Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 10 April 2003 .
Colleagues , it was with great regret that I learned that Dr Pierre Pradier had died at his home in Biarritz on Friday 29 April at the age of 69 .
Dr Bradier was a Member of this Parliament from 1994 to 1998 , in the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
As a co-founder and honorary president of Médecins du Monde , this exceptional physician always fought to uphold and represent the values of humanism .
I invite you to rise and observe a minute 's silence in memory of our departed colleague .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Mr President , I would just like to say that there will be a commemoration of the life of Dr Pierre Pradier tomorrow at 3 p.m. in the room reserved for the Verts / ALE Group .
I have been notified by the appropriate authorities in the accession States of the names of 159 observers appointed to the European Parliament .
That full list will be published in the Minutes of today 's sitting .
I should like , on behalf of Parliament , to offer a very warm word of welcome to all our observers here today .
On our behalf the political decision to begin our engagements after the signing of the Accession Treaties in Athens is an act of political pre-integration .
I wish you well in your time and your work here in Parliament .
I believe that , both for you and for this House , it provides a very useful learning opportunity through ' learning by doing ' with regard to our respective preferences and political interests .
We have here with us today observers from Cyprus , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Malta , Poland , Slovakia and Slovenia .
This is a moment that we in Parliament have anticipated and worked towards for a long time .
I want to place on record my own gratitude for the active support and assistance of the leaders of all the political groups , and of the Vice-Presidents of Parliament through the work of the Bureau , in bringing us to this point here today .
I also want this afternoon to express our joy in the European Parliament at the result of the most recent of the referendum campaigns held - namely that in Lithuania - where the turnout was exceptional and where the positive vote was exceptionally strong .
That is another powerful reminder , as we work through the referendum campaigns in each State , of the extent of the commitment and the appetite to build one Europe together .
I want to say to the observers that through your work here - especially through the political groups and in the committees - you will now have the opportunity to engage in active discussion on the results of the European Convention ; on the debate on emerging common foreign and security policy , including the emergence of defence policy ; on future regional and cohesion policies and on agricultural policy .
It is an important opportunity and an exchange from which we can all benefit .
We look forward to working with the observers here and we wish all of you success in your time here with us .
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 8 May 2003 has been distributed .
The following changes are proposed :
Tuesday
Mr President , regarding Tuesday 's agenda , I wanted to make a request , both on behalf of a large number of Members present in the House and on behalf of Aquitaine , Brittany and the Spanish coastal regions , concerning the attitude of IOPCF and the frankly laughable compensation which it has proposed to award us following the Prestige disaster .
Would it be possible to ask the Commission to state its opinion and position on the matter in the context of the debate on the Manders report , which is to take place on Tuesday at 10 a.m ?

In answer to your question of whether it is possible to ask the Commission , yes it is .
Let me make that request of the Commission to see whether , in addition to the debate on the Manders report , it could respond to your question by way of a statement .
Mr President , I should like to point out that I share Mr Bébéar 's indignation . The FIPOL amounts are , indeed , clearly inadequate , as has been shown in this case .
Tomorrow , it will be my colleague , Mrs Wallström , who will be responsible for replying to you .
I would nonetheless point out to you that we are working within the International Maritime Organisation to increase the figure concerned , which at present is absolutely ridiculous , to EUR 1 000 million .
Tomorrow , my colleague , Mrs Wallström , will reply to you in more detail , however .
Mr President , the Conference of Presidents decided , by means of a vote , that this debate would not be followed by a resolution . The reasons for this are very clear .
Following the dismal role played by the European Union in the Iraq crisis , we think that this is not the moment either to deepen divisions or to ascribe blame to anyone .
Instead , it is a time for finding a common will and forging a consensus in order to enable the European project to move forward following the pitiful spectacle offered by this Parliament at its last plenary session when we were incapable of agreeing upon a resolution .
We are very keen in Parliament on beavering away at putting the world to rights and demanding of the Council of Ministers that it have the ability to speak with a single voice on the international stage , but we are incapable of agreeing upon a resolution .
My group is therefore in favour of a debate and of statements by the Council and the Commission , but not in favour of a resolution , at least until such time as this Parliament is capable of agreeing upon a resolution .
Mr President , this is about Wednesday .
I cannot find on Wednesday 's agenda any vote on the calendar of part-sessions .
In the last part-session , we had a vote on an illegal calendar , and I wanted to ask you why this vote is not being repeated .
It is the case that a number of Members are considering appealing against this decision .
As we have a deadline to keep to , I wanted to ask when a lawful vote on our calendar of part-sessions is to take place .
Mr Posselt , we have had a considerable and in-depth exchange of views with the different political groups to see what formulations we can bring forward and those discussions between the groups are continuing .
My own preference and determination is to bring forward a satisfactory proposal to the House at the earliest possible date .
That has not so far emerged in terms likely to commend majorities and so the consultation between the groups continues .
I can promise you that I am determined to act on this with urgency .
I request publicly , here today , what I requested privately last week at the Conference of Presidents - that the groups give real urgency to producing for us a satisfactory outcome .
Whatever the various preferences colleagues have about Parliament and seats , a calendar should nonetheless honour the rule of law : something that is inescapable and indispensable in the life of a parliament .
Thursday
Mr President , in connection with the question submitted on postal services , I should like to say on behalf of the European People 's Party that we are opposed to the inclusion of this question on the agenda for the following reason : the arrangement which the Commission promised to put in place , by which I mean the division between reserve and non-reserve activities in the same legal entity , basically concerns one Member State and the two existing directives therefore contain an authorisation in relation to postal services .
No legislative procedure is therefore required .
This is a question of compliance by just one Member State with existing postal arrangements .
Procedure 86.3 , which the honourable Members criticise , is in our view perfectly legal .
We therefore consider the question to be superfluous .
Mr President , I would like to inform the House that the Conference of Presidents unanimously decided to include Mr Herman Schmid 's report on employment guidelines in the agenda for Thursday morning , provided , of course , that it is adopted by the relevant committee this evening .
Let me confirm that is so , pending its adoption by the committee .
Mr President , thank you for allowing me to speak briefly on the subject of your statement on Mr Jean-Marie Le Pen 's mandate .
Mr Le Pen has been a Member of this House for almost 20 years .
I have to say , Mr President , that I regret the decision you have taken , for a number of reasons .
Firstly , the judgment you referred to is not final - as you said , moreover - it is likely to be appealed against , indeed it was appealed against last Friday , and I therefore feel that it might have been better for Parliament not to act immediately on a judgment of the Court of First Instance which is not final .
Secondly , as is clear from your own statement , Mr President , and nobody would dispute this , Jean-Marie Le Pen was a Member of the European Parliament until 10 April 2003 pursuant to a judgment of the President of the Court of First Instance of the European Communities .
For him no longer to be a Member of the European Parliament , it is necessary to reestablish the disqualification from holding office imposed by the French Government , a disqualification based on ineligibility for office which came to an end two and a half years ago .
Since 24 November 2000 , Mr Le Pen has enjoyed full civic rights once again , as , moreover , was shown by his candidacy for the French Presidential elections , to which there was no objection .
I therefore believe that , in this judicial proceeding , Parliament should not be opposed to Jean-Marie Le Pen but stand by him , whatever one might think of his political views , for , in the future , any Member might fall victim to persecution from a government and might be forced to relinquish their office by a mere government decision .
I am surprised that even minimal evaluation by Parliament of these decisions is not possible .
For these reasons , Mr President , and for others relating to the breach of provisions of internal French law , specifically the French penal code , and to the application of older texts , specifically the 1977 act , which , in my opinion , is completely inapplicable in this case since it relates to a period when Members of the European Parliament were not elected by direct universal suffrage but were members of national parliaments , I believe that this complex issue should have been , and still ought to be , referred to the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which is the only committee currently competent in matters of verification of credentials , pursuant to Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr Gollnisch , it was important to give you the opportunity to place on the record your point of view , with which I am indeed familiar in the light of earlier exchanges of views .
As President of the House I have a duty to individual Members .
Having your view on the record today I hope will show that various interpretations are possible : you have offered one .
I also feel I have a duty to the institution .
I am advised that in law , and in complying with the ruling , I am acting in the correct way .
I wish to assure you that should it be the case , in the light of appeals , that the courts instruct Parliament to act in any particular way , we will , in law , always respect what is required of us .
Mr President , as steps are being taken in the Middle East with the road map towards peace , I would like to draw the attention of the House to the welcome steps being made towards the same process in Kashmir and the recent steps taken by the governments of India and Pakistan in this regard .
Noting , though , the visit of Richard Armitage , the US Deputy Secretary of State , to that area , I would like to call on you to urge the institutions of the Union to become involved in this process too , just as we are in the Middle East through the quartet - perhaps we can invent something of a similar kind for Kashmir .
Above all , the Kashmiri people should be involved in this process .
Lastly I would like to draw your attention to the fact that this issue was addressed in the Conference of Presidents a few months ago when , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , it was suggested that an ad hoc delegation should go to Afghanistan .
That suggestion was approved , but no delegation was approved for Kashmir .
Could I ask you please to put that back on the agenda of the Conference of Presidents this week , so that we can take a decision and also have an ad hoc delegation to Kashmir .
Mr Elles , it might also be useful to invite your group and the other groups to assist in putting the item on the agenda for the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo , two tribes , the Lendu and the Hema , are in conflict with each other .
Hundreds have already been killed , and thousands are fleeing .
Since the Ugandan army left the region , the MONUC is on the scene , but its combat forces number scarcely 625 troops as against 25 000 combatants .
There are not enough MONUC soldiers .
In addition , even Mr Mbeki is of the opinion that their mandate must be strengthened , because they do not have a mandate that permits them to use force to stop the violence .
Thus the violence continues to increase .
The Security Council should now speak out about this .
It is not even possible to help those who have fallen victim to this mass slaughter , as the security conditions do not permit this ; and the international organisations have had to withdraw .
I would ask that you , in your role as President of the European Parliament , urge the Security Council to do what is necessary in order that we do not see the same thing happening here as we did in Rwanda , with genocide taking place before the eyes of the UN simply because we do not have a mandate and because we are not providing the necessary means to stop the violence .
Mr President , I want to draw attention to the fact that there are 25 000 people in the European Union dying every year from a disease which , if it is caught in time , is largely curable .
I am talking about breast cancer .
I would like to welcome the Commission 's initiative to urge Member States to introduce best practice with regard to breast-cancer screening .
It is a matter of some regret to me that the death rate in Ireland is something over two and a half times the EU average per thousand of population .
Less than half of the population in Ireland has public breast-screening services available .
I am sure Ireland is not alone in this .
I would urge the Commission to include in the recommendation targets for Member States to meet and also annual reports on the meeting of those targets .
At the very least , we should name and shame those States that are failing to invest in health services that can save lives if they are properly applied .

Mr President , last week , the former governor of the Colombian province of Antioquia , Mr Gaviria , and his peace adviser , Mr Echeverri , with both of whom a delegation from this Parliament had met , were , together with eight other people belonging to the army and the state security services , shamefully assassinated by the guerrilla forces of the Colombian FARC who had been holding them prisoner under cruel conditions .
These events , which have caused an upheaval in the country , again make clear the true criminal character of this organisation - which is still holding the presidential candidate , Íngrid Betancourt , captive - and make it abundantly clear how wise it was to decide to include it on the European Union 's list of terrorist organisations .
I would , for all these reasons , ask you , on behalf of this Assembly , to convey to Colombia 's legitimate authorities our solidarity with the victims ' families and our active commitment to the cause of peace in that country .
Mr President , I am glad to be able to raise this matter in the presence of the Commissioner for Transport , Mrs de Palacio , because it is scandalous that the French Government obliges us to come to Strasbourg and has exercised political and emotional pressure - some would say blackmail - to keep us here , but fails both to get a TGV line built and , even as owner of Air France , to ensure decent air services to this beautiful but inconveniently located city .
Mr President , I commend you for recently taking up the question of Air France services to Strasbourg from London , as reflected in today 's Financial Times .
Thank you .
We face the prospect of cancellation of the direct flights from London Gatwick to Strasbourg from next month by the Air France subsidiary Britair .
I understand Britair is going to court over subsidies to the new competitor Ryanair , which appear to breach state aid rules .
There is a similar case going on in Belgium over Charleroi .
Will you please keep up all possible pressure , perhaps in conjunction with Commissioner de Palacio , to ensure a decent air service as long as we have to remain in Strasbourg once a month , which I hope will not be for very much longer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I rise to speak on the subject of Cuba .
During the previous part-session , we approved a vote rejecting the wave of repression that the Cuban dictator has unleashed on his people , having imprisoned scores of intellectuals , writers and artists .
The Cuban dictatorship , however , then summarily sentenced three young men to death for having hijacked a boat - an undeniably serious act - in a trial that was summary and harsh , and which provided no guarantees .
This House cannot remain unmoved by this behaviour by the Cuban dictatorship .
This House , which has condemned the existence of the death penalty in various countries across the world and which has condemned all countries enforcing the death penalty , cannot remain unmoved by this irrational and barbaric behaviour by the Cuban dictatorship .
Mr President , this morning the press tells us that you complained that you had to get up at 4 a.m. in order to get to Strasbourg to do business here .
I do hope you think it is worthwhile getting up that early .
I would like to know on behalf of my colleagues who have just taken the memorial last flight from London Gatwick to Strasbourg what you are doing about this situation ?
Baroness Ludford has already raised this matter .
You have no doubt been in touch with the mayor of Strasbourg ; many of us have written to the Mayor of Strasbourg .
If Strasbourg is to be taken seriously as a place where the European Parliament does business , and welcomes not only Members from that Parliament and new Members but also business people and the press of the world , then it has to do something about the flights to Strasbourg from London .
What is happening ?
Will we in fact find ourselves on the memorial last flight from Strasbourg to London on Thursday ?
If so , that is very sad , not least for Strasbourg itself , which has absolutely no hope of getting the backing of any British Members in its future role as one of the places where the European Parliament meets .
Regarding my own departure times , the answer to your question is : yes , if I am doing my duty it is always worth getting up on time .
Regarding your question on correspondence , immediately on learning of the prospect that the service to which you refer would eventually be cancelled I wrote to the French authorities in appropriate terms and I am awaiting a response .
That is all I can tell you .
I can tell you the facts of the matter .
You are welcome to have a copy of my correspondence and indeed a copy of any response that I eventually receive .
Mr President , recently , along with other passengers , I was kept on board a flight from London to Brussels for two hours after landing at Brussels , because of the presence on that flight of a Chinese gentleman travelling from Toronto who was quite clearly rather ill and was suspected of having SARS .
During our two hours on board , it was clear to us that neither the Belgian health authorities nor the airline concerned , British Midland , had the faintest idea what to do in such an eventuality .
I am glad to be able to tell you the person tested negative .
However , I would be grateful , in case similar incidents should occur , which they undoubtedly will , if you could contact both the Commission and the Council of Ministers , representing the Member States , so that appropriate measures can be put in place and so that both airlines and national health authorities know what to do if someone they suspect of being gravely ill is on board one of their planes .
I should like to remind the House that a debate on this issue is scheduled for tomorrow and will perhaps afford an opportunity for the House and for colleagues to make that point .
Mr President , a fortnight ago our only national institution , Udalbitza , was banned and eight of its leaders imprisoned .
Last Saturday , the day before yesterday , tens of thousands of people were in the streets of Bilbao , taking part in a march that was also forbidden , to back Udalbitza 's efforts to develop a democratic process grounded on the free will of the Basque people .
Udalbitza has enhanced the national construction of our country , favouring local representatives ' joint action in fields such as culture , the environment , social welfare , economic development , land organisation , sports and , of course , the promotion of the Basque language .
More than eighty thousand people have given their signatures to guarantee the presence of those local candidates and the growth of self-determination in the elections this month .
The Spanish judiciary has banned them too .
Can anyone say what the European Union is waiting for before it reacts ?
Mr President , Mr Gorostiaga insists on blaming the Spanish Government for making his party illegal .
It would appear that internal documents even go so far as also to hold Members of the European Parliament , including myself , responsible when this was a decision taken unanimously by the Spanish Supreme Court .
Those who maintain this either misunderstand the nature of the constitutional State , one of whose basic principles is the separation of powers , are ignorant of it or , at best , simply reject it .
I would take the liberty of reading out a paragraph from a document that I shall forward to the Members of this Parliament , that has been signed by a range of European intellectuals and that concludes with words to the effect that , even if there is a frequent temptation to ignore what is happening , European citizens are asked , on 25 May - the date of the Spanish local elections - generally to declare their mood of anger in memory of the victims who have died for freedom in the Basque Country and in honour of those who , this very day , defend it with a courage that , in the not too distant future , will stir Europe .
This document has been signed by , amongst others , Nadine Gordimer , Günter Grass , Bernard-Henri Lévy , Paul Preston , Mario Vargas Llosa and our fellow MEP , Mr Vattimo .
In short , dangerous right-wing extremists , as Mr Gorostiaga would say .
Mr President , I too should like to express my deepest satisfaction that observers from the new Member States of the European Parliament will be participating in plenary as of today .
Allow me , however , as chairman of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , to express my deepest disappointment as to the composition of these representations from the gender point of view .
Women are underrepresented and , as can be seen from the list you have distributed to us , there are two countries - Estonia and Slovenia - which have not included a single woman in their representations .
I consider that this is an insult to women , who are not represented in the representations of the Member States , and shows disdain for the policy of gender equality which the European Union has been promoting for 50 years .
I only hope that this will not happen at the next European elections and that the representations will be balanced from the gender point of view .
As I know , Mr President , that you support this policy , I should like you to take an initiative and bring this to the attention of your counterparts in the parliaments of these countries .
The only requirement that Parliament stated in its invitation to send observers was that the numbers sent should reasonably reflect the balance within the national parliaments themselves .
There were no other conditions .
I note the point you make , but I should like to point out that a week ago in Brussels we had a meeting of the speakers of the national parliaments : the speaker from Estonia is a woman and the Estonian Foreign Minister is also a woman , so the gender balance may be better than it appears on the list of observers submitted .
I hope you will join with myself and James Elles and the other members of the all-party Kashmir Group in welcoming the renewed dialogue between India and Pakistan over the disputed territory of Kashmir .
As everyone in this House knows , relations between India and Pakistan have been very difficult over the last few months , and since both countries are nuclear powers it is very important for this dialogue to be successful .
I would reiterate the points made by James Elles as regards the Kashmiri people being involved in this dialogue at the earliest possible convenience and as regards ensuring that the European Union continues to offer its services as an honest broker , as agreed under the common foreign and security policy - if , that is , both India and Pakistan feel it necessary to take advantage of that offer .
Mr President , I should like to draw attention to the way in which the Danish Government and a number of Danish parties are at present genuinely trying to harass Development Commissioner Poul Nilsson .
This is happening in the light of the fact that , after having visited Iraq , he has set out a number of facts , namely that Iraq is an occupied country , that this situation will be untenable if the occupying power is not replaced by a UN force and that the United States has , to all appearances , appropriated the Iraqi people 's oil .
I should like to ask you , Commissioner , whether or not you share my admiration for a man who dares to call a spade a spade and who has the courage of his convictions . Do you not think that this attempt to muzzle the Commissioner is unacceptable ?
Mr President , since Parliament has , unfortunately , rejected our proposal to include an item on Guinea-Bissau in the topical and urgent debate , I wish to take this opportunity simply to draw my fellow Members ' attention to the deterioration of the situation in that country , which is undergoing an almost total breakdown , and to call on Parliament - which I know has been assessing the situation with regard to the elections planned for 6 July - to continue closely to follow these elections and send a mission of observers .
This is extremely important in order to ensure that the people of Guinea-Bissau are given the means to find a democratic solution to the appalling crisis affecting their country .
I should just like to point out that any observer mission in that regard should be based on a proposal from the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy to the Conference of Presidents .
Then it can be dealt with in the usual way .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last Friday , Parliament was closed on account of the holiday celebrating the day in 1950 when Robert Schuman made his declaration on the establishment of the European Coal and Steel Community .
This is only right , but the fact passes unnoticed in the Union , especially in my country , and I think that something should be done about this .
The best way of increasing citizens ' sense of belonging to the Union is to introduce a paid public holiday on that day throughout the Union .
I think that we should make a commitment to a genuine Europe-wide public holiday .
It would be good if this were in place as early as next year , including in the new countries set to join .
Perhaps Parliament - and you , Mr President - could take the initiative on this , by pointing out to the Council that this is an important example of how to get citizens closely involved in the Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to return to the subject of Columbia .
I believe that we must not hide our extreme concern , for the hostages are currently in a situation of dire peril .
The attempt to retrieve the hostages launched on 5 May by the Columbian President , Mr Uribe , shows that life is no longer worth anything in that part of the world .
The European Parliament has on many occasions displayed its support for and taken steps to help people fighting for human rights and democracy .
In this context , and in order to show that we are not a fickle Parliament but that we are endeavouring to be faithful to our democratic commitments and to the protection of individuals throughout the world , would it be possible to make representations to the government , reminding it that a hard line cannot be the general rule where people 's lives are at stake and there are prices to be paid , and that it is therefore appropriate in this case first and foremost to respect the demands of the families , who do not want the government to take a hard line so that it can give a display of its power some time in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you may be aware , I am the Chairman of the Delegation to the EU-Russia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee .
Over the last year , we have spoken about the situation in Russia on a number of occasions .
In doing so , we have also very specifically spoken about the situation in Chechnya .
We have always approached that situation from a very critical angle .
We have also always said , however , that the conflict in Chechnya must be solved peacefully .
I heard today that there was another attack this morning in the north of Chechnya , when a suicide squad drove a truck into a government building .
More than thirty people are reported dead .
Mr President , I should like to ask you , in your role as President of the European Parliament , to express our condolences to the families of the deceased , and also to the local authorities , whilst emphasising strongly that this House deplores the use of any kind of violence to solve the conflict in Chechnya , and that we wish to take the path of negotiation .
I will be happy to do so , Mr Staes .
( Protests from Mr Ortuondo Larrea )
I am very sorry , but we have exceeded our time limit .
I am not a magician !
You will have to speak tomorrow .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0131 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Council common position with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council decision on adopting a multiannual programme for action in the field of energy : ' Intelligent Energy - Europe ' Programme ( 2003-2006 ) ( 15547 / 3 / 2003 - C5-0037 / 2003 - 2002 / 0082 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Eryl Margaret McNally ) .
. As rapporteur for the Intelligent Energy for Europe Programme , I would like to thank all three institutions for their cooperation in enabling us to reach successfully a second reading : the European Commission , of course , for coming forward with the proposals , the Council of Ministers and the three presidencies involved in this - the Spanish , Danish and above all the Greek presidencies - and especially the Members of the European Parliament and the staff of the European Parliament .
I am pleased we have been able to find a compromise at second reading between the Parliament and the Council of Ministers by working very quickly and in fact by foregoing the normal full procedure for codecision matters .
This is frankly not the best way to work , and I am sorry that the Council of Ministers is beginning to expect accelerated procedures as the norm .
They are less transparent and less democratic and often lead to temporary misunderstandings , especially when negotiations are conducted - as they inevitably are - in only one language .
The title of this programme is self-explanatory .
We need only imagine the contents of a programme called ' stupid ' energy .
In such a programme we would use fossil fuels , which we know to be finite and which emit CO2 , as quickly as possible and would burn them just as inefficiently and profligately , in a way which the United States could teach us .
' Stupid ' energy would use electricity and gas to heat the air outside buildings rather than insulating the buildings .
It would encourage us to drive more and larger cars at high speeds so that we use more fossil fuels , preferably with only one occupant in each car .
Despite its high economic costs , its failure to deal with radioactive waste and the need for very high safety and security standards , ' stupid ' energy would insist on the promulgation of nuclear power , even in countries at very high risk of nuclear weapons proliferation .
Enough about ' stupid ' energy .
We currently do some of those things , which makes the current programme even more topical and even more useful .
It is actually a modest programme , with EUR 200 million allocated for four years , which is frankly still inadequate .
I hope that further funding will be made available during the programme , in particular when new Member States join .
The programme has four objectives , all of which are indeed intelligent : the promotion of renewable energy sources , of energy efficiency , of clean transport and of all these three things in developing countries .
All four objectives are important and I congratulate the European Commission on its intention to establish coordinating measures .
I look forward to hearing the Commissioner 's declaration , which is a declaration that I made clear was essential if we were to find agreement .
Parliament 's amendments to the Council of Ministers ' common position encompass the budget - we insisted on an increase to EUR 200 million with a review clause - and numerous clarifications .
I am pleased to say that 22 of Parliament 's amendments were accepted in the common position and others have been accepted in subsequent negotiations .
There is an unfortunate omission as regards the need for a strategic agency in the field of energy .
Parliament will pursue that idea in other ways .
The Commission has done well to come forward with this programme .
Its measures will help with protection of the environment , security of supply and with our industrial competitiveness .
It will complement efforts by Member States and will encourage the laggardly Member States to do more .
I will not name them to spare people 's blushes .
I am particularly pleased that the COOPENER Programme , which is itself modest , will serve as leverage for much better-funded programmes such as those foreseen in Johannesburg .
Over 2 billion people in the world have no access to electricity .
This programme will help .
One worrying aspect is the difficulty the Commission apparently has with the lead times for its proposals .
These proposals were published so late that it is not going to be possible to commit money to projects until February 2004 .
I hope that the Commissioner will undertake a review of the timescale for preparing legislation to prevent problems of this sort , which I am sure are as disappointing to her as they are to us .
Nevertheless , the Intelligent Energy for Europe Programme will be of very real value and I look forward to its adoption following the Commissioner 's declaration , and to a vote tomorrow which I hope will be very well supported by a European Parliament that will follow the programme with great interest .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank Mrs McNally for her work as rapporteur on this Decision .
I am aware that she has worked intensely with all our colleagues in Parliament and the Council to reach the position we are now dealing with .
I believe it is extremely important that today , and tomorrow at the vote , we can conclude the approval of this programme once and for all .
The present proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision relates to a multi-annual action programme in the energy sector , to cover the period 2003-2006 , and hence the urgency of concluding this debate .
We have four specific fields : the rational use of energy , the management of demand , which previously fell within the SAVE programme ; new and renewable energy sources , previously known as ALTENER ; transport aspects relating to energy : STEER ; and the promotion at international level of renewable energy sources and energy efficiency , known as COOPENER .
Before discussing the amendments , I would like to make a brief comment on an issue which I have noted causes concern in Parliament : the coordination of the programme and its relationship with other Community policies with an energy dimension , particularly in the field covered by the programme .
This has just been pointed out by Mrs McNally , who wishes it to be made absolutely clear .
I would therefore like to say that I share the honourable Members ' concern - in particular that of the rapporteur , Mrs McNally - and , in this regard , I believe that the inter-service consultations and cooperation are of great importance and should be common practice .
I have committed myself fully to increasing and improving these interrelationships with regard to the management of our programme .
I am convinced that in this way the execution of actions in the field of energy will be carried out in a way which is coherent with the different Community instruments .
To this end , Mrs McNally , I therefore propose to establish an interservices group , consisting of all those Commission services whose policies and programmes relate to the present programme .
I am essentially talking about the services responsible for development cooperation , agriculture , regional development , the environment and technological research and development .
With regard to the amendments presented by the European Parliament , I am pleased to note that , following the recent discussions with the Council , a compromise has been reached with regard to the amendments which were still awaiting agreement .
I would like to affirm and confirm the Commission 's total support for the new text presented by Parliament .
Please allow me therefore , ladies and gentlemen , to congratulate you on behalf of the Commission on the agreement reached with the Council , particularly with regard to the budget for the programme , that is , the famous EUR 200 million , which represent a considerable effort .
As we know , Mrs McNally possibly wanted more .
So did we , but I believe 200 million is a significant sum , which , over four years , represents a very considerable increase in the budgets when compared to what we have been using in the past .
I trust that you will approve the vote recommended by the rapporteur and that a speedy approval of the programme will allow it to be launched without wasting the funds corresponding to 2003 ; and that there will be a global approval at the end of the year , since we will have made sufficient progress in this regard , and that they will therefore be able to be used , including the funds corresponding to 2003 .
I would like to thank Mrs McNally once again for her wonderful work and the honourable Members for their attention .
Mr President , I would also like to lend my support to those who have signalled their congratulations to Eryl McNally for doing an excellent job in piloting this through Parliament and of course in conducting negotiations on our behalf with the other institutions .
The rapporteur has already covered the main issues of substance , with all of which my group and I entirely agree .
I only wish to make two additional wider points at this stage .
Firstly , Intelligent Europe is not and should not be the title for this programme but , as the rapporteur herself suggested , should of course be the umbrella title for everything we do in the energy policy environment .
As many colleagues know , we are facing a glut of legislation in the energy field today , this week and next week , ranging from combined heat and power through to trans-European networks and to the all-important electricity and gas liberalisation package .
Collectively we hope all of those measures together represent a real , intelligent policy .
If you will forgive me for using this ghastly phrase , they represent a ' joined-up policy , joined-up government ' .
To that end the Commissioner 's declaration today is very important and much to be welcomed .
The second point is about the budget .
We warmly support the rapporteur 's success in raising the overall budget , but it is worth noting that the EUR 200m , which is of course a great deal of money to you and me , is actually extremely little when compared to the enormous range of tasks which the Intelligent Energy programme is supposed to tackle .
EUR 200m could easily be absorbed in any one of the four titles and for that reason alone - and of course this is something we have seen in other areas as well , the trans-European networks for instance - the seed money being put forward by the European Union is massively dwarfed by the tasks to be performed .
For that reason , we really do hope that procedures will be as efficient as possible , will avoid duplication , will avoid unnecessary administrative and bureaucratic checks and will give the taxpayers the right bang for their bucks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have already had the opportunity - at first reading - to express my views on this important subject and I am therefore pleased to be able to speak again this evening .
I would like to start by personally thanking my friend and colleague , Mrs McNally , for the high quality of her report and for the way she has conducted negotiations with the Council .
I have known her for a long time and I would like to pay tribute to her for her hard work , although I sometimes , or often , rather , disagree with the liberal lines taken by some of her friends .
Also on a personal note , I would like to tell Mrs de Palacio that , although she has never replied to my question on what I consider to be a contradiction between free competition seeking to force prices down and the undeniable need to save energy , I appreciate her work as Commissioner responsible for energy , her indisputable abilities and her willingness to listen .
To turn to the content now , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , I would point out that the ' Intelligent Energy for Europe ' programme , covering the period 2003 to 2006 , replaces a programme which expired on 31 December 2002 . That explains the urgent need for us to come to an agreement and find the best possible compromise .
It is no surprise that the most heated debates were on the question of the budget .
I want once again to lament the fact that , all too often at European level , in very many fields , we are unable to provide ourselves with funding which is commensurate to our goals .
I have said it time and time again in this House and elsewhere .
In this case , it is all the more regrettable in that a mid-term assessment of the current programme has revealed that the current specific programmes have suffered from a serious lack of resources .
In the end , after a number of tripartite meetings , the Council and Parliament succeeded in achieving a compromise of the sum of EUR 200 million , although the Council had been holding out for a sum of EUR 190 million .
It is too little , even though it is better than nothing .
As has been said , the sum will be divided between four specific programmes : energy efficiency , the promotion of renewable energy sources , energy aspects of transport , and the promotion of renewable energies and energy efficiency in the developing countries .
I endorse these headings and I stress the need for action in these areas .
Again with regard to the content , the Council has accepted most of Parliament 's amendments : the inclusion of the candidate countries , the dissemination of the programmes and access thereto and the setting of transparent criteria for selecting participants .
We welcome this .
However , the Council has not accepted the creation of a European Intelligent Energy Agency .
I for my part , like the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , regret this .
I think it would have helped us .
Nor has the Council accepted the establishment of a task force within the Commission to coordinate the different areas , but Mrs de Palacio has given us a certain amount of reassurance on that point .
I will end by stressing once again that energy is not just another commodity .
It involves heavy , ongoing investment .
It is in many respects a public service which must be protected zealously in the interest of all citizens in all senses of the word .
In the future , we must save , diversify , increase security of supply and assess costs and benefits , and not just short-term costs and benefits .
We must look far into the future .
Demand will grow and fossil energies will decline .
Public opinion is opposed to fission and so we must develop renewable energies and save energy .
Lastly , and this is my last point , Mr President , we must implement what I personally consider to be the viable energy of the future , fusion , and thus launch very quickly indeed the ITER programme , very quickly indeed , Mr President .
Mr President , it is claimed that the Intelligent Energy for Europe programme is indispensable .
However , any mention of intelligent energy and request for renewable energy is likely to be met with derision rather than serious debate by the man in the street .
For the man and woman in the street in my neck of the woods , this energy policy manifests itself in the growing scourge of wind farms - which are progressively blighting our treasured countryside - whose economic value far outstrips the notional value of this supposedly cost-free source .
In fact , wind power is so costly that without substantial subsidy from taxpayers and energy users , its use would be prohibitively expensive .
Since we are dealing with an intermittent energy source - as wind flow is far from constant - equivalent conventional generation must be supplied as back-up , which itself consumes as much energy as wind power is supposed to save .
Bearing in mind that it is EU money and woolly thinking that sustains this programme - the two being largely inseparable - it is my view that the energy policy we are considering today is far from intelligent .
As usual in EU nomenclature , the title conveys the opposite of reality .
As always , I can only register my disapproval .
However , I do so in the knowledge that my electorate , at least , is more intelligent than the policies produced in its name .
Mr President , the previous energy framework programme terminated at the end of last year .
As the Intelligent Energy for Europe programme that is to replace it is only just now being discussed , we cannot accuse the Commission and the Council of acting too hastily .
The previous programme , however , was a lot later in making its appearance , so there has been some progress , albeit slight .
The new programme includes fewer separate programmes , so that is good .
In fact , resources for the previous framework programme had been chopped up into excessively small bits , and it has not been easy to achieve any visible results .
The administrative costs of having many programmes , the consultants ' fees and the various seminars , of which there is no shortage in Europe , eat up resources , with the result that there are fewer left for concrete action .
In the new programme resources are being increased , the overall sums involved will increase and the fact that a five-year programme is being replaced by one lasting four years will mean that additional cash is available each year .
The energy industry , however , is such a capital-intensive sector of production that not even additional funds will solve the problems EU countries have with regard to adequate supplies of energy , the security of supply or energy saving and environmental protection .
The common objectives that have been set , for example regarding the use of renewable forms of energy , are so ambitious that achieving them depends crucially on the Member States .
We cannot leave it just to the ALTENER programme to achieve these goals .
It is being proposed that a new special Agency should be set up to coordinate cooperation in the energy sector .
Experience has shown , however , that agencies do not always reduce bureaucracy - they tend rather to do the opposite - and special agencies are always harder for Parliament to monitor than the Commission is .
Setting up new agencies does not increase administrative transparency .
With regard to the work the rapporteur has done , I would like to join my colleague , Mr Caudron , in expressing my thanks to her on behalf of our group .
I want to thank you for your speeches , ladies and gentlemen , and say that , indeed , the attempt must be made to avoid the ' stupid ' energy , to which Mrs McNally and other speakers referred earlier .
Mrs McNally knows that I too subscribe to the theory that the European Agency would have provided a method of administration and would very likely have had many positive features .
I believe , however , that , by means of this intergroup system , or system of organisation within the Commission incorporating all the various services affected , we can overcome your worries .
I also wish briefly to add that I fully concur with what Mr Caudron has said about the launch , as soon as possible , of the ITER initiative , as well as other initiatives .
With regard to the EUR 200 million , I am thinking , for example , of the COOPENER programme through which the most appropriate technologies , including clean carbon technologies , together with energy efficiency and technological development , would be spread throughout the developing countries .
We shall have to return to this subject one day when we talk about Kyoto , because Kyoto does not only affect Europe but addresses a global problem .
If we imagine that developing countries will not make use of coal , we are mistaken .
They will in fact make use of coal if that is what is most readily available to them .
That is clear , and that is the direction in which we must move .
I also want to invite you , as a thought for the future , to remember that the Community budget , set this year in anticipation of next year , will involve 0.99 % of GDP , there being 25 Member States .
In addition to having just 0.99 % of GDP , we shall perform the miracle of being 25 Member States , with 500 more officials .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0138 / 2003 ) by Mr Glante , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the promotion of cogeneration based on a useful heat demand in the internal energy market .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , even the title of this directive indicates that this topic is a relatively complex one .
I just want to try and do something I have done in the past , which is to explain what this is in very simple terms and for the benefit of those not involved in these matters . What we are talking about is the production , by the traditional means of steam , of electricity , which is then supplied for efficient use in industry or for heating .
The promotion of this technology can be seen as being consonant with the objectives - the Kyoto commitments - that we , and many other countries , have set ourselves .
It will help to save energy , to use it efficiently , and to reduce emissions of CO2 .
Implementing this technology can also make supplies more secure .
My primary concern , when engaging in these discussions , when voting , and when tabling amendments , has been to shape a directive that will be applicable throughout Europe , at the same level , and with the same ground rules .
This consideration applies in particular to the reference values to be used to define energy savings .
We call upon the Commission to draw up , within an appropriate timeframe , a package of European reference values to facilitate comparisons of implementation in the various Member States .
I saw it as important that there should be greater legal certainty within the European Union , and that the Member States should , on the basis of this directive - assuming that it enters into force after second reading and , perhaps , after a conciliation procedure - have legal certainty and be able to promote this technology .
The report is a highly technical one , and discussing it was a relatively complicated business .
Our discussions were lively , but also very fair , and we were very fair-minded in our dealings with each other .
There was no confrontation between Left and Right of the sort I have previously described , but rather a confrontation between North and South , each being convinced that one method or another was better .
I believe that the compromise we have reached is a sound one .
All of us - myself included - have had to moderate our demands to some extent .
I was not happy with all the compromises , but I accepted them as being what this is all about . At the end of the day , this result , at least in the committee , where there were 32 votes in favour , none against , and 11 abstentions - let me mention at this point that I am to this day unsure how the 11 abstentions came about - has shown that we have come to a sensible compromise .
Including those in my report , we started out with 240 amendments .
Tomorrow , there will be 11 amendments on the table for us to vote on .
I think that is a very fine achievement .
We have done good work , and I can tell you that one or other of the eleven amendments will not get my vote , but , on the whole , what comes out of first reading stage will look very good .
I just hope that the Council will match this by putting a proper political position on the table in May , or by June at the latest .
What the Council is currently discussing differs to quite a large extent from what we have been discussing here , so the second reading is guaranteed to be , once more , exciting and highly contentious .
I hope that tomorrow 's vote will go well and that we will adopt the report ; then I will already be looking forward to the discussions in the course of second reading .
If we all work together properly on that , and if the Council is well disposed , we will manage to get this report adopted by the end of this Parliamentary term - I think , at second reading stage or perhaps after a conciliation procedure - and then legal certainty will have been created .
To that extent , I think , we have been able to improve the Commission proposal by making it more precise , specific and exact , and I hope it will meet with general approval tomorrow .
Mr President , the proposal for a Directive on the promotion of cogeneration , as the rapporteur , Mr Glante , has pointed out , is a truly complex issue .
Furthermore , the debates in the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy have demonstrated how diverse the positions are , as have the meetings , hearings and seminars held in recent months in this Parliament , demonstrating the interest which this initiative has awoken in the different sectors of society .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur because he has been able to bring together and agree a solution with the various Members involved which in the end means that we are only talking about eleven amendments .
Ladies and gentlemen , the creation of a European framework for cogeneration is a great challenge .
I am happy to say that , in my opinion , the proposal for a Directive on the promotion of cogeneration , which we are discussing , conforms to the requirements and furthermore it provides a response at a time when we are talking about integration of the European energy market and in particular the electricity market .
As the rapporteur has pointed out , cogeneration can be an efficient way to produce heat and electricity jointly in a single process , its correct and appropriate use increases the security of supply , it leads to undeniable energy savings and a resulting reduction in greenhouse gases .
But we know that we are facing problems relating to the energy market , since its advantages are not reflected in an equal fashion within the sector .
No legal instrument resolves this problem and the directive creates the framework necessary to guarantee a stable environment for the initiatives to promote cogeneration .
Within that framework , it falls to the States to make a greater effort to promote this process and to increase production , by means of specific measures , in the form of economic support programmes .
They can also facilitate new investment , guarantee more equitable conditions and eliminate administrative and other types of obstacles , but all within an integrated European market .
In accordance with our proposal , the Member States , by means of an analysis of high-efficiency cogeneration potential , are obliged to estimate the expected heat demand in their territory , which is likely to be used appropriately , by means of cogeneration techniques .
This is the first step , which must facilitate future initiatives and monitoring in this field .
Furthermore , as a result of the future directive , energy and cogeneration producers will be in a position to request a guarantee of origin which demonstrates that the electricity sold to the network is genuinely produced by means of high-efficiency cogeneration , from cogeneration which results in global energy savings .
This element is an instrument to increase the level of knowledge and transparency of the market and furthermore the proposal insists that there must be no discrimination against producers of energy by means of cogeneration with regard to the conditions for connection to the network , nor with regard to the purchase and sale of electricity .
Furthermore , the States will have the right to prioritise electricity produced by means of cogeneration .
The sector - as the honourable Members know - has expressed on repeated occasions the need for these measures if this type of production is really to be properly developed .
The definitions of cogeneration , and in particular high-efficiency cogeneration , may appear very technical , but to adopt a common methodology is an important step forward , which offers the sector undeniable legal certainty with regard to efficiency requirements .
It offers the States an instrument for creating support programmes capable of promoting cogeneration and at the same time to prevent distortions in the internal energy market , and also distortions in the field of competition , in a more extensive manner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have explained the Commission 's objective in relation to this proposal , and I await the debate which is now going to take place .
I trust that , together with the rapporteur , we will be able during this legislature to approve this text at second reading , since I believe it is extremely important in order to complete all the actions we are implementing in the aim of increasing energy efficiency and energy savings and promoting renewable energy sources , as we have been doing over recent years .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a directive which has involved complicated , extensive and heated debates within the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy in particular .
We have tried to stress that cogeneration is not an end in itself but an energy efficiency measure and that this proposal , which pursues the Commission 's strategy of increasing energy efficiency in the European Union , was well received but at the same time presented a series of problems , as the rapporteur , Mr Glante , pointed out at the outset .
Then , by means of close dialogue and debate between various members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , we presented a balanced proposal which was genuinely significant from the point of view of energy savings .
As I said before , cogeneration based on heat demand will therefore allow us to optimise the situation in terms of greenhouse gases and balance the functioning of the electrical system .
However , this whole building could have fallen down upon us if we had promoted an unnecessary demand for heat .
Too simplistic an approach - such as the one I believe was proposed initially - would have led us to promote the construction of cogeneration plants without there being any real heat demand .
And this would have been contrary to what we believed the objective of this proposal to be .
I would like to congratulate Mr Glante and everybody who has participated in the various meetings which have taken place on this issue , because it was not an easy issue to understand .
They include my colleague , Mr Vidal-Quadras , who has worked courageously on this directive .
We have been through numbers , formulae , variables and subscripts and I believe we have finally managed to bring our points of view closer together .
The compromise amendments represent good progress in terms of reaching a final agreement and it is significant that the existence of different technologies throughout the length and breadth of the European Union has been recognised .
It is the case that the more heat a plant produces , the greater the global efficiency of the cogeneration process .
But to reduce the whole directive to this statement is simplistic and unrealistic .
A plant for the exclusive production of heat with an efficiency of 80 % is entirely inefficient - I would even go as far as to say obsolete - but a plant for the production of electricity with an efficiency of 50 % may be very efficient .
And why is all of this the case ?
For the simple reason that electricity is a more elaborate form of energy which is obtained from heat .
Once it is made clear that the global efficiency of the plant is not an appropriate or absolute parameter for determining the value of cogeneration , what are we left with ?
We are left - as I believe Mr Vidal-Quadras will also point out - with primary energy savings and consequently gas emissions savings .
This is the most appropriate parameter for measuring the benefits derived from cogeneration , when compared to the separate production of heat and electricity .
We must not forget an important point : that cogeneration has been developed in the different Member States according to cultural traditions .
In the countries of the Centre and the North of Europe heat for municipal uses predominates , and it is obvious that heating and hot water needs are enormous during much of the year ; in other latitudes a form of cogeneration in which the proportion of heat is lower has developed for obvious reasons , and therefore electricity for industrial uses predominates .
The remainder is sold on the network .
Mr Glante has been able to see that this proposal required a profound analysis before reaching definitive conclusions .
However , as draftsman for the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , I must say that this was not the case in this committee and that the opinion it approved , in the light of what is being proposed today , following the debates and meetings which have taken place , lacks realism and rigour .
The complexity of this issue was demonstrated a moment ago and I , as rapporteur supported by my group , requested a more flexible timetable . In other words , I asked that this proposal be debated seriously and that there might be more time to compare our differing opinions with the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
This request was denied and the proposal was voted on in a hurried fashion with the result that I am now describing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , amongst all of us , we must try to prevent situations such as this .
An opinion cannot be drawn up in the way it has been drawn up in the case of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on cogeneration , which I fear is not an isolated case since it happens relatively often in Parliament .
Finally , I believe we have produced a rigorous , proportionate and necessary proposal .
I would therefore congratulate the rapporteur once again , and my colleagues in the Industry Committee , on their excellent work , and particularly on not accepting the first proposal and fighting to reach agreements on a proposal which satisfies everybody .
Congratulations , Commissioner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is absolutely no doubt that the promotion of electrical energy production by means of cogeneration is an objective which we should all share , and for various reasons .
We are therefore going to support the Commission 's initiative , which deserves all our respect , and we congratulate the Commissioner on it .
Production by means of cogeneration allows , firstly , energy savings and , as a consequence , achieves an environmental protection objective , since it reduces CO2 production .
There are other reasons why this method deserves our support .
Firstly , by producing heat and electricity in a combined fashion , costs can be reduced , and also , if required , users can be offered an alternative supply , which , in some cases , is a way of introducing competition , particularly in those markets - as is the case in the electricity market in my country - where there is a strong oligopolistic component .
Support for the promotion of cogeneration has been ratified by this Parliament in its Resolution of 25 September and we will therefore be acting coherently by supporting this initiative .
But the problem is that , when we talk about the concept of cogeneration , there are in fact very differing realities between cogeneration in the countries of the North of Europe and that in the South .
It was therefore very difficult to combine such different realities in a single proposal .
In the countries of the North cogeneration is essentially used to produce heating , while in the South , cogeneration is a system used by certain industrial sectors which require the production of intensive heat and also reduces the cost of electrical energy .
Examples of this are the paper industry and the ceramics industry .
It can be deduced from this that the cogeneration plants used in different countries differ radically .
While in the plants dedicated to heating steam turbines are used , and it is only necessary to generate heat during the cold months of the year , in those intended for cogeneration production for industrial purposes the heat required is of greater intensity and is used throughout the year .
This means that there are differing sizes and systems , and to encompass everything within a single directive has been difficult .
I believe that the efforts made by the rapporteur to encompass and include such differing realities in the text of the directive have been remarkable to say the least , and I would therefore like to congratulate him warmly .
I would like to say that , in general terms , we will support the text of the report with the amendments proposed .
Mr President , I am sure I speak on behalf of other colleagues when I say that this has been one of the most intriguing and perplexing issues I have ever had to follow .
For non-specialists like myself it became at times an impenetrable mass of acronyms and technical details , and Mr Glante and Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca at times seemed to be speaking a language that sane , normal human beings could not possibly follow .
I never knew , for instance , that something called the Protermo method could produce as much heat and fury as it did in the debate in our committee .
It is a pity we did not combine that heat in our committee with some power while we were at it .
Still , even for those such as myself who were not able to follow every twist and turn , my group is certainly extremely pleased with the outcome and looks forward to supporting the rapporteur in the vote tomorrow .
We are particularly pleased that the two approaches represented by the differing sides of the debate in our committee - on the one hand wishing to retain a methodology to distinguish cogeneration from other forms of generation , and on the other hand wishing to maintain an accent on energy saving - have been retained in the famous Annexes two and three , and that some accommodation between those two perspectives has been reached .
We are also extremely pleased to support the measures in this directive which protect and promote micro-cogeneration , which we feel to be an essential component in the development of CHP and also of course - I speak on behalf of my group and that of others - we are very keen to try to use tomorrow 's vote as a starting point to have a serious though no doubt tough debate with the Council on maintaining and pursuing real rather than just symbolic targets .
My final note is one of caution .
There are a number of amendments tabled .
I would urge colleagues from other groups to refrain from supporting amendments which disturb this very delicately constructed compromise .
It would seem , at least to us in my group , to be a shame to jeopardise a compromise which took so long and was frankly so painful in its birth .
Mr President , it is astonishing that market forces have been incapable on their own of boosting the energy efficiency of the fuels they use through the generation of combined heat and power .
As the heat generated in the production of electricity can be used for both heating and cooling , it is an economic resource , the utilisation of which ( one would think ) served the interests of the production plants themselves .
The directive is not needed just because it will help to protect the single energy market .
It is also needed to compel the Member States to channel resources for the effective use of fuels in the name of efficiency and environmental protection .
Common objectives are set very carelessly in the EU .
An objective is set , but neither the resources nor the sanctions to achieve these objectives are created .
An example of setting objectives based on wishful thinking is the promotion of cogeneration now being discussed .
The aim to increase cogeneration to account for 18 % of electricity generation by 2010 or 2012 is a pious hope .
The market will engage in cogeneration if it is financially worthwhile .
The directive will not mean the market 's unseen hand will lose the power of its grip .
Small production units are often innovative : they make good use of margins that do not interest the big producers .
For that reason , in many of the amendments one feels there is concern regarding the equal treatment of small producers in a liberalised market dominated by the large producers .
It is only reasonable to insist that the small producers should be certain of having access to the network , and they should get a fair price for electricity from cogeneration .
In this connection I would furthermore like to draw attention to the problems that arise if there is no coordination between different directives .
For example , the directive on a system for greenhouse gas emission rights trading should not be inconsistent with this directive .
The former is a synthetic market directive , whilst this directive on cogeneration is financial / technical .
The directive on emission rights trading is not in the interests of European business , whilst this directive is .
Mr President , the drawing up of this Directive and Parliament 's report on this legislative instrument has been very laborious , but I would not say that there has been confrontation , but rather a progressive and patient convergence towards rigour and the service of the European general interest by bringing together arguments and points of view .

The three central points we have achieved , Mr President , by means of this long discussion , have been , firstly , to place primary energy saving at the heart of the Directive as an essential defining parameter ; secondly , to calculate the percentage energy saving in relation to the electricity produced and not in relation to the total of heat plus electricity , in order to emphasise where the energy saving is achieved ; and finally we have distinguished clearly between two situations : that of those installations which work permanently producing heat and electricity simultaneously and that of those which , because of the way they operate and the purposes they serve , produce electricity and heat simultaneously only for part of the year , and the rest of the year work exclusively in condensation mode .
Mr President , these three points were essential to achieving the aim of this Directive , which was a good definition of cogeneration , and which will allow us to define a good system for stimulating this form of energy production , leading to what we are all seeking : savings of primary energy , reduction of CO2 emissions and increasing the Union 's independence with regard to the external supply of energy sources .
Unfortunately , this discussion , which we have all participated in with great enthusiasm , dedication and goodwill , has not been enough for the whole of the House - Mr Turmes for example - but neither can we expect everybody to understand everything straightaway .
I am sure that Mr Turmes , who is very knowledgeable in this field , will continue considering it , and that what he cannot see today he will soon see clearly .
I am happy to continue explaining the same things both to him and his collaborators , as I have done up till now - although having heard his speech I see that I have not been successful - because talking to him is always a pleasure , in political and human terms .
Mr Glante , please allow me to address an observation expressly to you , and I would like to thank you warmly for your receptiveness and cooperation throughout the work we have done together : when a sculpture is finished and is almost perfect , there are always certain final touches which make it absolutely perfect .
I would draw your attention to Amendments Nos 75 and 81 , which correspond to the agreement we reached after the meeting in committee and which our group considers to be essential : Amendment No 75 , which removes the threshold of 80 % , which no longer makes sense , and Amendment No 81 , which clearly distinguishes between each type of installation .
Commissioner , General de Gaulle said that policy is action at the service of a strong , simple and clear idea .
If this is the case , Commissioner , you have a European energy policy in mind and , as long as you continue to develop it , this Parliament will support you , because it fulfils objectives which we all wish to achieve : increasing our competitiveness , guaranteeing the well-being of all Europeans and greater economic growth .
Mr President , I too wish first of all to thank Mr Glante for producing an excellent report .
The proposal for a directive on the promotion of cogeneration is an important part of the EU 's strategy for energy efficiency and energy savings .
Cogeneration will also contribute to a reduction in greenhouse gases , as has been said here .
The short-term aim must be to develop the present cogeneration plants and , where possible , to encourage the establishment of high-efficiency plants .
The longer-term objective must be to create a framework for ensuring that high-efficiency cogeneration has a key role to play in increasing energy efficiency and savings .
The amendments relating to micro-generation , renewable energy sources and district cooling are important in terms of technological development .
It is possible to store heat in all size categories for a day or a year , as opposed to what is stated in the Commission proposal and in certain committee opinions .
Financial support should not be restricted just to CHP technology based on a useful heat demand .
Flexibility in the use of CHP plants must be permitted , as dictated by the time of year , the working day and random variables .
Waste heat produced at a cogeneration plant has a potentially wider use than is the case at present .
It may also be used , for example , for cooling , water purification and air conditioning .
This report is very technical , and the Finnish word ' suuritehoinen ' ( ' powerful ' ) often mistakenly appears in the Finnish language version .
The correct translation is ' korkean hyötysuhteen ' ( ' high-efficiency ' ) .
The word ' suuritehoinen ' would lead the reader to understand that the directive only applied to large installations .
The important thing is that the will is there to support high-efficiency technology regardless of size .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we have reached an extremely important juncture .
The report on cogeneration that we have here is enormously important in terms of a sustainable energy policy in Europe .
I should first of all like to join my fellow Members in thanking the rapporteur , Mr Glante , for his extremely amiable , pleasant , very constructive cooperation .
I should like to call upon him to continue this cooperation until the end , to ensure that we achieve a good result tomorrow .
It has been rightly pointed out that the emphasis has come to be placed much more on the conservation of energy .
The important thing , of course , is seeing to it that we arrive at a situation in which we in Europe are able to achieve our CO2 targets .
Cogeneration plays a very important role in this .
What is also particularly important , however , is of course that we aspire to have high-quality installations in Europe , that we do not become lazy about cogeneration , but instead set our sights as high as possible in order to achieve the maximum possible savings .
I think that that is the message that should also be sent out by the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
I actually liked the picture painted by Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca very much .
It is almost complete , but something still remains to be done : we need to add further - but minor - refinements to Annexes II and III .
The subdivision of fuel consumption not related to cogeneration is now , therefore , being moved to Annex III , so we have to tidy up Annex II a little , simplifying it slightly , more in the direction of Annex III .
That , Mr Glante , is also the reason why we tabled both Amendment No 175 and Amendment No 176 .
This has turned out to be a very technical report , but it ultimately revolves around the fact that we are in need of a common , precise calculation method and harmonisation of the support schemes applied by the European Union .
Amendment No 42 is essential .
It is essential that this harmonised reference value for determining primary energy savings by cogeneration is brought in as soon as possible , namely within two years .
It is also essential that the calculation method be precise and harmonised throughout the EU .
The report now contains that whole package , and for this reason I think that it deserves our support .
I hope , therefore , that Mr Glante will also be able to secure the support of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for his proposal tomorrow .
Mr Vidal-Quadras Roca has already indicated how essential Amendments Nos 75 , 76 and 81 are to us .
It all depends on him , therefore - on his support for our amendments - whether the PPE-DE Group is able to follow him .
I hope that it can .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur and my colleagues on working together to achieve the compromise formula and definitions , which have covered a very complicated and technical set of issues .
I particularly wish to support the importance of aiming at energy savings over efficiency : we want to use less fuel .
I welcome the linkage of support with the environmental benefits that will flow from it .
I would like to refer to some concerns expressed by a company in my former constituency and now the south-west region that I represent .
They tell me they have supplied co-generation plant over the past 20 years , which has contributed to an estimated annual saving of 700 000 tonnes of carbon , which is a significant saving .
They are concerned about this 50-megawatt threshold for eligibility .
They want it to be removed as a distortion or potential distortion to investment decisions .
They are very keen on the test of eligibility for support to be based on primary energy savings and - a point which has not yet been mentioned - they want the directive to recognise and reward the benefits of utilising waste heat and fuels .
That can come from a variety of sources .
I wish to raise two concerns of my own .
Firstly , we must beware of losing sight of the objectives of this directive beneath this welter of technical detail .
Colleagues have referred to the complexities that we have been addressing in committee and sometimes it has been a little obscure what the outcome would be .
We must remember that we are looking for primary energy savings .
I am concerned about the potential for over-elaborate administrative requirements : too many people being involved in the certification and eligibility procedures .
There is always a risk that one can stifle an initiative by too much bureaucracy .
However , I would like to broadly commend and support this proposal .
We look forward to achieving a good result in the vote tomorrow with the cooperation that we have seen up to now .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for their contributions and say to them that I agree with all of them .
Our task over all these recent years has been to propose greater energy efficiency , greater savings and use of energy , all for the sake of sustainable development , which means not just guaranteeing competitiveness and quality of service for users , but also respecting the environment .
But I believe that all the honourable Members will agree that what we cannot do , under the banner of ' cogeneration ' , is to ultimately create a system in which more energy is consumed than would be consumed in a separated fashion throughout the process and which furthermore benefits from subsidies which , at the end of the day , are paid for by users , the taxpayer - there are various possibilities - or simply network clients , leading not just to inefficient use of energy and greater energy consumption , but also distortions of competition and a lack of competitiveness throughout the system , which I believe would benefit nobody .
The intention is to support real cogeneration and to prevent subterfuge , which , on the pretext of carrying out cogeneration activity , really involves other types of activity .
I would once again like to thank the rapporteur .
Several of you have referred to the complex and difficult discussions .
I understand that many aspects are highly complex from a technical point of view and I would therefore like once again to thank you for the effort and quality you have put into your work , despite the fact that the Commission cannot accept some of the elements proposed .
Of the 85 amendments remaining , the great majority are acceptable either totally , partially or following some modification .
Nevertheless , there are 28 which we reject entirely .
I will provide the honourable Members with a complete copy , Mr President , so that there are no doubts
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0129 / 2003 ) by Mr Nicholson , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the insurance requirements for air carriers and aircraft operators .
Mr President , I should firstly like to express my thanks for the cooperation I received in the preparation of this report , not only from the Commission but also from colleagues on the committee , where we were involved in extremely good cooperation in bringing forward compromise amendments .
These have strengthened the report to the best interests of the industry and those involved in it .
We should all be aware that this report came about , to a large extent , as a result of the aeroplanes flying into the Twin Towers in New York in September 2001 .
It is an attempt , to some extent , to restore confidence in the insurance market in the European Union .
Hopefully that confidence will return .
I have to say at the outset that this is not necessarily a major problem for what we would term the ' major airlines ' , that is , airlines such as Lufthansa , Air France , British Airways and the other big boys .
They do not have a problem with this .
It is the small , regional airlines that will be most affected - indeed not only small , regional airlines , but aircraft training schools and people who fly their own small planes , etc .
They are the people who , to a large extent , could feel they face the greatest problem .
There could be an added cost to them .
That is something we want to try to avoid .
As I said , I tried to achieve a consensus with the compromise amendments that we came forward with in committee .
I feel we have achieved this .
We have introduced three extra categories . These categories allow for greater flexibility and stability in the smaller aircraft area .
We also have to be aware of the substantial support given to the industry in the United States .
The US Government has been a very strong supporter of its industry , especially since 11 September , and continues to be so .
We must not allow our industry in the European Union to place its operators at any further disadvantage .
By sticking to the Montreal Convention and the ECAC figures I hope we have been able to find and bring forward a balanced report that will hopefully find a way forward .
There are still some areas of concern . We debated them in committee .
Mrs Foster brought forward a couple of amendments .
She has concerns about the overflying of European Union airspace .
That is something that she is right to continue to develop .
We have to understand what this means and how it is going to be controlled .
The other question is one we really must address between first and second readings - and I ask the Commission to take this on board - is that of an impact assessment , another issue raised in committee .
We should return to that at a later stage .
We have to know what the cost and effect , the damage or the benefit will be to those who fly , be it as a hobby , on business or for any other reason .
We should be prepared to take time to make that assessment .
It is not in the interests of the European Union to bring in legislation that will put people at a disadvantage and make the European Union look like kill-joys .
That certainly is not my intention .
I will continue to defend the most vulnerable in this field - the small operators and those who enjoy flying as a sport .
In committee I met with many interests in the industry .
I also met with the insurers .
It is amazing that in the European Union we only have two or three companies or people providing insurance for aircraft .
There is very little competition in this field .
It is right for us to encourage competition but the timing , elements and basics have to be right .
We have to ensure that we have a proposal that will encourage others into this industry and bring greater competition .
It is right to encourage and prepare for those conditions .
Hopefully , very soon , we will be able to return to a more stable market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say very briefly that the Community regulations in force simply require air companies to be insured , but they do not set any criterion , condition or sum to be respected by the authorising authorities of the Member States of the Union .
It therefore became necessary to clarify the situation , particularly following the events of 11 September 2001 .
As the rapporteur has quite rightly said , it is a question of restoring confidence and of providing the possibility of sufficient insurance cover , for small companies as well .
The Commission 's objective is therefore to ensure that all aircraft flying to European destinations are always insured against various risks , including war and terrorism .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Nicholson , for his constructive work , into which he has incorporated a more balanced approach , particularly with regard to third-party insurance .
The Commission is very concerned that this proposal should be adopted rapidly and will continue to observe the air insurance market in order to ensure that the current situation excludes any risk of aircraft lacking sufficient cover .
But I would like to say to the honourable Member that , with regard to the impact assessment , the reality is that before preparing this proposal , the Commission gathered diverse information on the issue of the insurance conditions applicable in the different States of the Union by means of the European Civil Aviation Conference and third countries , including also all aspects relating to insurance associated with leasing contracts , the Commission has been actively monitoring the development of the insurance market , both at European level and at international level .
Firstly at European level in order to ultimately put an end to the special conditions which allowed the cover of certain types of risk by the public sector , but also by means of the International Civil Aviation Organisation , which is where we believe this type of issue should essentially be dealt with .
The proposal which the honourable Members are discussing today also stems from the various discussions which took place in a special group created precisely in order to discuss the problems relating to insurance following the tragic events of September .
That special group included representatives of the insurance industries and the air industries .
Finally , I would like to say to you that , following the introduction of special conditions which have been in operation for some time following 11 September ( until we believed that the market had recovered sufficient capacity to cover all the risks at reasonable prices ) , the Commission has monitored the support measures and tariffs applied in the different States of the Union , which has given us firsthand and direct knowledge of the true situation of air insurance in the different countries of the Union .
Therefore , in this regard , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , Mr Nicholson , we believed that more extensive impact studies were not necessary , since we had more than sufficient information to produce this proposal .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur for this report , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , for having accepted the majority of the amendments which this Committee has proposed in its opinion .
I would also like to thank all the members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism for having accepted a series of points of view which the Committee on Legal Affairs believed were important because they would improve the report being produced by Parliament .
Secondly , Madam Vice-President , please allow me to congratulate you as we have done on other occasions and on other diverse and varied reports , since , once again , you have dealt with a complicated and controversial issue , which may annoy certain sectors and groups affected , and have made a courageous proposal which , in certain cases , as you can see , we have reduced to a certain extent , although on other aspects we have proposed , if you like , some further detail and a degree of toughening of the proposal .
We must acknowledge your work and your will to resolve issues so that the European citizens are much better covered and so that they gain confidence in air transport .
Furthermore , this confidence , security and responsibility in the rules on air transport should also be extended to other areas of transport on which you have also made proposals and in which we have not reached the same level in terms of the internal market and liberalisation .
We are dealing with a courageous proposal , from the Commission , the rapporteur and the Committee on Transport , which provides for a qualitative leap in the field of insurance .
As both you and the rapporteur have indicated quite correctly , we are trying to give the citizens and users confidence and we are making our air transport competitive , and at the same time establishing a series of rules which indicate the route to be taken by air companies as well as the route to be taken by other States .
None of these concepts should make us nervous .
I believe we are taking the right approach and we must maintain it .
We must improve the texts , we must propose innovative ideas such as this and you will always have our support , Madam Vice-President .
I hope that Parliament will vote to ratify the proposal of the Committee on Transport , which I believe the Commission can accept , and I believe the Council will be capable of following us and that we will not find , as on other occasions , that in the end certain issues have been rather left behind and then we have all regretted it and have been obliged to resolve them hurriedly .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Nicholson , on his report .
Members have highlighted the reasons why this regulation is required in the aftermath of the events of 11 September 2001 in the United States , so I will not go any further on that point .
I should just like to say that we believe it is a necessary regulation because it creates legal certainty and because it establishes minimum insurance requirements for liability in respect of passengers , luggage , cargo , mail and third parties .
On the whole , we believe that the Commission did a reasonable job .
However , we also believe our committee has improved the text by bringing it closer to reality and by clarifying certain aspects of it .
I support the call from the rapporteur with regard to an economic impact assessment of this legislation before the second reading .
The main points I would like to raise on behalf of the PSE Group are as follows :
The Commission 's categories regarding the minimum insurance requirements cover too wide a spectrum of aircraft and would have constituted a burden which is too high or even unbearable for smaller aircraft in general aviation .
I believe we have found a good compromise in the committee by lowering and changing the categories and by using more or less the categories of resolution ECAC / 25-1 .
My group has tabled two amendments again for plenary .
The first is to ensure that the person of the party liable in respect of an aircraft is identical to the person required to take out the insurance .
This amendment is necessary in order to avoid duplication of insurance , gaps in the insurance cover , or insurance without liability .
The second amendment is about the consequences if the conditions of this regulation are not met , in particular as it applies to an air carrier or aircraft operators from third countries , who must be refused access to routes to or within the Community or the right to overfly the territory if they fail to comply .
We must remember that Community air carriers and keepers of aircraft registered in the Community shall forfeit their operating license where the prescribed insurance cover is not maintained .
Therefore we must make this distinction between third country and Community carriers or operators .
We believe that refusal or access to routes is the appropriate sanction for non-EU air carriers and aircraft operators , and that the only sanction we can impose is the denial of access to routes .
These two amendments are reasonable and I hope colleagues will support them .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Nicholson , ladies and gentlemen .
First of all , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his good work , which has resulted in a balanced report .
I had therefore hoped that the Commissioner would arrive in Strasbourg by aeroplane today , but I believe that she just came by car .
That is a shame .
One could ask oneself whether that is because she considers that the level we are now proposing as a Parliament is too low .
I realise that it has turned out much lower than she proposed .
Nevertheless , I believe strongly in the compromise that our rapporteur has achieved and give it my wholehearted support .
I should like , however , to send a general signal to the Commission regarding the tendency I perceive in its rules of late with regard to aviation .
I wonder aloud whether the Commission shares my concern that things are not going well for the European aviation sector .
I broadly support the Commission 's initiatives .
However , that institution 's timing and the ' open skies ' authority yet to be further developed have meant that the sector is having to deal with a large number of changes simultaneously at a very difficult time .
It is overstretched .
I would not wish you to misunderstand me : I am in favour of opening up markets to more competition and of reducing intervention by the authorities , but we must be clear and realistic , with transitional rules .
We have a variety of regimes : national , European and international , and they are intertwined .
I think , therefore , that we have to take care not to start the race too fast .
I should like to ask that , at second reading , the economic impact be presented , so that we know what it really involves and that we really are going to make the Community finishing line .
I fully support the compromise that Mr Nicholson has presented .
I really find and this is the main reason we have to do it that a cup of coffee at home or here in Strasbourg is much more enjoyable than on the road in Luxembourg if one does happen to go by car .
In a real , insured aeroplane .
This is what is important .
We want to have a consumer-friendly product , a safe product , in the air , and I hope that we can decide on that together tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are establishing the minimum insurance requirements to be fulfilled by air companies and operators flying through our airspace or providing services destined for or departing from the European Union , in order to guarantee their liability for possible damage which may be caused to passengers , luggage , cargo , mail or third parties .
In order to successfully achieve such a laudable objective , we must not allow the Regulation we are approving to contain imprecise definitions or confused concepts , since that could lead to situations in which there is no cover or protection , either for the consumer using the air service or for third parties suffering damage in the event of incidents .
We therefore propose several amendments , with a view to better defining in the regulatory text the terms ' passenger ' , ' insurance ' and ' flight ' , compensation to third parties , where appropriate , and we also advocate the inclusion amongst the risks insured of other contingencies , accidents and fortuitous incidents , as well as the risks caused by acts of war , terrorism , kidnap , sabotage , hijack and social or industrial disturbances .
Furthermore , we propose that companies and operators registered in a third country , that is , outside the European Union , can be considered as conforming to the requirements of this regulation we are discussing , provided that they produce an insurance certificate , issued under appropriate regulatory conditions by any insurer authorised to operate legally in accordance with Community law .
We also propose that , in all cases of aircraft operated under a leasing system , with or without crews , for whatever time period , it should always be the companies or operators carrying out flights who should fulfil the minimum insurance requirements .
Finally , we ask the Commission to take the initiative to harmonise legislation on insurance against risks in all the Union 's air terminals , so that we do not end up in a situation where only possible damage suffered during flights is covered , but also any damage during the rest of the time that users remain within the air transport service chain .
Mr President , Commissioner , serious accidents in the recent past , and their aftermath , have shown us that the legislation on the liability of carriers in respect of third parties is not satisfactory .
For that reason , I certainly do not wish to deny the necessity of this proposal for a regulation .
It is indeed important when introducing this kind of measure that all airlines , both EU and non-EU carriers , are subject to the same requirements .
After all , the measure would be severely restricted in its effectiveness if this regulation only related to EU carriers .
It would , moreover , have a disruptive effect on the already delicate relations in the aviation sector .
Another aspect for which the international context is of great importance is the amount of the sums insured .
It would cloud relations in the sector if we were to lay down considerably higher sums than have been agreed in the international aviation community .
Without detracting from my support for this proposal , I should like to make an appeal to the Council and to the Commission .
Given the malaise in the aviation sector , I would call on the Council and the Commission to adopt a constructive attitude towards the aviation sector .
As a result of a number of crises , a kind of yo-yo situation seems to have arisen there , in which the viability of the airlines - not only from Europe , but also from elsewhere - is seriously under threat .
Given the contribution that this sector makes to the development of the Community , a support strategy is the least it can expect .
This means that I can give the report my support - and the rapporteur my gratitude .
I should like to note , however , that the circumstances require that it be introduced with care .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as all those who have spoken before me have already said , Mr Nicholson really has done an excellent job , succeeding in convincing a large part - if not all - of the Commission of the validity of the proposals for compromise amendments he has put forward , which are very appropriate and necessary .
Commissioner , we fully agree with the Commission that the measure is appropriate and necessary ; previous speakers have already explained why .
We need to give consumers and air transport users increasing guarantees , and we need , as has been said , gradually to achieve a situation where the sector is regulated and rights are protected in this field , in order to provide the same possibility of development and to restore consumer confidence .
It is , however , true , Commissioner - and I regret to say that this does not appear to be a new scenario - that , although you followed a sound , effective line with regard to air transport , the competent services of the Commission then took - and not for the first time - a rather too rigid approach when it came to specifics .
As you are quite aware , I am the rapporteur for the measure on overbooking , with regard to which we encountered the same rigidity as we are experiencing today in the field of insurance .
What do I mean by rigidity ?
I mean an approach that is a little oversimplistic , which does not , indeed , take into account the two fundamental factors already mentioned .
Firstly , there are different kinds of air transport : the major airlines are one thing but the regional airlines are another , and private operators - as in this case - are quite another .
The second factor which is being overlooked is that this is a difficult time for the sector , not so much because of economic trends - September 11 , the Middle East , the war in Iraq and now SARS which , as you know , Commissioner , has already done twice as much damage to the air traffic sector as Iraq - as the fact that , in the face of these economic difficulties , while US airlines are receiving what is practically full , total support from the US Government , we , on the other hand , are leaving most of our airlines on their own to cope with the demands we are making of them and the changes we are asking them to make , however necessary these requests may be .
To sum up , then , it was necessary for a good measure to be proposed , but I believe that , on this occasion too , without Parliament 's astute contribution , the good end result we can adopt and endorse today might not have been achieved .
Mr President , I am glad that the rapporteur has consulted the stakeholders on this matter , although I note he does not specify who they are !
In my own fevered imagination , I have always equated stakeholders with Count Dracula .
However , in this context I consider that my own stakeholders are my electorate .
I was sent to this Parliament to use my best endeavours to arrest the march of EU regulations or mitigate their effect .
In respect of this legislation , I note that the proposal conforms to the provisions of the Montreal and Warsaw Conventions .
However , the signatories to the Conventions are the Member States , not the European Union !
Thus , while I would obviously support the idea of rationalising aviation insurance , I cannot accept Commission attempts to superimpose a European dimension on what should be a matter for nation states .
To the extent that I am also a stakeholder , I will therefore do the only thing I can in this House : thrust my own stake through the heart of this proposal and vote against it .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank my colleague Mr Nicholson for all his hard work , and to say that I would fully support his and other Members ' requests that a thorough financial business impact assessment be carried out by the Commission before the second reading .
I would also echo remarks by Mr Lisi and others on the state of the industry at this moment .
It goes without saying that none of us here would expect airlines to be operating without the proper levels of insurance cover and there is no evidence to suggest that the airlines have ever done so .
However , the draft proposal took no account of the financial impact on the European aviation industry .
Airlines have already endured an increase of 300 % for their insurance premiums post September 11 .
In particular the proposal paid no regard to the financial effects on regional airlines , the general aviation sector and flying schools .
In addition the UK Government has already estimated extra costs to the UK sector of £ 50 million , a fact that the Commission is determined to ignore .
My second point concerns the proposed levels of insurance cover and I fully supported the cross-party compromise that was voted on overwhelmingly at committee stage and which was more in line with the ECAC specifications .
Thirdly we have still not received a satisfactory answer regarding the practical application of this legislation on the issue of overflying .
Comprehensive transit agreements have been in place worldwide for the last 60 years and it is therefore vital that any additional information required would have to be processed in a straightforward manner .
The suggestion that this information could be filed with the flight plan seems totally impractical to me and does not answer the important question regarding an aircraft diverting into European airspace in unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances .
My final point concerns third party liability cover for war and terrorism .
The Commission strongly suggests that this legislation will open up the insurance market which is currently a virtual monopoly supplier .
However , we have heard no detailed evidence to support this , contrary to what the Commissioner has said .
According to the experts there are no products of this nature available to international airlines and none are ever likely to emerge .
In conclusion , I would request that the Commission not only informs our committee of the results of the business impact assessment but also answers satisfactorily the two additional points I have raised on overflying and insurance cover before the second reading .
Too often the Commission ignores such requests from our committee members for information and we will no longer be ignored .
Finally , I would stress that this House should not pass legislation that cannot be complied with .
Thank you very much Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the Commission statement on the ministerial meeting of the European Space Agency on 27 May 2003 .
. ( ES ) Mr President , it is a pleasure for me to take the floor today on behalf of my colleague , Commissioner Busquin , and on behalf of the Commission .
I would like to begin by congratulating the European Parliament on its initiatives aimed at drawing the attention of the States of the Union - which we should not forget are the European protagonists in the space sector - but drawing the attention of those States to the need to take courageous and significant decisions in a sector in crisis , as the space sector currently is .
The broad debate arising from the Commission 's Green Paper on European space policy highlights several points .
Firstly , I would mention the need to go ahead with a restructuring of the launcher sector in order to guarantee Europe access to space .
Secondly , I would like , together with the whole of the Commission , to re-affirm how urgent it is to reach an agreement within the European Space Agency on Galileo .
I would like to say , ladies and gentlemen , that I believe it essential that there be an agreement within the European Space Agency since we have been waiting too long .
First it was certain countries , and now it is others .
In any event , at Community level , we reached an agreement a whole year ago during the Spanish Presidency .
Unfortunately , an agreement is still to be reached within the Space Agency where I would remind the honourable Members that the intergovernmental system operates .
With regard to the Galileo issue , I would like to point out that this is one of the great essential projects if we are to maintain our space sector , and that , furthermore , if we do not establish the joint undertaking very quickly , which must move this project ahead , we risk facing difficulties when it comes to continuing to maintain the adjudication of frequencies which we achieved having overcome every type of obstacle in 2000 .
I would therefore like once again to insist on the European interest , on the need for an agreement to be reached on this point as soon as possible and that national differences be resolved .
Finally , the Commission supports the work of the Convention aimed at including space as a shared competence in the Union Treaty in the future .
The initial approaches emerging from the process of consultation on the Green Paper are converging in favour of the definition of a space policy for the European Union , as well as its application by means of an ambitious space programme .
Before I finish , however , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that the existence of a common policy in the defence sector at least , in the arms sector , would also assist enormously the work and activity of the space sector .
We know , ladies and gentlemen , that , for our most direct competitors , the most significant support for this sector comes from precisely that source of funding .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner both for the time she has devoted to this initiative and for her comments on the matter , which confirm the Commission 's intention to develop a strategy consistent with that already presented in the Green Paper on Space Policy and with the initiatives on the Galileo joint undertaking .

The motion for a resolution is a response to a growing concern : when we discuss the Green Paper with a view to the drawing up of a White Paper - in other words , of a more organic Commission proposal - we would not want to find ourselves in a situation where our goals are jeopardised by the severe crisis affecting the entire European space industry and , in particular , the new version of Ariane ; nor would we want - and I believe this is one of the Commission 's concerns - the impasse in connection with the Galileo project ultimately to jeopardise a highly ambitious project which has required extraordinary cooperation from the whole of European industry .
We are convinced that space is a key sector for Europe and that this decision , formalised by the establishment of the European Space Agency , must be confirmed and consolidated .
The Space Agency is an asset which we must not waste , and it is no coincidence that it is cited , not least in the recent action plan to increase research , as one of the major technological platforms to be considered if we are to respond to the need to make the European economy competitive .
The space industry is currently experiencing a period of crisis .
However , we must remember that , although the resources which have been available to it are infinitely inferior to those at the disposal of the parallel United States industry , it has succeeded in winning a sizeable share of the market and has managed to compete in those fields in which it was operating in parallel with the US initiative too , reducing Europe 's dependency on US technology in industry sectors where both were active and , not least , finding the means to cooperate positively with North American industry .
We feel that this presence , this initiative must be confirmed , and it would appear from the Commission 's response - although expressed in what , as I have said , is an unplanned debate arising from the concern not to find ourselves in a situation where our plans are jeopardised and pending a more organic , comprehensive assessment - that it agrees with us .
We must acknowledge that the development of the space sector is extremely important in terms of making the knowledge-based economy a practical reality , that public funding and coordination of defence policies is essential and that it can be supplemented by private investment but only in some links in the space industry value chain .
We hope that these observations , which express our agreement with the Commission , will be heeded by the Council when it meets on 27 May to take decisions .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs de Palacio for her speech this Monday night at the beginning of the Parliamentary session on a matter that is highly topical , since , in fact , our speeches are not so much addressed to Commissioner Busquin or to Mrs de Palacio herself as to the ministerial meeting of the European Space Agency , which is due to take place in a few days ' time .
We have high expectations of its outcome .
I think it is worth saying that this is a topical initiative .
It is not intended to replace reports or the debate on the Green Paper , or the Galileo debate .
It has simply become clear at various meetings that this is a critical time for the European space sector - perhaps more critical than we realise - due to the problems of Arianespace , which affect not only launchers but the entire satellite industry as well .
A question mark is therefore now hanging over the skills and expertise we have acquired , which are extremely valuable at a time when new space powers are emerging all over the world , at a time when we can see that the market studies carried out in the 1990s are no longer being acted on , in particular in the field of satellite constellations .
We therefore need to examine the question of what Europe is doing , given that this is a European project .
Of course , the French are particularly concerned , since they instigated the conquest of space a few years ago , but , today , it is no longer possible for one isolated country to maintain its space capacity at world level .
Today , therefore , I am not speaking as a Frenchman , Commissioner , but as a European who would like us to consider Airbus and what that remarkable achievement involved .
We should make that clear to those who might say that if the European space sector does not measure up they will buy elsewhere .
We could also have purchased planes elsewhere .
Sadly , however , this would compromise European skills , technology and expertise , and , in particular , civil applications in all fields , including medicine , information technology and aeronautics .
This is therefore a strategic project , not just in the military sense , but also quite simply in terms of what is Europe 's most valuable asset , in other words its technological progress .
As far as you can , we would like you to convey to the Member States , who are also members of the ESA , our desire to see an emergency plan implemented to restructure the launcher sector , and also our desire to see the Galileo crisis resolved .
You have certainly done more than your duty in this field .
For the first time , Europe is sending out a strong signal , it possesses a space programme , and we know that programmes are essential , but we can see that the ESA is suffering one crisis after another .
Commissioner , we believe it is very important , on the one hand , to succeed in overcoming this crisis at the next ministerial meeting of the ESA , and , on the other , if we do not succeed , to ask the Commission to take matters firmly in hand .
I know this is difficult , I know that Germany and France in particular are not necessarily cooperative with regard to establishing an executive director .
I would like to see an end to minor skirmishes in this field .
What we are asking , however , is that the Commission compensate for the failings of the ESA , if failings it must have .
Lastly , we would like to send a message to the Convention on the future of the Union , calling for space to be an area of shared competence in future , since , once again , we believe this would be in keeping with its strategic nature .
Mr President , firstly I wish to thank Ms de Palacio for her excellent introduction .
The European Union 's common space policy is important .
The European Space Agency is an essential part of European integration .
Most of the members of the European Space Agency are members of the EU , and most of the members of the EU are also members of the European Space Agency .
Space technology is a very important area for policy on research and industry .
At present more than 40 000 people work in the space industry and the sector indirectly creates employment for as many as 250 000 .
Space research is traditionally at the forefront of all research .
Many of the discoveries made there are later on applied in the circumstances of everyday life , to become of service to the whole public .
By far the largest and most important of the projects jointly engaged in by the European Union and the ESA is the Galileo Satellite Navigation Programme .
It is a system based on satellites and ground stations , which is intended to be introduced in 2008 .
It will enable receivers to locate their whereabouts and determine what time it is , with extreme accuracy , anywhere on earth .
The European system differs from the American GPS and the Russian Glonas systems in that it is the most modern system , and its operation would not be adversely affected in times of crisis .
The last war in Iraq showed just how important this is .
The Galileo system would secure the non-dependence of the EU and the ESA on the other systems , whose management would be none of their business .
The EU 's involvement is mainly restricted to developing the Galileo system , which should be completed in 2005 .
This phase will cost at least EUR 1.1 billion , of which the EU has undertaken to pay half and the ESA the other half .
In addition , the private sector should be involved in the project , contributing around EUR 200 million .
The Galileo system is vital for the development of European research and technology .
The EU and the ESA countries should be at the global forefront of space technology .
Mr President , we are indeed facing a very unusual situation and I am glad this debate is being held tonight , even though , sadly , very few Members are present in the Chamber .
In the face of the international competition that has developed in the field of launchers , and considerable funding problems , the European space industry is undergoing a very serious , even unprecedented , crisis , and we therefore urgently need to overcome this situation which threatens the very existence of Arianespace and find solutions .
I would like to emphasise the fact that access to space is not just an industrial priority - it is also a requirement in terms of European identity and autonomy in a field in which we have acquired substantial competence .
Space is all about research and highly important civil applications .
We often consider it to mean the conquest of space , but I personally would say that space is mainly what we call useful space - telecommunications , observation satellites , medicine and disaster prevention .
It is an area of excellence and competence and also an important source of skilled employment , providing 35 000 direct jobs in Europe , with a significant research sector .
As you are aware , I would like to emphasise the need for the space sector to serve mainly peaceful objectives .
I would join other Members in welcoming the fact that the development of the European space policy has been deemed a priority for the Sixth Community Framework-Programme for research and development .
I was also pleased to note that the future of the European Space Agency is on the agenda for our part-session .
The European Space Agency is an effective intergovernmental coordination body that has contributed to the development of space applications in Europe and throughout the world .
I therefore consider it necessary to establish a genuine European space policy with greater involvement of European Union competences in this field .
I also believe that this is not incompatible with maintaining the autonomy of the Agency .
The Union therefore needs to make a genuine commitment for the Agency to continue to develop as a coordinator and programme manager .
Once again , I would like to reiterate what other Members have said . In order to establish an autonomous European policy we urgently need to overcome the impasse on the Galileo dossier and , at last - as we have endlessly repeated - ensure that the Member States overcome their differences to enact this programme and move towards its rapid implementation , relaunching the European launcher .
I would , however , Commissioner - and I do not know whether this is a possibility - like the Commission to carry out a study on distortions in competition between Ariane and launchers from other countries on the civil commercial market .
Although I share the concern and desire to make space a European project and concentrate on the necessary restructuring of the sector , I nevertheless have a few questions on the industrial restructuring that is currently underway , coming as I do from the Toulouse area .
Under what conditions and for what purpose are they being carried out ?
I do not think that the European space sector suffers from increased competence .
Quite the opposite . This would be to take a short-term view rather than an ambitious , long-term view .
I believe that continuing to develop technological and human competence in the sector , rather than losing them , would be the real goal for Europe if , as stated , it is to possess an autonomous , competitive competence in this field .
I too believe it is important to send a strong signal to the forthcoming Council of Ministers .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is my responsibility , on behalf of the competent committee in this area , the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , to draw up the report on the state of progress of the Galileo programme and the integration of the EGNOS programme into the Galileo programme .
The first discussion within the competent committee , the ITRE committee , will take place on 21 May and the report will be discussed in plenary in November .
Given the problems you have highlighted , Commissioner , I would like , if I may , to speak on behalf of the ITRE Committee and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to remind us all of the timetable for implementing Galileo : autumn 2002 , the Galileo Joint Undertaking becomes operative ; end of 2002 , Commission report to the Council on the integration of the EGNOS programme into the Galileo programme and the concession model ; December 2002 , Council decision on the services provided by Galileo and the frequency service plan ; July 2003 , World Radiocommunications Conference ; summer 2003 , Commission proposal to the Council on the creation of the future security body ; autumn 2003 , Commission report to the Council on the preselection of the future concessionaire ; end of 2004 , launch of the first experimental satellite .
If we want to adhere to this timetable , we now urgently need to overcome the impasse that has arisen within the ESA , where the Member States are divided over the importance each has in the programme .
It is understandable that the Member States concerned want to have their say , but it is rather a nuisance , since , for the sake of 1 % or 2 % of their participation , we are in danger of considerably delaying the implementation of this project , which genuinely has a European dimension .
We are aware of the need for technology that is equivalent to or better than GPS .
As we saw with Commissioner Busquin , substantial research has been carried out with a view to achieving extraordinary technology , which will be even better than GPS technology .
It will comprise environmental applications , which will also be essential .
We in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance feel strongly that the project should be transparent , and we do not want it to be carried out in haste because of a delay .
We are extremely concerned that the Galileo project should have civil , rather than military , applications .
We therefore consider that it should be implemented swiftly .
More than 200 Members of Parliament signed a motion in April against a delay and in favour of speeding up the implementation of the project .
I would be grateful , Commissioner , if you could do all you can to ensure that progress is made in this direction and to overcome the impasse as swiftly as possible .
Mr President , if the speeches are becoming repetitive , that is a very good thing .
It shows the widespread support .
We want a consolidated European space policy .
We do not want continuous , ad hoc structures .
We need a permanent solution .
This must be made clear at the ESA ministerial meeting .
The reasons are obvious .
There is considerable European added value in working together .
There is an existing acquis which must be built upon .
We must have independence within this part of the world in this very important sector .
It allows us to have links with third countries such as the United States - why not - and also Russia and countries further afield such as South Africa and some of the applicant countries .
It allows us to retain our scientists and our technologists .
Otherwise we will lose them .
It allows us to recruit the new generation of scientists and technologists .
We cannot do that unless there are projects that capture the imagination of our talented young people .
It allows us , of course , to have spin-offs in a variety of sectors which have already been mentioned and which will enhance the SME sector .
It allows us to be much more efficient in carrying out our EU objectives and policies on climate change , agriculture , security and development in the developing countries .
We are playing uphill on a very sloping playing field against the United States .
They use cross-subsidy to the tune of 31.8 billion of public money - and rising fast - compared to our EUR 6 billion - and falling .
They use public procurement , without blushing , to encourage their space sector .
They use R & D. They use a monopoly on certain electronic equipment to keep us from exploiting the high-tech space sector .
We have already heard about launchers and satellites .
Clearly the problems of the telecoms sector have been difficult for satellites in the European Union .
But there is no reason , with an up-turn , that we should not , with public procurement and public funds , be launching far more satellites in the future for public , citizen benefit .
As far as Galileo is concerned , Mr President , you know more than anyone else in this House what is needed .
I am delighted that Mr Prodi is prepared to be proactive .
He will have the support of many people in this Chamber .
Finally , let us not forget astronomy and space exploration .
I would like to hear a bit more about the European southern laboratory .
Let us have space policy in the Convention .
It is an ideal area for the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , may there one day be a satellite passing overhead that bears your name .
Now that would be a nice contribution from the Commission .
The discussions surrounding the financing of Galileo are starting - within the European Space Agency , at any rate - to resemble a bad soap opera .
At every turn , another Member State emerges from the wings to block this agreement .
Now it seems that Spain is the culprit once more .
This is hard to understand , since , after all , Galileo is important to maritime safety .
The Prestige environmental disaster is evidently not a sufficiently convincing argument for Mr Aznar 's government .
It is time that our Parliament blew the whistle to bring an end to this little game .
It is a very great commitment , and it is perhaps precisely for that reason that some countries are under pressure to shelve this strategic project .
That is why I am one of the co-signatories to this resolution .
Galileo is of strategic importance to the Union , because - whatever happens - we have to keep pace with technology .
We want independence when it comes to information on positioning , and we do not want a ' brain drain ' or ' job drain ' to the United States .
The decision to proceed with Galileo was not taken lightly .
After all , there are many arguments for and against it .
I support the arguments in favour of Galileo .
Here in this Chamber , I want to lend my support to the realisation of this network .
We must not dawdle on this , however .
The scenario is simple : if Galileo is not realised as soon as possible , the transport sector will delve deeper and deeper into GPS applications , and Galileo will remain unused .
In the short term , therefore , Galileo has to constitute a valuable alternative to GPS for the European transport sector .
This sector needs a strong signal from the Commission , the ESA and the Galileo Consortium , and quickly , otherwise future users will not put their trust in the applications ; and Galileo is too expensive to remain unused .
I should just like to go on to emphasise its civilian nature .
That is something that is very important to us .
Only Galileo can offer users a guarantee that the plug will not be pulled when the United States once more feels compelled to take unilateral action somewhere .
Incidentally , the Commission itself , in its communication , speaks about the consequences of the war in Iraq for the energy and transport sector .
We must not , therefore , lose this project ; national interests must defer to the interests of the Union in this respect .
In my country there is a pop song about Satellite Suzy .
I hope that Satellite Suzy , too , passes overhead one day .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot cover in a few minutes all the problems affecting European space policy .
Today , I shall merely raise the problems relating to the Galileo programme .
More than a year has passed since the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism adopted this European satellite navigation programme in March 2002 , and it has so far proved impossible to reach an agreement within the European Space Agency with regard to funding this programme .
Galileo came into existence after marked opposition from certain countries .
Today , it cannot be implemented , first of all , because of the strong competition between those who would like to lead the project , and , secondly , for reasons concerning levels of funding .
The European space industry , as we have all said , is currently undergoing a considerable crisis .
It employs 30 000 highly-skilled workers in Europe and we must do all we can to protect the extraordinary technological and human potential represented by this industry . Galileo is one of the programmes that will be able to make the greatest contribution .
It will also , moreover , provide the European Union with strategic independence .
The European Parliament wanted companies to participate financially in the joint undertaking .
These companies have taken the appropriate action and we now need to support the swift implementation of the project .
Our credibility is at stake .
There is another key element in favour of implementing the programme as a matter of urgency .
As you said , Commissioner , unless we send a signal at the appropriate time , we shall not be able to use the frequencies reserved for Galileo and the related functions .
The European Space Agency must take a decision rapidly and this concern is shared by many of us , both as Members of the European and national parliaments , who drew up and disseminated the document ' Galileo : il est temps d 'agir ' [ ' Galileo : time to act ! ' ] , addressed to the Heads of State and Government of the Member States .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Galileo programme shows us the limits of the current European space policy .
We must learn lessons from this concerning the discussions held which will lead to the adoption , between now and the end of the year , of a White Paper on the subject .
The Galileo programme must be successful and send out a positive signal from Europe concerning an ambitious space policy .
This House must provide its full support so that the joint undertaking can be implemented rapidly and so that the European Commission , as represented by you , Commissioner , shares this concern of our ' Sky and Space ' intergroup in the European Parliament .
Furthermore , in his letter of 30 April last , President Prodi informed the members of this intergroup , through the intermediary of its chair , Mr Savary , of the possibility considered by the Commission of implementing the joint undertaking unilaterally , should an agreement from the ESA not be forthcoming in the next few days .
We would also call on all the Member States to put an end to their differences concerning funding for the programme at the meeting of the European Space Agency on 27 May next , so that we can , at last , move forward .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I fully agree on the strategic importance of the space sector for Europe .
It is the only technology capable of ensuring the emergence of new worldwide rules to genuinely allow the European industry to access new markets and new technological developments .
The space sector to a large extent represents one of the frontiers of pioneering technology .
Europe must not therefore fail to be involved in this extremely important sector .
We must implement a new policy which integrates all European actions .
A moment ago , Mrs McNally spoke of the importance and European added value of the space sector .
And in this regard I proposed earlier the inclusion of space policy within the field of Community competences within the context of the review of the Treaties which is currently taking place in the Convention and therefore the drawing up of a future constitutional Treaty .
The second aspect : space at the service of Community policies , a key objective in relation to the White Paper ; it should therefore be included in applications such as agriculture , fisheries , education , the environment , which several speakers have mentioned .
The European Space Agency will be able to act to stimulate programmes if the view is taken that space is currently of strategic importance ; and the Agency can take an approach which overcomes the current restrictions of the intergovernmental approach .
With regard to the launcher sector , the Commission is preparing a report for September on this strategic sector , which is unquestionably one of the sectors with the greatest difficulties at this time .
Finally , I will comment on the Galileo programme , which , like all these issues - I would repeat - are the responsibility of my colleague Mr Busquin , who is doing tremendous work together with the whole team in the Directorate-General for Research and Technological Development .

Ladies and gentlemen , since I took on my responsibilities as Commissioner , I have dedicated every effort to Galileo , and not only effort , but also political impetus , in accordance with my capacities and very willingly .
It was a project which was far from being able to be realised when I arrived here .
Such a significant project was being dealt with by just two officials for the whole project ( one of them is here today - no longer in the Directorate-General Transport - and I would like to congratulate Mr Tytgat on his will , because at the end of the day , we are often able to build Europe thanks to specific people who have the courage to move forward promoting their ideas ) , a project which was very far from maturity .
I have given my personal impetus to this project since I began to work here .
And I am going to say one thing to you : it has been paralysed for more than a year .
The agreement within the Community was reached more than a year ago during the Spanish Presidency , which dedicated much effort to this project .
I would like to say to the honourable Members that the Community aspect has worked , though more slowly than I would have liked .
What has failed has been the intergovernmental aspect which takes the form of the European Space Agency .
On occasions , in the course of one year , two countries have blocked the decisions of the European Space Agency .
And I understand that over the last month another two have caused problems - in particular one which I know very well .
I have always called upon all of them to resolve these differences as soon as possible and not to block the project .
I have heard ministers in the Council of Ministers haggling over the project , saying that it could not be done by means of an agency , as was proposed at the outset , because we wanted a fully commercial project , with commercial criteria , approached purely from the point of view of economics and economic efficiency , and now I cannot believe that the haggling within the European Space Agency relates to whether the headquarters is in one country or another or whether the Presidency is of one nationality or another .
This entirely contradicts what I have heard , not from these ministers but from their transport colleagues , during a series of Councils in which we have had very tough debates .
In accordance with my responsibilities , I have proposed to the monitoring committee , in which all the States are represented , the name of a director for the joint undertaking , to implement the joint undertaking solely with Community funds , without making use of the funds of the European Space Agency .
It is the Member States who have blocked the proposal I have made in this field .
So let me make it very clear , ladies and gentlemen : within the Community field , the problems have been resolved .
It is within the European Space Agency that the problems are still to be resolved and that some Member States - sometimes certain Member States and sometimes others , it does not matter - are blocking a project which is absolutely strategic for the development not just of the space sector , but for the technological development of Europe , and so that it does not get left behind in relation to a series of essential and key applications .
I would like to clearly express my great concern at the repeated delays - I said this a year and a half ago , in December 2001 - of the project in the Council of Ministers , which jeopardises any real possibility of its being implemented , particularly if we are saying that we want the whole system to operate according to strict market rules .
We must choose .
If we want hard and fast market rules , it makes no sense that we have been wasting our time for more than a year in the European Space Agency arguing about which country or city the headquarters will be in , whether the President of Galileo Industries is to be this person or that person , or whether they come from this or that country of the European Union .
What we need to do is seek the best options .
We must seek the most efficient location and headquarters .
That is what we must seek .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I can only agree with what has just been said here , but I would like to say to you that there are limits , and the limits are that there is an intergovernmental part which is unfortunately deadlocked .
Mr President , of course I will continue to make every possible effort and apply all the pressure I can in order to move this project ahead since , as the honourable Members know , I have invested a lot in it for many years and I believe it is essential to European technological development .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for your frank words , which I can assure you were much appreciated .
Thank you for that clarification .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
( The sitting was suspended at 9 p.m. )
Decision on urgent procedure
Ladies and gentlemen , before we debate Mr Manders ' report , we have to vote on the request to apply the urgent procedure to the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of an agreement in the form of a letter between the European Community and the Republic of Croatia on the ecopoint system applicable to Croatian transit traffic through Austria .
I shall now give the floor to the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , which is the competent committee for this matter .
Mr President , I wanted , first of all , on a brief point of order , to comment on the application of Rule 112 , reminding Parliament that this is a procedure which is to be applied strictly in exceptional circumstances .
Quite frankly , I am amazed that the Council should invoke Rule 112 for a matter of this nature , which we would have been able to address in a few week 's time anyway without it making any difference to the measure , which , as you are aware , has already been in force since 1 January .
In this regard , I would point out to the House that , irrespective of the position it expresses , last night , at an extraordinary meeting held at the request of the Council , the competent committee did not reach the quorum necessary to vote .
The coordinators present were , in fact , surprised at the application of Rule 112 precisely because - as I said before , Mr President - it is , in my opinion , an instrument which is to be used in exceptional circumstances .
We are therefore stunned that the urgent procedure has been employed for what is , I reiterate , a measure whose content is of very minor import .
Mr President , the chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism himself has already stressed that this is of course an unusual procedure .
On the other hand , the deadlines are very tight , making the urgent procedure necessary .
I would therefore propose that we accept the request for urgent procedure .
The next item is the report ( A5-0145 / 2003 ) by Mr Manders , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage [ COM ( 2002 ) 17 - C5-0088 / 2002 - 2002 / 0021 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , I wish to begin by welcoming our new colleagues from the new Member States .
It is a real pleasure to see them in the European Parliament and I welcome them to the EU family .
Firstly , let me thank the rapporteur , Mr Manders , for his report concerning the Commission 's proposal on environmental liability .
Environmental liability is an important subject that has received well-deserved attention and caused intensive discussion for many years .
The Commission has been working on this issue for a long time , in close contact with the parties concerned and civil society .
This process has re-emphasised the strategic importance of the underlying principles , whilst also pointing to a great diversity of opinions on the details of implementation .
One is tempted to say that there are almost as many different views on the main issues as there are parties involved .
I am thus well aware that this proposal is a complex and sensitive one .
Difficult choices had to be made on many of its aspects and the appropriate balance had to be found among competing interests .
We believe that the Commission succeeded in reaching this balance when it adopted the proposal in January 2002 .
It is with the aim of maintaining , if not further improving , this balance that it will consider the amendments adopted by Parliament .
Let me briefly present to you the main features of the Commission 's proposal .
The proposal aims to establish a Community framework whereby environmental damage - which is defined in the proposal as biodiversity damage , water damage and land damage - would be prevented or remedied through a system of environmental liability .
Whenever possible the operator who has caused the environmental damage - or provoked an imminent threat of such damage occurring - must , in accordance with the polluter pays principle , bear the costs associated with the implementation of the necessary preventive or restorative measures .
In certain cases , in which no operator can be held liable or a liable operator is unable to pay , Member States must assume the responsibility for finding an alternative source of financing the measures in question .
There are several key issues that deserve special attention .
These issues certainly invite more detailed comments , but today I will be as concise as possible .
Firstly , the scope of the proposal in terms of the activities and biodiversity to be covered : in the Commission 's view , strict liability should apply to the activities listed in Annex I to the proposal , and also to occupational activities other than those listed in Annex I , it being understood that this second tier of liability is fault-based .
The Commission considers that suppressing this part of the liability regime is unacceptable since this would weaken the proposal .
Conversely , the Commission does not believe it either justifiable or workable to expand strict liability to all occupational activities in the EU .
Having commented on the scope , let me just finish by saying that the debate on the amendments will be an extremely important one , during which I am sure we will hear some new arguments .
Mr President , I would also like to welcome all our new colleagues , and I hope that they will also become involved in this complex report .
I would like to thank all my colleagues who have been involved in this subject and who will be involved in it in the future .
Particularly everyone who took part in the working party in order to find a compromise .
I would in particular like to thank Mr Papayannakis for his excellent co-operation , and I would like to thank the Commission and the Council for the abundant information they have provided and the considerable co-operation they have offered .
This is perhaps the most complex subject , both from a legal and a political point of view , with a total of almost 900 amendments - if I include all the committees ' amendments - which were then reduced to about 75 in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
We have voted on these .
There are once again 108 amendments before us in the plenary session now , with the necessary split votes .
This will mean that we will have a long hard session in front of us this afternoon , but I think that it will be worthwhile .
I would just like to briefly outline the background .
I think that this report has prestige written all over it .
First we had the Exxon Valdez and the Erika and then the Prestige , but the report also has political prestige written all over it , and has had since 1976 .
If you go faster than you are actually able to , you will not achieve anything .
That is my position .
So you have to try and make rules that are workable and realistic .
The conflict in competence between the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market was the starting point of political sentiment in particular .
I believe that if liability regimes were not even to be dealt with in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market any longer , we might as well abolish it and set up one committee , the Committee for ' All Affairs ' .
It could have 626 members , and possibly even 735 after next year , and then I know for sure that we would never get out of it .
Because of the conflict in competences , the subject has become controversial and heavily charged , one in which everyone wanted to stake their own political claim with a view to political profiling .
That was a pity , because it has meant that up to now it has been virtually impossible to arrive at compromises and to create broader support .
I ultimately decided on an approach that was considered on the basis of all the amendments submitted and that does not specifically favour industry and does not specifically favour the environment .
I have tried to find a balance that will make a new piece of legislation - because that is after all what we are talking about - workable and implementable , one that will ultimately be able to develop into a piece of workable legislation that will result in a preventative approach to the environment and will ultimately protect the environment .
I also think that it is important to create a level playing field , because I believe that environmental legislation is part of our economy .
The first compromises I suggested were based on this .
For example , I said that the legal basis should be Article 175 .
Every Member State is developing its own system , and based on the best examples in the market , the Commission will be issuing harmonised draft legislation on environmental protection throughout Europe in five years ' time .
In this way we will get a level playing field , we will avoid environmental dumping and we will avoid a situation in which there will ultimately be 25 different legal systems which will definitely do nothing to promote the internal market nor protect the environment .
I understand that there are a number of countries , including my own country , the Netherlands , that will always want to go a little bit further .
That is fine , and I think that that should be allowed .
On the other hand , I think that it is better that those countries that do not go as far should be brought up to a higher level , which will be ultimately better for the environment in absolute terms .
If we apply Article 95 , therefore , it will be easier for the European Commission , as the watchdog of the Treaty , to bring those parties who do not comply with the rules before the European Court of Justice , thus ensuring that the environment actually benefits from this legislation .
In my initial proposals I opted for mitigating factors instead of exemptions , and I think that that was a good thing .
I linked liability for risk with state-of-the-art defence as a mitigating factor ; 100 % mitigation would mean that the judge could decide not to hold somebody liable .
Unfortunately we were not able to achieve that .
The scope : I mentioned sites , habitat and species protected under Community legislation , and sites protected under national legislation .
I said that this should be complementary to all international conventions so as to ensure that there would be a level playing field and a comparable liability regime in that area too .
Unfortunately we were not able to achieve this .
I was isolated in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Nobody , neither on the left nor on the right , would support me .
In order to ensure that we could deal with this here today , I looked for and found support in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
That means that I had to tone down my original suggestions somewhat , but ultimately I am particularly happy with what the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has adopted , and I will support that .
I therefore also support the amendments that were submitted and that were based on my initial compromise amendments .
I hope that we will have a favourable vote , and I welcome the challenge of being able to continue to play a prominent role in this difficult matter at second reading .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are debating a draft directive which we have been waiting 20 years for .
The practical application of the polluter pays principle appears to be more complicated than we imagined , which is only reasonable because , of course , we need both to establish liability for restoring environmental damage and to find a way so that the taxpayer does not bear the liability and the cost and pollution is prevented , not just suppressed .
Consequently , we are talking about the objective liability of polluters and about a set of arrangements to influence the behaviour of operators .
This draft directive gives rise to conflicting emotions in me : both satisfaction , because it may pave the way for reform , but merely pave the way , and reservations , because the steps proposed are timid , Commissioner .
For example , biodiversity , as defined in the draft , is restricted to habitats and species covered by the Habitats and Birds Directives , in other words only 13 % of the EU 's territory .
Secondly , the definition of environmental damage needs to be broader and should also include radiation , damage to air quality and damage to biodiversity caused by genetically modified organisms .
Thirdly , oil pollution and nuclear damage are not covered with the argument that they are covered by international conventions .
However , these generally cover traditional damage and not environmental damage .
In addition , several Member States of the European Union have not signed them .
Furthermore , they contain clauses expressly prohibiting the introduction of provisions governing wider environmental liability .
The directive must therefore be clear and must expressly state what the current liability regime is .
There must also be a provision allowing these international conventions to be amended and we must wait for the relevant proposals from the Commission .
In addition , provision is made for exceptions from environmental liability for emissions or activities for which a permit has been issued or which were not considered harmful when the permit was issued .
These are the so-called ' permit and state of the art defences ' .
I think that these exceptions undermine the reliability of the objectives of the directive , limit the scope of the liability regime and undermine the polluter pays principle .
There is a study which was carried out by the Commission itself , Commissioner , and which shows that 10 of the 15 Member States of the Union do not make provision for this sort of exception .
Why , therefore , should the new directive encourage numerous Member States to back off when it comes to the severity of their environmental legislation ?
Furthermore , the proposal for a directive establishes a public law regime , with the competent authority responsible for determining and securing the appropriate prevention or remediation measures .
However , this may risk putting the burden on the taxpayer .
Thus , initial liability for taking preventive and remediation measures should lie with the operator .
The competent public authority must comply with the procedure for ascertaining and restoring the damage .
Then there is the question of citizens ' only having indirect access to justice .
The proposal does not foresee the possibility of citizens ' taking direct recourse to justice .
I think that this violates the Aarhus Convention .
I also believe there must be a mandatory operator insurance system with common rules for financial guarantees .
If there is , there will be no distortion of competition .
However , if there is not , it may be distorted and , moreover , the prevention system will be weak and I think we shall not see the beneficial impact on the economy that we hope for .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , for which I have the honour of acting as draftsman , approved an opinion in the spirit of these comments .
We are now submitting to the House , together with numerous other honourable Members from numerous political groups , a series of proposals which are less ambitious but which represent a compromise of several views .
We are trying to achieve a rapprochement with the Council 's positions so that we can see the Greek Presidency achieve political agreement in the Environment Council on 13 June .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ecosystem and the flow of matter and energy follow a predictable , quantifiable course to which human activity must be adapted .
We do not protect nature just by putting a fence round it .
In order for us to protect the viability of Europe , we need industry and the economy as a whole to turn green .
We cannot say that we are neither with one nor the other .
I trust that the outcome of our vote will send a clear political message to the whole of Europe : that we are determined to lay down a substantial policy which will guarantee better environmental protection , in keeping with the economic and social objectives of the Union .
Our vote will not bring about immediate change .
If we vote in favour of the amendments which we have the honour of presenting to you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we can start paving the way for the gradual introduction of a model of sustainability and responsibility in Europe and beyond .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow we will be voting here in Parliament on the environmental liability directive , thus bringing to an end what has been a long and , as you know , very controversial debate .
Allow me first to express very special thanks to our rapporteur , Toine Manders , who has worked tirelessly for many months to produce his report .
He really has endeavoured to take account of the views of all of those concerned and has constantly sought to compromise .
Once again I would express my sincere thanks for the constructive dialogue that we have enjoyed .
Before I go any further , allow me also to say very clearly , ladies and gentlemen , that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports both this directive and the Commission proposal .
We want stricter rules on environmental liability .
Those who cause environmental damage in the course of their occupational activities must also be answerable for that .
Compensation should also be paid for damage caused to biological diversity , that is , for what is termed ecological damage .
As such provisions do not yet exist in the Member States , we are entering new territory here .
But I think that it is good that we are entering new territory and my group supports liability for ecological damage , even though we are all aware that it will be difficult to put actual figures on this in practice .
I do understand that it is not always possible to reach a broad consensus where environmental liability is concerned .
However , that is precisely why I am particularly advocating the adoption of the report of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market today , because the Legal Affairs Committee has issued a clear , moderate and practicable opinion .
The report represents a major step forward towards improved environmental protection and therefore also deserves to receive strong support in tomorrow 's vote in the plenary .
It begins , ladies and gentlemen , even with the numerous definitions that are placed at the start of the directive and delineate its scope , for example the definition of biological diversity .
Here , as I have already said , we are entering new territory .
It makes sense , in my opinion , to base the rules on habitats and species that are already protected by European law .
Furthermore , the Member States should be free to designate additional national protection areas , but it would breach the boundaries of the directive in every respect if we went any further than this .
A further example is the directive 's scope .
I think that here too we found a compromise in the Legal Affairs Committee that refers to the system of international conventions and makes the relationship with them clear .
The idea is that for those areas in which international systems of establishing liability are effectively in force the environmental liability directive should not apply in the first instance .
I believe that the compromise that has been found here is a sensible one .
Finally , my group also firmly supports the exemptions from liability that are named in the Commission draft .
There are two points at issue here : firstly , permit defence and secondly ' state of the art ' defence .
We think it is right for these liability privileges to be listed in the directive .
We also think it is right that those who work their land in accordance with good farming practice should receive a liability privilege .
May I say in conclusion , ladies and gentlemen , that we reached a good compromise in the Legal Affairs Committee and I would ask that this compromise also be supported here tomorrow by a majority of this House .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we expect a great deal of our environment , often too much .
That is why it is high time for us in the European Union to create strict rules on protecting the environment , such as the uniform provisions on environmental liability that we are finally able to deal with today in plenary after lengthy preliminary wrangling in the committees responsible .
Environmental liability is not about punishing old ladies who when out walking their dogs are not conscientious about clearing up after their little darlings .
We need liability provisions that place obligations on all those who cause environmental damage , without exception .
If the money is coming out of their own pocket , those who end up paying for rectifying the damage will soon think twice about how they treat our environment and be more careful .
That is why the Group of the Party of European Socialists is in favour of a series of amendments to the Commission text .
There is absolutely no reason why the polluter pays principle should not also apply to pollution caused by the oil industry or the nuclear industry or why it should not apply to the release of genetically modified organisms .
Are not the names Erika and Prestige synonymous with absolutely enormous environmental problems , which still have not been overcome ?
Can we see why the State and therefore the community of taxpayers should have to pay for the mistakes of others , simply because the risks appear to be hard to assess or difficult to insure against ?
Must we virtually invite people to be careless with the environment because certain polluters are beyond the reach of the law on damages ?
No , most certainly not !
It is therefore only logical that our Parliament should ensure that managers of companies that put the environment at risk have insurance or other precautionary financial measures in place so that they can pay for repair and restoration of the environment .
Finally , I should like to address one further point that is of particular importance to us Social Democrats .
The State and therefore the people should not be landed with the responsibility or the bill for rectifying the damage and restoring the environment by the back door either .
Under no circumstances !
The polluter pays principle should apply always and to everyone .
That is why we have tabled an amendment to Articles 4 and 5 in the form of an additional clarificatory paragraph .
The purpose of this amendment is to enable the authorities responsible to set out the steps that need to be taken without having to take action themselves or incur costs in advance , which may be considerable and difficult to recover afterwards .
If the plenary goes along with the amendments tabled by the Group of the Party of European Socialists and others in preference to those of the Legal Affairs Committee , we will have environmental liability legislation that assigns the costs fairly and at the same time acts preventively .
In these amendments we demand a minimum of what the people of Europe rightly expect from environmental liability legislation at European level .
This minimum must be reached .
If the results of the individual votes mean that it is not , then to my great regret we will have to reject this important directive as a whole .
Mr President , this proposal by the European Commission is the first attempt to adopt a comprehensive system in the European Union with a view to preventing and repairing environmental damage .
I am sure everyone agrees that we are in urgent need of such a scheme .
However much we agree on the principle , however , the more divided Parliament seems to be on its scope .
How far should we go in protecting the environment and the obligation to repair the damage ?
There are numerous specific points of conflict : the precise description of environmental damage , the exclusion of certain industrial sectors , the extent of the polluter pays principle , the fixing of financial guarantees , the insurability of risks and the fixing of maximum amounts for repairing damage .
Our rapporteur , Mr Manders , whom I heartily congratulate , has attempted to reconcile what are often highly diverse standpoints , and I believe the result is a well-balanced report and a well-balanced result which takes account of the many interests and economic sectors involved in this subject .
That is ultimately what we all want : a good , well-defined , uniform European framework which provides a comprehensive approach to environmental damage with specific European standards and the same rules for the whole of the European Union ; one in which everybody knows exactly what they must comply with .
I have no doubt that many people , including our green fundamentalists , would like to go much further .
The question is , however , not whether this is necessary or useful , but whether this is achievable at the moment .
After all , the question then arises as to whether this is affordable or insurable for the economic sectors or whether it will remain incalculable for them .
Those parties who would like to go much further must realise that they may be striving for the unachievable and that we may end up empty-handed at the final vote .
We must not allow this to happen .
The most important thing at the moment is to achieve a good general scheme for the immediate future in which we tackle the real responsibilities .
We cannot afford to waste any more time .
Mr President , in January 2002 , the Commission finally reached , with this proposal for a directive , the end of a process which had lasted for ten years .
In 1993 , in fact , there was already a Green Paper on environmental liability .
The European Parliament , via the ENVI , subsequently urged the Commission , on several occasions , to take rapid action on this subject .
We have waited , therefore , a very long time for the day when there would be a sound proposal on the table .
What , then , does this Commission proposal achieve ?
Obviously it does not live up to its stated ambitions .
I believe that the Commission 's original ambitions were on a grand scale , but that the final product is disappointing . I also believe that we should draw attention to the factors which are the cause of this disappointment .
The first of these factors is that the definition of the environment is too restricted .
In the case of biodiversity , for example , a proportion estimated to be equivalent to only 20 % of biodiversity would be protected , and only 13 % of European territory would be covered .
The second factor is the scope of the proposals .
Annex I lists the various economic activities which are covered by the principle of liability without fault .
This list of activities is very restrictive .
In particular , it excludes anything concerning nuclear activities or the transporting of hydrocarbons , without any real justification .
Reference is made to international conventions , which certainly exist but which do not cover the remedying of environmental damage .
I would remind the House of what was said here yesterday by one of our PPE members , Mr Bébéar , when he complained - quite rightly - about the low level of compensation envisaged by the IOPCF for the victims of the Prestige accident .
We must , therefore , be consistent , and adopt a very firm amendment requiring that , in the case of accidents of this type , what is not covered by the international convention should be covered by our directive .
However , the Commission 's proposal does not do this .
The third factor which has to be taken into consideration is the exemptions laid down on the basis of the existence of an operating permit or the existence of scientific knowledge which , at the time of the accident , would not have been sufficiently relevant to justify the liability of the economic activity in question .
For example , in the case of GMOs or of pesticides which are , amongst other things , endocrine disrupters , if one follows this principle then practically all related activities would escape the application of the directive .
This is not acceptable .
I shall conclude , Mr President , by saying that our group supports a series of amendments which are in line with the proposals of Mr Papayannakis to the ENVI , and which have been taken up by Mrs Gebhardt .
I believe that these important changes are essential in order to give this directive real substance .
Mr President , as we know , the environment is ' out ' .
It seems to be difficult to arouse any sympathy for environmental standpoints .
This proposal is also suffering from this .
We have been dealing with it for many years , and we always seem to lack the conviction to actually do something about it .
Now there is once again great disagreement about the way in which we should tackle liability .
Industry has been lobbying hard , with arguments which are understandable but which I believe cannot be honoured .
Insurance aspects are in particular being raised .
Yet this has not convinced me to vote in favour of toning down the present proposal .
On the contrary .
I believe that strong environmental liability legislation will have a preventative effect with regard to environmental damage and will encourage the repair of the damage .
' The polluter pays ' should be the logical adage .
There has been a limited form of environmental liability based on that principle in the Netherlands for some time now .
It works well , and it saves money .
I believe that the Commission 's proposal has already bowed to pressure from industry to too great an extent .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has made this even worse .
I hope that by adopting the amendments submitted by myself and others , we can change the effect of the directive in a positive way .
Over the next few years we will see in practice whether this directive is workable in the European Union .
We do not have to bring things down to the lowest common denominator right from the start .
If it does not work , we can always amend the directive .
It would show real guts if we , as the legislative organ , were to take this risk now in order to avoid the risk of environmental damage .
Mr President , I would like to start by expressing my heartfelt thanks - not just a routine thank-you - to Mr Manders , the rapporteur , and to Mrs Niebler for the enormous amount of work they have done .
I would then like to make two points : one specific and the other general .
The specific point is also a response to some of the previous speeches .
If I am not mistaken , the farming world welcomed the proposal for a directive on environmental liability , particularly because the Commission had opted for a horizontal approach .
During the work in Parliament other viewpoints emerged in committee and , as a result , it is now very difficult to accept the idea of farmers being liable for environmental damage the causes of which are beyond their control .
In this regard , any extension of the directive 's scope - a compulsory financial guarantee , reversing the burden of proof and , most importantly , excluding some means of exemption - would make it extremely difficult for farmers to manage their activities .
In practical terms , a farmer might be forced to pay compensation for environmental damage caused by an activity , even though he has been issued with a permit to perform that activity and has observed all the relevant legal provisions .
I am sure that farmers are willing to shoulder their responsibilities , but not when they have no control over the cause of the damage .
This is the reasoning underlying our work in the Committee on Legal Affairs , and we have adopted this approach , developing a line which will not have serious consequences for the farming world or for the rural environment in general .
I hope that the rapporteur will agree with this position and that the European Parliament will endorse it .
As regards the general point , it too reflects a fear .
Extending the directive 's scope beyond that of the Commission 's original proposal would , as I see it , be likely to jeopardise the certainty of the legal framework proposed and the resulting insurance guarantees , thus making it difficult to enforce a principle useful to European society in general .
Mr President , like all my group I essentially welcome this proposal and the opportunity to speak on its behalf .
As my friend Mr Lannoye said , it is , if not ' too little , too late ' , at any rate ' not very much and rather late ' .
But it is a step in the right direction and it is very important to establish the polluter pays principle .
After all , most human activities have some impact on the environment .
The issue is who tidies up afterwards - the person who causes it or somebody else ?
Like many members of this House I have received powerful representations from local authorities in my own constituency in Scotland , saying that if this directive is not carried local authorities and other public bodies will continue to have to deal , out of general tax revenues , with the problems which other people ought either to have prevented in the first place or be dealing with at present .
It is worth reminding ourselves that the polluter pays principle is only half the story .
The fact of the matter is that those who pollute are engaged in economic activities producing goods or services which other people want to buy , presumably at the price at which they are offered .
If the polluter does not pay , the problem is that the price is too low and consumers get a kind of a free lunch for which they then have to pay afterwards in their capacity as taxpayers .
We must try to ensure , therefore , that we have a regime which is genuinely directed at those producers and activities which can take better precautions and adequately insure against liability so that the pressure of insurance premium liabilities and the cost of insurance premiums reward those who are most careful and push up prices for those who are least careful , thereby creating a virtuous circle .
With regard to that issue , I have had much doubt throughout the debates about the so-called state-of-the-art and permit defences , as there is a rationale which says that people should be able to work closely to the terms of , for example , a carefully designed permit and thereby guarantee themselves against liability .
On the whole though , I have come to the view expressed in Amendment No 104 that these matters should be treated as matters of litigation rather than matters of exemption , which is a reasonable compromise to reach , so we very strongly support the directive on condition that the relevant amendments are carried .
Mr President , the directive we are about to vote on can and must be clearly perceived as a turning point by the European citizens .
Seveso , the disasters , with which we are sadly , all familiar , in the Natural Park of Doñana and the sinking of the oil tanker , the Prestige , and , last but not least , the confirmation of the devastating future health implications of the environmental degradation caused by the Priolo chemical plant , are all incidents which call for the establishment of a European system of civil liability for environmental damage .
We need to send out a strong political signal , which will help , not least , to stop some regressive tendencies which are emerging here and there .
As Mrs Wallström , for example , is quite aware , the Italian Government is about to undertake a revision of the penal code , planning , inter alia , to remove the penalties for crimes against the environment .
Therefore , there is all the more need for a system rigorously applying the polluter pays principle and thus creating powerful incentives for preventing and avoiding the repetition of such situations in the future .
Indeed , the ultimate goal is prevention , not the provision of compensation for damage .
To this end , we in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy have endeavoured to achieve the removal of some of the dangerous exemptions which allow wide-ranging , general means of protection and which , in actual fact , turn the environmental authorisations into a sort of licence to pollute , with the serious danger that the effectiveness of the proposed legislative system will be nullified .
We have tried to ensure that it is the operator responsible , not the taxpayer , who bears the costs of remedying the environmental damage .
It is , moreover , necessary for all the economic activities which could result in environmental damage to be taken into consideration and provided for in the liability system .
This system should lay down , as a general rule , specific liability for environmental damage , irrespective of whether the activity causing the damage is deemed to be dangerous or not .
This directive is vitally important .
Now long-awaited , it will be a fundamental element of European environmental legislation , provided , however , that the changes which we have worked on with the 16 compromise amendments to reinforce the text are adopted .
I strongly urge you to adopt the compromise amendments , which repropose the substance of the text that was adopted in the Committee on the Environment and then nullified by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market ; if the amendments are not adopted , as Mrs Gebhardt has already said , particularly if Amendments Nos 99 , 103 and 107 are not adopted , our group will not be able to vote for the Manders report .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Davies has been talking about an environmental Holy Grail .
I must say that I am also pleased that a level playing field is being created for all parties involved in creating environmental damage .
This means that it will be easier for the business community to comply with this directive .
There are , however , two things that I would like to point out .
The first is the question of nuclear energy and non-regulated businesses .
The second question is that of maritime transport .
I live near two nuclear power stations , namely the only commercial nuclear power station in my country and also the Doel in Belgium .
How is this regulated at the moment ?
The owners of the nuclear power stations only have limited liability , and the State absorbs that .
In Belgium , for example , that amounts to EUR 300 million per power station , and in my country the figure is EUR 2.26 billion .
This seems a lot of money , but it is in fact very little if you consider that these power stations are located in an industrial area .
I find it inexplicable that the public and businesses will be held liable and that businesses allied to the state will be exempted from this kind of liability .
I find the amendment that asks for this to be reviewed in 5 years ' time very flexible , and I think that the Commission must adopt it and that we must also vote on it .
The same applies to liability for maritime transport .
I asked about liability relating to the Tricolor disaster two months ago , and I have not yet had any replies to my questions .
We are asking for this to also be included in the directive and the international conventions reviewed and for the loopholes to be closed .
Finally , I would like to come back to nuclear energy .
Nuclear energy is always regarded as a cheap kind of energy , but if all the costs were to be charged on , including the costs relating to environmental damage , the question is whether wind energy and other environmentally-friendly forms of energy would not be equally competitive .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner to create a level playing field for this issue as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , numerous speakers have stressed the importance of this environment directive .
We actually ought to have been ambitious enough to make it the centrepiece of our environmental legislation .
It is all the more regrettable that industry has managed to insert a series of exemptions in these provisions .
Polluters actually ought to be answerable for the damage that they have caused and ought also to be obliged to take preventive measures .
Given that there are so many exemptions and that only a very small number of accidents are covered by this directive , I fear that we will not achieve what we originally set out to do .
As you know , accidents only qualify as such if those causing them are negligent or otherwise at fault , which means that damage to biodiversity caused by the use of licensed genetically modified seed is not covered at all .
This is very regrettable .
Furthermore , the fact that the notion of strict liability is linked to the list of dangerous activities in this way means that entire areas that pose a potential risk , such as mining and drilling for oil and gas , are also excluded , as is a large proportion of the consumer goods industry .
The fact that there is no obligation to introduce general insurance for environmental damage is also a mistake in my view , because we have to ensure that when damage is caused to property and health , liability is not only restricted to Natura 2000 areas , but also applies further afield .
Nevertheless , provided that the Commission sees reason , I hope that we will succeed in making this environmental liability directive the centrepiece of our legislation . I also hope that it will not remain full of holes like a Swiss cheese which would mean that it only applied in a very few cases , because if so we would not achieve our aims , which are to give industry incentives to take preventive measures and really to make the polluter pays principle the focus of our action .
Mr President , it emerged in Denmark at the weekend that glyphosate has penetrated into the upper groundwater reservoirs .
That is very significant in a country like Denmark where we drink water directly from the tap .
The crop spray is called Roundup and is manufactured by Monsanto .
Roundup is approved and used extensively in the rest of the EU .
For me , it is no surprise that poison , when systematically dispersed , ends up in our precious groundwater .
It has to be possible , in a case like this , to hold Monsanto clearly liable for what has happened to Danish groundwater .
Monsanto is also behind the large-scale genetic modification of plants .
Plants are genetically modified so that they become resistant to , for example , Roundup , with the result that weeds can be sprayed more vigorously without the crop being damaged .
It should therefore also be possible to hold Monsanto liable for the disease and permanent damage that will be caused by the use of genetically modified crops .
In Denmark , we have banned a large proportion of the pesticides on the market in the rest of the EU .
The EU is now in the process of forcing Denmark to lift the ban on a number of these pesticides .
It has compelled Denmark to use the genetically modified plants without making anyone liable for the pollution of the countryside that this involves .
It is completely unacceptable .
Mr President , for as long as mankind has been here on earth , he has been polluting .
The more people there are , the more sophisticated they become , the worse that pollution potentially gets .
Some damage , given human nature and the fallen world we live in , is inevitable .
Self-evidently , prevention is the first priority and in any event , pollution should be kept to a minimum .
But where it does occur , those responsible should make amends .
What we must recognise , however , is that much of what creates a threat to our environment may not only be helping mankind in other ways but may actually be helping the environment itself .
This legislation is a piece of civil , not criminal , law .
It is not about punishing wrongdoers but apportioning and allocating responsibility for environmental damage .
Punishment should be meted out by criminal sanctions not civil liability .
There are others who see this as a skirmish in some kind of Manichean struggle between the public sector , which is good , and the private sector , which is bad .
Such 20th-century class warfare has no place today .
The two are complementary .
They are interdependent and responsibility for the consequences of pollution should be shared and allocated between them .
The private sector cannot and should not walk away from the consequences of its actions , and the public sector , and indeed society and the public at large cannot wash their hands and privatise the responsibilities incurred in regulating the private sector while enjoying the benefits which accrue from their actions .
Further , since pollution is a practical problem , remedial actions must be practical too .
Fantasy solutions are as detrimental as pollution itself .
It is for these reasons that the British Conservatives support the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market 's amendments to the draft directive .
They are not perfect and we expect to see improvements in second reading as the Council further refines European thinking on this important topic .
But they represent a further responsible step on the journey of dealing with the consequences of pollution across Europe and the wider world .
Mr President , the objectives of the proposal for a directive are very ambitious and are designed to minimise environmental damage using both preventive means and means of apportioning the cost of restoring the damage .
The amendments we support represent a necessary compromise , not just to prevent the adoption of the directive from being put off , but also to ensure the entire protection system is viable and to prevent distortions of the market .
My congratulations to my honourable friends Mr Manders and Mr Papayannakis on achieving the necessary compromises .
The implementation of the polluter pays principle is of fundamental importance .
However , it calls for the introduction of new concepts and innovative institutions which , however much we want them , are difficult to introduce at once .
The compulsory financial guarantees for restoring environmental damage are a conditio sine qua non for efficient environmental protection .
Without doubt , our long-term objective must be to introduce a system of compulsory insurance which will function as a disincentive .
However , compulsory insurance must be introduced gradually in cooperation with the operators involved .
Account must be taken of the fact that insurance companies need a certain amount of time to prepare .
In all events , however , the phases for imposing a compulsory insurance system need to be defined as of now in the text of the directive , together with the type of damage it will cover and the activities to which it will refer .
As far as restoring environmental damage is concerned , we cannot accept broad derogations from operators ' liability . Otherwise , the final financial burden will be shifted to the taxpayer .
The exercise of activities for which permits are granted and which are not considered harmful at the time they are exercised must not preclude the operator 's responsibility ; however , the fact that there is a permit or that the harmful consequences of the activity at issue were not recognised in time could function as a mitigating circumstance when apportioning the cost of restoring ecological damage to the operator , provided that the operator was in full compliance with the terms imposed under current legislation or the permit during the exercise of its activity .
We are right to accept the report 's differentiation criteria for compensation , from which we can indirectly see the size of the company , thereby ensuring that the viability of small companies is not jeopardised .
The foregoing also demonstrates that , if environmental protection is to be effective and ecological disasters are to be prevented , the activities that come within the scope of the directive must be revised on a regular basis , together with an evaluation of the most recent scientific conclusions and the experience acquired in the meantime .
Mr President , the tightening up of the environmental liability legislation that we are discussing today is a very important subject .
It is necessary if we are to repair and tackle environmental damage , but we also need it as a big stick to wield against damage occurring in future .
The report before us seems to me to be a very workable compromise that should win a majority of votes .
The rapporteur has , and I am very grateful to him for this , taken back one or two things like his tree fund , and the shadow rapporteurs Angelika Niebler and Markus Ferber have been working with the rapporteur to do all they can to achieve a workable compromise .
That does not mean that I am completely happy with what we have before us .
I have , however , promised Mrs Niebler that our group would support her because I want to give the proposal the benefit of the doubt .
Why am I not happy ?
I wonder whether excluding certain sectors - the oil industry , the nuclear industry - is sufficiently well covered by the international agreements that are in place .
I doubt it somehow .
Secondly - and this is actually contradictory - we will be creating a new way of bringing the GMOs that are permitted back under this legislation .
I have my doubts about this .
Then there is the definition of habitat .
What will it cost when two wild hamsters are removed when an industrial park is built ; who can pay for that ?
I still have problems with the way in which habitat is defined .
Thirdly , I believe that there is too little commitment regarding insurance .
I would have preferred insurance to be made compulsory , because this would be relevant to small- and medium-sized enterprises in particular .
This will now be reviewed after five years .
Whether that is enough for it to work , I do not know .
Mr President , like everybody else in the Chamber , I welcome this directive .
For too long now we have operated on the polluter pays principle , but what has the polluter paid in the past ?
The polluter has paid a small fine which never bears any resemblance to the actual clear-up costs of a site .
It is high time that we got round to not ' the polluter pays ' , but ' the polluter restores the site ' .
That is what this directive sets out to do .
However , the directive , as amended by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , is a weak directive at the moment .
We have left it unclear , we have left it vague .
I will point out some areas in which we have done that .
The definition of biodiversity is a very weak and very vague description .
It gives no comfort to the operators , no comfort to the environmental organisations and no comfort to the general public .
That is why I support the compromise amendment put forward by my own group , the GUE / NGL and the Verts / ALE .
Another point which the directive , as amended by the Legal Affairs Committee , has failed to address is that of mandatory financial insurance .
As it is formulated at the moment , it will allow bad operators to continue to be bad operators .
If they fall foul of the law they will go into insolvency .
Who will pick up the cost of that ?
It will be the general public .
It will pick up the bill for restoring the site and operators will walk away once more .
We cannot allow that to happen .
Again , I urge people to look at the compromise coming from the three groups that I mentioned earlier .
On the question of permit defences , again , a full permit defence could be seen as a licence to pollute .
We must not allow that .
We must look at giving Member States and the courts the power to intervene if they believe that there has been pollution by somebody with a permit defence .
My group , and the European Parliamentary Labour Party , has some difficulty with the question of GMOs , not because we are against GMOs but because we think this legislation might weaken existing GMO legislation .
Therefore we will be asking for a split vote on one of the amendments .
Mr President , environmental liability should be one of the jewels in the crown of European environmental legislation , but up to now it has been a tragedy .
The Commission has taken 20 years to translate the polluter pays principle into legislation .
It is not getting industry to pay , however , but the national governments .
The polluter pays principle has been desecrated by the Commission .
Unfortunately , Mr Manders has made the mess even worse and has trimmed the already weak proposal right down to the bone .
It is not surprising that the whole of industry is rallying round Mr Manders .
If industry has an environmental permit , it can never be liable .
A car driver needs a driving licence to use the roads , but if the car driver causes an accident , he or she is most definitely liable .
That is where compulsory car insurance comes in .
We must introduce exactly the same responsibilities for industry .
That is the core of the polluter pays principle .
We must be able to claim against the perpetrators for accidents like those involving the Prestige and the Erika , as well as nuclear accidents and pollution caused by genetically modified food .
Hopefully the left liberals , the socialists , the greens , the regionalists , the communists and individuals on the right will achieve a majority tomorrow .
Mr President , I think it is very important that we should now obtain common legislation on environmental liability .
That is something for which we have waited for many years .
I do not believe that the Commission 's proposal for a directive is completely satisfactory .
On the other hand , to adopt Mr Manders ' report unamended would be totally to undermine environmental protection in the EU .
It would genuinely undermine the Commission 's actual proposal .
There is a need for important changes .
First and foremost , it must be ensured that the polluter pays principle is applied without exception , and we must at the same time ensure , along the lines indicated by several other people , that there are financial guarantees of the polluter 's also actually being able to pay , either through compulsory insurance arrangements or in some other way .
We should have strict or objective liability for forms of environmental destruction resulting from commercial activity .
When it comes to the issue of reducing biodiversity , I think it important that we obtain as broad a definition as possible so that all the habitats and species protected by Community legislation and corresponding national legislation are in actual fact covered .
Finally , I believe that the directive should also cover pollution of the countryside by genetically modified organisms .
I cannot begin to understand why there is no desire to address that issue in this directive .
In conclusion , a remark on access to the complaints procedure .
I believe that , in this area too , we must provide cover that is as broad as is humanly possible so that people really are given the opportunity to make complaints about environmental pollution , and the same thing should of course apply to non-governmental organisations or NGOs .
As a very last point , a couple of remarks about the legal base itself .
I appreciate that some people would like , in a few years ' time , to transfer the legal base from the environmental protection provisions to the internal market .
That would , in my view , be a total mistake , and it would in actual fact destroy the rules governing environmental liability already established in many Member States . That is therefore something I would very strongly oppose , and I would state that I shall only be able to vote in favour of Mr Manders ' report if it is amended in relation to the points I have just mentioned .

Mr President , a legislative framework on environmental liability is necessary because it is right that the polluter should pay .
However , the legislation must be well-balanced and take into consideration the expressed requirements of European industry .
The position adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which is summarised in Mr Manders ' report - and I would like to thank Mr Manders for this important document - is an acceptable compromise , although it does involve some sacrifices .
Some of the amendments being tabled now are particularly dangerous , in that they would make it impossible for operators to quantify insurance coverage .
The definition of environmental damage is central to the structure of the directive , as are the definitions of biodiversity and biodiversity damage .
As I see it , Amendments Nos 23 , 84 and 98 are unacceptable : if an incident does not have harmful effects , then it is risk , not damage we should be talking about .
Amendment No 95 is not acceptable either , in that it disregards the polluter pays principle .
Indeed , the concept of liability is independent of the relationship of indefeasible right to use a site .
The definition of GMO soil contamination is inappropriate in that it is part of a general definition which does not list all the sources of contamination .
There needs to be a reference to proportional liability , not joint and several liability , which would create a system based on mistrust .
Prevention can and must continue to be the highest priority in activities which might affect the environment .
Lastly , the financial guarantees : in order to allow the insurance market to consolidate , we need to ensure maximum flexibility even after the first five years of application of the new legislation .
I therefore urge the Members to support the Committee on Legal Affairs ' compromise , which is a clear , powerful signal furthering environmental protection but does not penalise European industry .
Mr President , it is essential for the polluter pays principle to be rigorously applied .
There are examples in all Member States of industry polluting an area and then moving on or going into liquidation . In Co .
Tipperary , Ireland , toxic dust has been blowing across the countryside from an abandoned 147-acre open-cast mine for the last 20 years .
It is not right that the company , which made vast sums of money - most of which tax-free - should walk away and leave the taxpayer to carry the cost of cleaning up the site .
I would also strongly argue that the principle of covering radiation pollution should be included too .
The people of Ireland will regard this directive as a sick joke if radiation is not included , as Sellafield is one of the single most serious threats to the Irish environment .
If this issue is not covered in this directive then it simply will not make sense to many Irish people .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Manders , and also Mr Papayannakis , on their work .
Adopting a directive on environmental liability would be of enormous value .
It would give credibility to environmental legislators , increase protection of the citizens and would send a clear message to economic operators that polluting does not pay .
I therefore welcomed the proposal for a directive with great expectations , but although it is a step in the right direction , I believe it falls short of what is needed .
Furthermore , in seeking to resolve any legal ambiguity , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has ended up further weakening the environmental objectives .
Consequently , with regard to the directive 's scope , I would first of all admit that the issue of damage to biodiversity must be clarified but the solution does not lie , in my opinion , in excluding it from the directive .
The loss of biodiversity in the European Union is a reality and the commitments given in Johannesburg and Gothenburg must be honoured .
Secondly , I believe that , in addition to the damage to the ecological and chemical makeup of water , the directive should also cover damage to its volume , as laid down in the framework directive on water .
Thirdly , I feel it is unacceptable for oil pollution in maritime transport and radioactive pollution caused by nuclear reactors to be excluded from the directive 's scope .
These activities are amongst the most damaging to the environment and international instruments do not properly address the prevention and remedying of the damage these activities cause .
Lastly , Mr President , I call for the directive to contain clearer provisions on making insurance compulsory , particularly for operators in more dangerous activities , in order to prevent taxpayers having to pay for damage in the event that companies become insolvent .
Mr President , I insist on congratulating Mr Manders as I think that he has performed his task admirably .
Not only has he got through a pile of work and consulted broadly ; he has also managed to achieve a balanced compromise in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market despite the hundreds of amendments and great controversy .
This debate makes it clear that the controversy is by no means resolved , but what Mr Manders is presenting is well-balanced , workable and reasonable , and it provides for updates within the next five years .
It is important - more than important - to repair the riches of the environment and even more important to prevent damage .
It goes without saying that a strict liability scheme can to a great extent contribute to this .
Even though the legislation is not yet complete , this report is taking us a considerable step towards better protection , because let us not forget that in addition to the obligation to repair , we are also introducing objective liability .
Objective liability - that means that neither blame nor negligence are relevant .
We have naturally been used to this modus operandi in other sectors for some time , but it is and remains a far-reaching principle .
I think that we must accept this far-reaching liability scheme , but at the same time I am convinced that the scheme must be legally secure , workable , efficient and reasonable , and therefore I am prepared to vote for the report as it has come from the vote in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has , in my view , produced a workable proposal .
Let us hope that the Council follows Parliament 's example , takes a decision and does not delay the directive .
Parliament should accept this proposal as a basis for a decision and extend the directive to environmental damage caused by nuclear activities .
The directive is important in my view because it will make the polluter pays principle a European principle that can be asserted in practice and because it will strengthen the European model of an environmental and social market economy .
Mrs Flemming and I tabled 35 amendments on behalf of the Austrian contingent .
Of these , 11 were accepted verbatim and 7 have been incorporated in the compromise amendments .
In my opinion , the following five points are particularly positive and deserve to be mentioned : firstly , the directive will apply to all those activities that are listed in Annex I and which are now described more clearly thanks to our amendment .
Secondly , liability is precluded for normal operations that have been approved by the authorities and for emissions or activities that are not regarded as harmful based on current scientific knowledge .
This provides legal certainty .
Thirdly , the principle of shared liability has been accepted instead of liability based on solidarity , which means that the costs will be split in cases where there are several polluters .
Fourthly , the directive seeks to have environmental damage made good and for that reason the provisions on compensation for interim losses have been deleted .
Fifthly , the committee is in favour of voluntary financial security measures and of capping liability and is against compulsory insurance .
This also represents a balance between different interests .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a directive on environmental liability provides for a balanced approach which will apply pressure on operators to avoid contamination and to remediate damage whilst suggesting only a light regulatory touch in order to achieve this .
Any fundamental changes to this proposal for a directive would have produced an unworkable and impractical solution to what is already a complicated subject , and I feel that the work carried out by Mr Manders and others in committee represents the great possible convergence in view of this constraint .

In fact , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has not made any fundamental changes to the Commission 's approach , but it has clarified a number of essential principles .
The directive does not apply retroactively .
The permit and ' state of the art ' exceptions should be retained .
There should be mandatory liability but not compulsory insurance - the guiding principle of the directive is that the polluter must pay for environmental damage caused by their actions .
An awareness of the financial implications of such damage will also lead to greater efforts to prevent environmental damage occurring .
The polluter pays principle therefore aims to address remediation and incentivise prevention .
A mandatory financial security regime might destabilise this relationship : operators would know that their financial liabilities are covered by an insurance policy , fund or levy and , as a consequence , the incentive to prevent damage is removed .
A mandatory system of financial security might well be described as the ' insurer pays principle ' in that the risk of liability has been transferred from operator to financial security provider .
We all must be socially responsible about protecting the environment because it is inherently a finite resource .
Operators need to recognise that there are consequences to their actions and that they will pay for any damage that they cause with intent or by way of being reckless .
The ' polluter pays principle ' is acceptable on these terms .
Thanks to the reasonable approach advocated by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , a Directive will have been created that reflects the interests of both industry and the environment .
Mr President , I should like to thank Members for all those valuable speeches and constructive ideas on how to improve this proposal .
Let me begin by commenting on two things : the polluter-pays principle and the scope .
Several Members referred to the long history of this proposal ; the debate reflected the different views and the need to find a balanced approach in the end .
I also understand that many Members want to be more ambitious : to overload this proposal with a lot more .
I can understand that , but it is important to see it as a step-by-step approach , because we have a practical view on this .
We do not want to overload it with aspects that we are negotiating at the same time in international fora .
I am sure that there would be more chance of losing the whole proposal if we were to try to burden it with these aspects .
The polluter-pays principle is the guiding principle behind this whole proposal , and that is why it is quoted in the first article .
The idea behind it is to create responsibility and , via that , to achieve prevention .
It gives that very clear signal .
We also touch upon the fact that in many cases it is not possible to find the polluter , or to make the polluter pay .
In that case , there has to be remediation .
We want to see an insurance system .
However , we believe that market forces should be allowed to create that kind of system .
We do not want to impose it today in a situation where it is not clear that we would achieve the desired effect .
In reply to Miss Breyer 's point : all accidents are covered .
I do not know what Members ' presumptions are about the targets for this legislation , but our presumptions are very much based on the facts that there are too many accidents and too many cases of negligence , and also that short-sighted greed is behind much of the pollution .
This is why we have designed the proposal this way .
Therefore , all accidents are covered and we have also covered cases of negligence ; this will create a polluter-pays principle and , in the end , pave the way for prevention .
What about the scope ?
It was very important for us to ensure that we have legal clarity if we want to introduce a new system covering biodiversity , because traditional damage - economic damage or damage to people - is already well covered by the legislation in all Member States .
We do not have to take over that at Community level , but we want to harmonise the rules for covering damage to biodiversity .
That was the starting-point .
If we want to do this and have a credible system , we need legal clarity and a system which is manageable and which can be applied .
If the definition is too wide - as it is proposed , it would cover , in some cases , the whole biosphere - it will be unmanageable .
For example , we would have to cover damage to weeds !
Is that something insurers will be happy to cover ?
Would that be a manageable system ?
Digging the foundations for a house would hurt worms .
Do we want that to be covered ?
Is that reasonable ?
You have to be sure about the scope and make a definition that provides legal clarity .
We have to see it as a step-by-step approach .
I am sure that as we apply this legislation there will be more legal clarity .
However , if we are too ambitious at the beginning and think that we can cover the whole biosphere , then we would not be serving environmental interests .
On GMOs , nuclear and marine pollution : we can see that this is an area in which we would also like to be more ambitious .
However , we have a very practical reason for not covering this in this particular proposal .
We are negotiating to improve the rules on these areas .
We have international fora and conventions that cover these matters .
We do not want to duplicate work : we want to be practical .
We do not want to overload this system by taking it on here .
We need another few years to work on incorporating these aspects .
For international activities , there should be international rules .
As I have already said , traditional damage is already covered by legislation in Member States .
What about oil or marine pollution ?
The polluter shall pay !
This is the only rule that can apply .
It is a scandal that we have let it go this far .
We have seen accident after accident .
But , again , this is a truly international activity and we have to work towards international rules that apply the polluter-pays principle .
I understand that the Director of the IOPC Fund has announced that claims for compensation would only be covered by up to 15 % of this amount .
This is not acceptable .
The Commission is well aware of the situation and this is why we have always supported the attempt to raise the funds available up to EUR 1 billion .
I understand that this week a diplomatic conference is being held in London to sign a protocol to raise the ceiling of the funds available for compensation .
I hope that this conference will be a success ; we are all determined to work on marine pollution and to do everything we can .
We want to avoid loopholes and also the absurd situation where neither the directive nor international conventions apply .
That is why the Commission agrees that the directive should apply in all cases where the relevant international convention is not yet in force .
For the same reason , where the relevant conventions are not in force , the Commission does not support the notion of waiting for five years before the directive is applicable .
It has also been proposed that after a five-year transitional period , the Commission should develop proposals so that the directive applies eventually in a complementary manner to the international conventions where liability or compensation is insufficiently regulated within those conventions .
The Commission does not believe that letting the directive play the role of filling in possible gaps in existing conventions would be either constructive or workable .
The conventions contain exclusivity clauses that bind the States ' parties to the conventions and prevent them from imposing any complementary legal instruments , so Member States would have to denounce conventions they had ratified to be able to follow Community rules .
Before letting it come to that , it would surely be preferable to try to improve those conventions by renegotiating them in the proper international context .
What about regulatory compliance and state-of-the-art and development risks ?
Some amendments have been tabled that seek to maintain the so-called permit and state-of-the-art or development risk defences as proper defences and , as far as permit defences are concerned , with a formulation that would better specify its scope .
Other amendments aim instead to introduce regulatory compliance and state-of-the-art as mitigating factors .
The Commission believes that proper defences , with the proposed improved wording , constitute a preferable solution in terms of insurability and legal certainty .
The Commission considers it useful , however , to better specify the scope of the so-called permit defence to avoid any suggestion that this might be tantamount to a blank cheque to pollute , because this is not the idea .
The Commission does not find it appropriate to impose liability on the competent authority when damage is caused by a permitted activity , nor does it find it appropriate that there should be a link between the state-of-the-art defence and any environmental audit and management system .
I am sure that these issues will come back during further decision-making on this issue .
Amendments have been tabled to impose either proportional liability or joint and several liability .
The Commission considers , however , that Member States should retain the right to opt for either joint and several , or for proportional liability , or a mix of both , according to their national legal traditions .
I recall in that respect that the proposal offers some safeguards to operators , since it provides that operators who are able to establish the extent to which the damage results from their activities , be required to bear only such costs as relate to that part of the damage .
It has been proposed that the Commission should present a proposal to supplement the regulatory framework on liability for damage caused by GMOs .
Apart from the fact that such a requirement would unduly impinge on the Commission 's right of initiative , the Commission is currently considering the issue of economic damage to conventional and organic farmers in the context of the so-called coexistence debate .
The outcome of that debate should not be prejudged here .
Again , this is what will cover traditional damage .
On financial security : amendments have been tabled either to propose that financial security become compulsory after the directive enters into force , or to oppose such a move towards compulsory financial security .
I think we can agree that financial security will become an important factor in the proper implementation of the directive .
Member States and market operators , as well as the Commission , will have an important role to play in encouraging a timely emergence of financial assurance systems , products and markets to that effect .
Having said this , it is clear to me that Member States should have the possibility to develop financial assurance solutions at their own pace ; solutions which are well adapted to their own needs and institutional conditions .
In addition , financial markets should be given time and leeway to develop market solutions following the demand for insurance that is very likely to take off once the new liability regime is established .
In the light of this , it appears premature to impose fully-fledged financial security for all Annex I operators within a few years .
That said , it would certainty be fruitful to revisit the situation when the Commission carries out its general review of the implementation of the directive .
There is general agreement that the polluter-pays principle should imply , for the liable operator as polluter , to pay for all the damage it causes to the environment .
In addition , there is a clear need for a common understanding within the Community that the costs of environmental damage should be borne by the polluter .
Furthermore , the rules set out in the proposal specify the full range of remediation actions to be carried out by the liable operator .
Amendments have now been tabled to narrow down the scope of damage remediation by suppressing the remediation of interim losses , together with suppressing the concept of a natural resource service .
Deleting elements from this range of actions would inevitably result in the polluter not having to carry the full cost of the damage he causes .
Finally , in the difficult context of this debate on environmental liability , the Commission has tried to reach an overall balance which has already been built on compromise solutions .
At this stage the Commission is still of the opinion that the proposal is fair and workable in many respects and should be supported .
I am also aware , however , that we are still at the beginning of the legislative process , and thus entirely conscious of the need for all the institutions involved in this process to reach agreement in due course .
Such an agreement implies necessarily the willingness of all parties to find appropriate and satisfactory compromises .
The debate has reflected this need to ensure that we bridge the different views and find a workable solution in the end .
I shall hand the Commission 's position on all the amendments to Parliament 's services for publication
The proposal for a directive on environmental liability is of great importance in ensuring improved environmental protection and combating all kinds of pollution .
Whether we take the example of AZF in Toulouse in 2002 or the Erika and Prestige oil tankers , these disasters cost human lives and lead to serious , long-term environmental damage .
The report by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market proposes a more conciliatory position with regard to business interests , weakening the initial proposal for a directive .
On the contrary , the provisions laid down should be strengthened with protection measures , making polluters bear the cost of environmental damage , giving NGOs and citizens the opportunity to take their case to court , and including in the directive damage caused by GMOs .
At a time when the IOPCF has just announced a ludicrous compensation rate of 15 % for the damage caused by the Prestige , causing amazement and anger among the people and associations , and rightly so , Europe now has a duty to send out a completely different message .
It must send out a clear message of justice and determination .
. ( IT ) Mr President , the Commission communication on environmental agreements is part of the process of simplifying and improving the legislative framework , which we all support .
Indeed , it is necessary for Community legislation to be further adapted in view of current issues , the challenges posed by enlargement , local situations and constantly developing technology .
The object is to maintain the legal certainty of law on the territory of the Union by means of greater involvement and dynamism on the part of economic and social operators .
This is the backdrop to the issue of environmental agreements .
I support the line taken by the Commission , which makes a distinction between two types of environmental agreement and , having made a number of amendments , I fully acknowledge the usefulness of these instruments to supplement regulatory measures , to be used only with a view to making improvements in the environmental field with a scope equal to or broader than those to be obtained by means of traditional legislative procedures .
The Treaty does not contain any specific provision concerning environmental agreements .
Such instruments must therefore be used in full compliance with all the provisions of the Treaty and the Community 's international commitments .
The basic structure of Community policy on the environment is and has always been legislative provisions , which in only a few specific cases may be combined with voluntary agreements .
In drafting the opinion on which we are about to vote , taking account of the debate held on the subject and Parliament 's positions , I felt that a number of clarifications and guarantees still needed to be included before the instruments mentioned in the Communication could be considered to be acceptable and genuinely practicable .
Five binding preliminary conditions are identified in particular , which I will now summarise briefly .
Firstly , I tried to make the concept of voluntary agreements as instruments for integrating Community legislation more explicit .
Secondly , I called for upstream definition of the sectors which might be the subject of voluntary agreements , through both coregulation and self-regulation instruments .
New regulatory instruments should , in fact , be used on the basis of a common reference framework showing , from the outset , the intention to use voluntary agreements in that specific sector .
The specific intention to use a voluntary agreement should be mentioned in the Commission 's annual work programme , or in documents with broader scope , such as White Papers or Thematic Strategies .
Thirdly , I proposed further analysis of the assessment criteria needed for correct use of environmental agreements .
I consider that , in order to guarantee the transparency and effectiveness of voluntary instruments , it is necessary to define the conditions of application and verify the implementing procedures .
As stressed earlier , the objectives of the agreement - defined within a legislative reference framework or set out in a Commission recommendation - must , in any case , entail obligations for the parties concerned .
Failure to respect or achieve the objectives laid down would trigger recourse to supplementary legislative mechanisms or the replacement of the agreement .
All things considered , the distinction between coregulation and self-regulation is appreciated here .
In the first case , the instruments have to be included in a binding legal framework giving the Council and Parliament the right to participate and adopt objectives , providing for public access and participation and introducing effective monitoring and sanction mechanisms .
In the second case , the Commission 's role may be to stimulate or encourage , by means of a recommendation , or to recognise , by means of an exchange of letters with the representatives of the sectors concerned .
Whatever the choice of instrument , Parliament and the Council retain their power to scrutinise the results achieved and the possibility of using typical legislative instruments at any time .
With regard to these bases , which the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has improved and endorsed , we give the green light to the Commission so that , in the sectors mentioned , first and foremost the PVC sector , we can start to put this mix of legislation and voluntary commitments to the practical test .
We have enhanced and rearranged the tool box : now let us all use it to the full !
Mr President , I would like to thank the European Parliament , and in particular its rapporteur , Mr Sacconi , for the work that has gone into this report and the motion for a resolution .
I welcome the overall positive tone of the report and the motion for a resolution .
The report broadly endorses the approach set out by the Commission in its communication .
I am particularly pleased that Parliament explicitly recognises environmental agreements as a useful complement to legislative measures .
I reconfirm the Commission 's commitment to making use of voluntary agreements at Community level on a selective case-by-case basis only , checking them against the criteria laid down in the communication and respecting procedural requirements that ensure proper involvement of the European Parliament .
My only regret is that the legitimate concerns of Parliament to exert its democratic control have resulted , in some points , in a call for control requirements that are not in balance with the voluntary nature of the instrument .
It is important to satisfy the need for transparency and control on the one hand without , on the other hand , discouraging economic actors from taking up the instrument of environmental agreements by imposing excessive requirements .
The Commission will make the choice between self-regulation and co-regulation on the basis of an ad hoc assessment of the individual agreement , the legal context and the policy issue at stake .
It would not make sense to define general abstract criteria to this effect .
As I have already indicated , imposing ambitious monitoring requirements on spontaneous agreements that are not formally acknowledged by the Commission appears to be overly burdensome and a real disincentive for industry to come forward with such agreements .
The Commission proposed general rules on impact assessment in its communication of 5 June 2002 .
It would not make sense to go beyond the requirements imposed on legislative acts when it comes to environmental agreements .
I am pleased that our tentative list of policy areas in which the instrument could be used meets with your agreement .
I also appreciate the suggestion that environmental agreements could be used in the sectors defined in the action plan set out by the Johannesburg world summit .
In conclusion I would like to emphasise that I consider Parliament 's resolution an overall positive signal that will contribute to facilitating the use of environmental agreements under transparent and acceptable conditions .
Mr President , I am very happy with Commissioner Wallström 's comments .
I am also relatively happy with Mr Sacconi 's report .
My only criticism of your report and of a number of the amendments submitted by Mr De Roo concerns the comments that Mrs Wallström also made .
Let me say the following : there is now a new instrument that has two kinds of voluntary agreements .
One is based on legislation in the form of co-regulation ; you can build on that , things can happen more quickly , we do not have to prescribe everything straight away .
The second suggestion that now appears in the new memorandum is completely voluntary self-regulation in which partners in the market agree something with each other which may anticipate what will be agreed at some point in the future .
This is based on voluntariness .
I feel - and this has just been expressed by Mrs Wallström - that anxiety is often the worst adviser in this Parliament , that we prescribe so much and that we are becoming so detailed that we are in the process of throwing the baby out with the bathwater , although we should be pleased with the large number of agreements there are .
May I perhaps say - Christian democracy being the midfield defender incarnate in my country - that very many things would not have happened without voluntariness .
Take the packaging covenant , for example .
That is a voluntary agreement that goes much further than the one that the most extreme would like to achieve now on a European level .
It is a voluntary agreement .
Give a clear field to voluntariness , I would say .
Let it take the place of the instrument , if it must .
Mr Sacconi , that is why I am asking everyone to approve the amendment that I have submitted on behalf of my group .
The same goes for the PVC strategy .
We could have achieved much more if this Parliament - including the liberals , incidentally - had said at the time : we are now going to ask the Commission to develop a new policy together with industry which will enable them to energetically go about ensuring - and in fact you were the rapporteur , Mr Sacconi - that that PVC is used up .
The same applies to pedestrian safety .
We could prevent 2 000 deaths a year if we act quickly .
I would like to ask for the other group to be allowed more leeway and to be trusted .
I am in favour of a good environmental policy .
All of us here are ; please make sure it is a good one .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish first of all to congratulate Mr Sacconi on his excellent report , with which I am in complete agreement .
Although in theory , voluntary environmental agreements are to be applauded , reality has shown that , precisely because they are voluntary , many of these agreements are ultimately not observed and , furthermore , have frequently been used as a pretext for not bringing into force more ambitious legally binding initiatives .
We all remember what happened with the emissions trading directive : many people tried to prevent it being adopted because some States had voluntary agreements in place with industry .
I therefore believe it is greatly to be welcomed that the Commission has taken the initiative to define clear rules for recognising voluntary agreements at Community level .


I think that there are some rules that must be respected : first of all , the voluntary agreements must be seen only as a complement to environmental policy and not as a basis for it ; secondly , they must be used only when they are proven to have advantages over conventional instruments ; thirdly , they must be promoted only in cases where they attempt to go further than traditional legislation ; fourthly , they must be geared towards technological research and be based on benchmarking criteria : it makes no sense to have voluntary agreements that do not promote the best technologies .
Lastly , there must be deadlines , timetables , clearly defined targets and mechanisms for monitoring results and ensuring compliance .
Mr President , I too must thank Mr Sacconi for a really good report which , in my opinion , states very precisely the prior conditions and requirements that must be present if an environmental agreement is to become a serviceable legal instrument .
I should like to say to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten that I think that voluntary agreements are important but that it is also important we be clear about which conditions must be fulfilled if the agreements are to be beneficial , in environmental terms too .
On this , I completely agree with what Mr de Silva said , to the effect that the environmental agreements can only be supplementary in areas in which they can be used to bring about improvements , or added value , in the environmental sphere , and that they should not just be used to avoid environmental regulation in a particular area .
In addition , it is important that the objectives and deadlines be carefully specified in connection with the agreements and that they also be sure to cover a representative sample of the relevant businesses and production in the area in question , so that one group of businesses is not given the opportunity to freewheel .
I think that complete openness in relation to the public , to this Parliament , to the environmental organisations and to civil society is also important .
There must be openness in connection with plans to enter into the environmental agreements , but also considerable scope for objecting to the use of environmental agreements in a specific area .
Finally , it is important , in connection with the agreements , that a monitoring and penalties system be established so that it can in actual fact be monitored whether the agreements , and objectives laid down in those agreements , are also being fulfilled during the periods of the agreements .
In my own country , Denmark , too , we have experimented with environmental agreements in some areas , for example the PVC area , in which there was not enough in terms of provisions governing monitoring and penalties . It emerged , when the period had elapsed , that absolutely nothing had happened in terms of improving the use of PVC materials .
It is therefore very important that these matters be clarified in connection with entering into environmental agreements .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report now before us is an important contribution to the aim of simplifying and improving environmental legislation in the Community .
For this special thanks go to my colleague , Mr Sacconi .
The feedback hitherto on environmental agreements has shown that a significant number of environmental and civil society players have viewed voluntary agreements with suspicion , even when the act of making the agreement in itself has been voluntary ( although the agreement itself is binding ) .
On the other hand , it has been the wish of industry to spread the practice of making voluntary agreements in order to achieve positive results from the point of view of flexibility , and so also , hopefully , that of the environment .
As I see it , the gap is now becoming well and truly bridged .
The report works on the assumption that voluntary agreements may be applied when the impact can be assessed using an integrated method and the added value for civil society can be measured using indicators of sustainable development .
Secondly , we have to be able to define our objectives and set clear deadlines for them .
In addition , we must insist on the agreement being representative .
In practice this would mean that badly organised sectors or those that provide opportunities for ' free riding ' would not be suitable for inclusion in any voluntary agreement .
With voluntary agreements it is just as necessary as it is with legislative measures to take account of public participation and to guarantee the transparency of agreements .
In addition we must ensure the binding nature of any agreement , the assessment of results and possible penalties .
With these conditions in place there is no risk attached to the use of voluntary agreements .
The conditions mentioned will guarantee that an agreement will produce a better end result than legislative instruments , from the point of view of the environment and society .
I must also therefore say that the amendment proposed by my colleague , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , should be supported .
The procedure for concluding an agreement generally instils a sense of genuine commitment to the objective in the party to that agreement .
It often goes deeper than the wording of the agreement or the letter of the law .
Thus , operators will not be using up their resources looking for loopholes ; instead , they will be seeking ways to effectively implement the objective .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0128 / 2003 ) by Mr Corbett , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on amending Decision 1999 / 468 / EC laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission ( COM ( 2002 ) 719 - C5-0002 / 2003 - 2002 / 0298 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Corbett , for the excellent work he has done in preparing this report on the Commission 's proposal to amend the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers .
I should like to record briefly the background and purposes of the reform under discussion today .
With this proposal the Commission is keeping to the commitments it made in the White Paper on European Governance and in its action plan on better regulation , namely , inter alia , to give the Council and the European Parliament equal rights in monitoring and overseeing the executive .
The two branches of the legislature must be placed on an equal footing , as supervisors of the Commission 's exercise of implementing powers in matters subject to codecision .
The European Parliament should , as co-legislator , be given the right to object not just to the scope of powers delegated to the Commission under codecision - the current right of scrutiny granted in Council Decision 1999 / 468 / EC - but also to the substance of a measure implementing a codecision act .
It is the hope of the Commission that such reform will ultimately pave the way to a wider review based on Treaty changes .
To this end , the Commission made concrete proposals to amend Article 202 of the Treaty in the framework of the European Convention , notably by introducing the concept of delegation of legislative powers in the Treaty .
I emphasise that a temporary reform of the system is all the more necessary as the uncertainty surrounding the ratification by 25 Member States of the new constitutional treaty is not inconsiderable .
The Commission therefore welcomes the support of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for the proposal and hopes the Chamber will confirm this favourable stance .
Mr President , I very much welcome the Commission proposal which , if adopted and adjusted slightly , would bring forward a substantial improvement to the current system and indeed could form the basis of solving once and for all this problem of the so-called comitology system that has been a difficulty for years .
All systems , be they national parliamentary or European Parliamentary systems , have methods of delegating powers to the executive : implementing powers , secondary legislation - call them what you like .
I will not get into a theological argument about the definition of such powers .
But it is normal practice .
What is not normal is the way we do it in the European Union where we set up , alongside the Commission , committees of national civil servants which , in some cases , have the powers to block the Commission .
Indeed so many committees have been set up that the name comitology was invented to describe a system that was so difficult to fathom and so difficult to get to grips with .
The system was greatly improved in 1999 when the revised system was adopted by the Council : greater transparency , a greater guarantee that Parliament has access to all the proposals and all the documents .
That is very good , but it has left two fundamental problems .
Firstly , the Commission 's powers are scrutinised only by committees of national civil servants , which alone have the power to block the Commission and call back the decision to the legislative authority .
Secondly , if a decision is called back , it only goes to one branch of the legislative authority , namely the Council , even when it is codecision legislation adopted in the first place by Parliament and the Council jointly .
That is something we find unacceptable .
We want equal rights of call back for Parliament and the Council - Parliament by an absolute majority , the Council by a qualified majority , as is the bottom line now when a matter goes back to the Council .
We should have the right to call back an implementing measure .
If it is called back there should be equal rights of scrutiny for both Parliament and the Council .
The Commission proposal almost achieves that .
It comes very close to doing that .
The fly in the ointment is the word ' possibly ' , which is in the Commission 's draft .
In other words the Commission , if we object to a draft , will possibly amend it to take account of our objections or refer it to the legislative procedure .
In my view and that of the committee , the word ' possibly ' should go because only then will we really have a basis for a definitive solution to this issue .
Why does the Commission insist on the word ' possibly ' ?
It says that the current legal basis of the Treaties does not allow it to go any further .
I beg to disagree .
If you look at the fact that the legislation is adopted anyway , in the first place , under codecision by Parliament and the Council , it is up to Parliament and the Council to put in place any system , and any checks and balances that they want .
If one argues that such checks and balances must conform to Article 202 , then let us look at that article .
It says : ' The Council may impose certain requirements in respect of the exercise of implementing powers . '
' Certain requirements ' is the wording on which the whole comitology system is based .
If such a complex system can be set up on the basis of that clause in the Treaty , there is absolutely nothing to prevent the Council from setting up a different system - the one which we are advocating - that gives the Council and Parliament equal rights to call back and equal rights to scrutinise .
Article 202 , in other words , is much more flexible than the Commission 's legal service seems to believe .
I would therefore urge the Commission to accept our amendment concerning the word ' possibly ' .
I give notice now that if the Commission does not accept that amendment then , before the final vote , I as rapporteur will move that the issue be referred back to committee , where we will pursue further negotiations with the Commission on this issue .
We have also sought to amend the Commission proposal to make it slightly more flexible .
This is something I hope the Commission will welcome .
We propose to give the Commission the right simply to withdraw an implementing measure if Parliament objects to it or indeed if the Council objects to it .
This is common sense .
Some implementing measures are discretionary , not obligatory .
If we think that the Commission does not need to adopt an implementing measure at the time or of the style that the Commission envisages , and we object to it , the Commission should be able to withdraw it .
That is already provided for in our Rules of Procedure .
I understand that the PPE-DE is opposed to that amendment .
I look forward to hearing their arguments on this , but it is in conformity with what Parliament adopted in the Bourlanges report only a few months ago .
We similarly propose to give the Commission the right to maintain an implementing measure , provisionally , when Parliament has objected to it , pending a full legislative procedure to review , amend or repeal the implementing measure - again an element of flexibility that I expect the Commission to welcome .
Finally , we propose to keep the special procedures that were agreed under the so-called Lamfalussy procedures .
I gather that is not a matter of controversy .
I am pleased to say that other committees , such as the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , which has a lot of experience with comitology , and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which has begun to deal with the Lamfalussy procedures , fully support the approach that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has taken on this .
If we manage to find a solution to this issue now we will have eliminated a problem that has messed up and held up numerous legislative procedures , and we will have removed one of the obstacles to Parliament being willing to delegate far more implementing powers to the Commission than is the case under these procedures .
If we have the right to call back in the way that is envisaged we will be able to delegate much more than we can now , knowing that we have the safety of being able to scrutinise and call back if necessary .
That is something that all should welcome .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking today on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to submit my opinion on the issue of comitology . In so doing - and this was of course mentioned at the end of the previous intervention - I am focusing in particular on the Lamfalussy process and the Lamfalussy procedures for legislation creating the internal market in financial services .
Like the Lamfalussy Group , our aim is to produce legislation in this sector that is close to the market and practicable ; that is what all of us want and are working for .
However , we must of course take a close look at what form the procedures may take in the future .
Precisely in our role as Parliament we need to ask ourselves whether the future procedures also have sufficient democratic legitimacy , because of course we are also getting increasing numbers of so-called soft laws , that is legislation at international level .
I only need to mention Basel II or the International Accounting Standards , which will soon become law in Europe once the necessary steps have been taken by the European Commission and after adoption in the Council and Parliament .
If in the future all of this were to happen in a comitology procedure , with a framework directive only giving general instructions , we would have a basic problem of legitimacy , and Parliament reserves the right to have a say on these very important issues in the future .
For this reason I can only support the rapporteur , Mr Corbett .
It is vital for us in the European Parliament to retain our influence at European level .
This does not mean that we also wish to discuss the technical details in the plenary or in committee .
That is not our point .
But if we feel that provisions are heading in the wrong direction it is vital that we be able to say so , and for this to happen it is essential that the constitution being drafted by the Convention give us a right to call back in the future , which means that if we are not happy with something we can recall it , change its focus and correct it .
That is why it is essential for the Commission and the Convention to support us here so that we can have the relevant provisions added .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mr Corbett .
This is not exactly a straightforward subject .
Perhaps the easiest way to explain it - since we always have a few visitors with us at this time of day - is to say that we are talking about building a bridge .
The Corbett report is an attempt to build a bridge out of this European confusion of non-competencies or mysterious clan competencies , which mean , as Mr Radwan said , that all of a sudden rules directly affecting the lives of millions of people are adopted at a lower level , when there is no direct democratic legitimacy for this .
This is to a large extent due to the history of the European Union and its failure to have a clear separation of powers . This state of affairs means that many issues fall in a grey area and are delegated .
In some cases laws are still made by civil servants ; in certain areas this is a practice that is even on the increase .
The fact that the European Parliament is putting up a fight is , I think , a historic achievement and also legitimises its existence .
But what is crucial now is undoubtedly for the Convention , which is of course occupying a great deal of our attention at the present time , to make it much more clear what happens where , and it is of course vital that this include the power for the European Parliament - this representative body of the people - to be able to call back such implementing powers once they have been delegated .
The success of this project will depend on this , but also on whether we can find the words and expressions - once Mr Corbett has built this bridge - to explain this to the public and the electorate in a way that they can actually understand , so as to bring clarity and transparency to the issue , so that there is nowhere that anyone can hide any tricks .
With this in mind I would stick to my ceterum censeo , that there can be no democracy without transparency .
Mr President , I am distinctly uneasy about this proposal , but there does not seem to be an easy answer .
On the one hand , Mr Corbett wants to give the Parliament equivalency with the Council , suggesting that somehow this improves the accountability of the system and by inference its democratic legitimacy .
On the other hand , the Council reflects the primacy of the nation-states , in theory at least , and should have the final say on whether a legislative instrument should have legal force .
Again , on the one hand , the problem is that the secretive and complex system adopted by the Council does not facilitate external scrutiny , which therefore negates any resemblance of accountability and therefore democracy .
On the other hand , the Parliament , despite its pretensions , lacks the European demos and therefore cannot claim to be a democratic institution .
On that basis , the current state of affairs is not satisfactory , but nor is what is proposed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's implementing powers : it all sounds so harmless and yet it conceals a multitude of problems that all of the committees that deal with European legislation have to contend with , and have been doing so for two decades .
The Council Decision of 1999 reduced the Babylonian confusion of over 20 variants of such committees in the Commission to three procedures , namely management , regulatory and advisory procedures .
The decision also laid down criteria for deciding which committee procedure was appropriate .
All of the relevant European Union legislation , consisting of several hundred directives and regulations , had to be brought into line with it .
Mrs Frassoni 's report in March 2003 - just a few weeks ago - brought this work to its conclusion .
The consequences of our consultations today would be that once again all of the European Union 's legislation , that is once again several hundred legal instruments , would have to be brought into line with the new texts .
Should the Convention - and here I am talking about Article 202 - propose alternative solutions to the ones that we are discussing today , then this process of adapting all European legislation would have to be repeated .
Once again , as with the Lamfalussy procedure , we are only debating an interim solution .
This is expressed very clearly in Amendment No 1 of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
In my judgment , the Commission proposal does not enable us to achieve the objectives of transparency and improved legislative supervision of the Commission when it enacts implementing provisions .
On the contrary , the proposed changes are designed to remodel Parliament 's existing right of supervision as a hearing procedure pure and simple .
De facto the Commission 's proposal amounts to abolishing the management procedure , which also considerably curtails the Council 's and the Member States ' influence and supervisory powers .
This might well not matter to us in Parliament if our influence and supervisory powers were enhanced accordingly .
That is the intention of Parliament 's amendments .
But the Commission , as Mr Corbett has already said , is refusing to delete an essential word , namely ' possibly ' .
This means that in the future it may only possibly take into account the substantive demands made by Parliament with regard to the implementing legislation .
We cannot support this as a Parliament and are in complete agreement with the rapporteur here .
Mr President , in the Convention - and this has already been mentioned several times today - we are holding intensive discussions on abolishing the old comitology system .
I believe that the end result will indeed move in this direction .
Why are we doing this ?
That too has already been mentioned .
We are doing it because the old system of comitology has essentially resulted in underground law , produced by way of methods that are undemocratic , and above all , lacking in transparency .
No one in the outside world knows what is done , how it is done or why it is done .
Above all , no one in the outside world knows what positions have been put forward here , by whom or why .
We have to change this .
That is why we will , in the Convention , be abolishing the old comitology system , but - and this too has already been mentioned - this is only possible if we have something with which to replace it .
We need delegated lawmaking , but we need delegated lawmaking with clear responsibilities , with clear rules of delegation , with mandates that are clearly understood , and above all with the possibility of recall , an equal right of recall for both the Council and Parliament .
In this context I have already referred several times to our discussions in the Convention .
Our concern is to ensure that the people of Europe have a clear picture of who is exercising legislative powers , why and for what reason , and the results that emerge on this point will soon be available as a constitutional proposal .
This does not however make the work on the Corbett report superfluous ; quite the opposite .
Until we have included this result in the constitution and implemented it , we need the results of the Corbett report , which are to a large extent along the same lines as what has been said in the Convention .
With this in mind not only do we congratulate the rapporteur but we also hope that the resulting proposals will be accepted as unanimously as possible and that an appropriate reform of the way in which this important issue is dealt with will allow them to replace the old , undemocratic system of comitology for the next few years .
Mr President , allow me to reply to some of the points that have been raised .
Firstly the question as to whether this is an interim solution .
In my view , the Commission proposal with our amendments can be the basis for a solution to the comitology problem that is compatible both with the current treaty and with what is likely to come out of the European Convention .
Of course , the Convention must do its work and get rid of the apparent contradictions between Articles 202 and 251 of the Treaty , and perhaps put some of the principles governing the delegation of implementing powers into the Treaty and into the constitution itself , but in my view what we are doing here could be entirely convergent with the work going on in the Convention .
Secondly , despite the great convergence we have achieved in general , I would like to mention the issue of the two points which , according to Mr Bourlanges , the PPE-DE Group intends to vote against .
I must say I disagree with the PPE-DE Group on this and I would point out that the position that I am defending is based on what was adopted by Parliament in Mr Bourlanges ' own report .
So I am consistent with what is in Parliament 's position up to now , and , indeed , in our own Rules of Procedure , where we have called upon the President of Parliament to ask the Commission to withdraw or modify any implementing measure that Parliament objects to , or to bring forward a legislative proposal .
So I am on the solid ground of what Parliament has consistently argued for over time in this and I would hope that the PPE-DE Group would rethink its position before we vote in half an hour 's time .
Also , on the question of the provisional adoption of a text pending the legislative procedure , this is important in certain circumstances in order to avoid a legal vacuum .
The measure applies provisionally while Parliament and the Council go through a legislative procedure to review it , amend it or repeal it , depending on what we decide to do .
But it can also be important to have a stopgap solution without a legal vacuum pending that legislative procedure .
In other words , I am asking for a menu of options .
If Parliament or Council objects to an implementing measure that the Commission has put forward , the Commission can either withdraw it - I think it has that right implicitly under the Treaty anyway but let us make that explicit - or it can amend it to take account of our objections , or it can put forward a legislative proposal .
If it does the latter it can apply the measure provisionally , if this is necessary to avoid a legal vacuum , or not if that is not necessary .
That range of opportunities is , I think , appropriate .
We should maintain the full list and I hope the PPE-DE Group will rethink its position and vote accordingly .
Mr President , first of all let me stress that the proposed amendments and the speeches made indicate that much thought and effort has gone into the examination of this proposal , which aims to enhance the role of the European Parliament in the institutional triangle .
As far as possible , the Commission will take into account the detailed amendments proposed by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
The Commission can accept , in whole or in part , Amendments Nos 1 , 2 ( in part ) , 4 , 7 , 8 , 11 ( in part ) , 13 , 14 , 18 and 19 .
However , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 , 10 or 11 ( in part ) , as they could complicate the Commission 's negotiations with the Council .
The Commission 's proposal aims to give the European Parliament and the Council equal rights as co-legislators in controlling the Commission ; but the proposal cannot go further than or beyond the scope of the present Treaty , which does not provide for explicit delegation of legislative power to the Commission .
The Commission , as the sole executive , should be able to retain full responsibility for adopting executive instruments .
This political responsibility goes hand in hand with the freedom of the Commission to adopt a decision , taking on board or not the objections raised by the legislator .
The deletion of ' possibly ' would tie the hands of the Commission and prevent it from exercising its responsibility as the executive .
The withdrawal option , as formulated in Mr Corbett 's Amendments Nos 3 , 10 and 11 , would effectively amount to replacing the freedom of adoption by the Commission by an explicit withdrawal or non-action by the Commission .
If the Commission 's views are not in line with those of the legislator , the Commission would be obliged to renounce the adoption of an implementing measure .
Substitution of the Commission 's responsibility and freedom to adopt an implementing measure via the non-action option would also send the wrong political signal to stakeholders .
The proposal is , on the contrary , based on the assumption that action is needed and that the Commission will take responsibility for it .
Given the scope afforded by the current Treaty , these amendments are therefore not acceptable to the Commission .
The proposal indeed goes as far as possible towards granting the European Parliament the control rights that , as a co-legislator , it should possess .
The reform , as I have just mentioned , cannot go as far as a more thoroughgoing reform conducted in the process of amending the Treaty .
In the framework of the European Convention , the Commission has explicitly suggested that the Council and the European Parliament should , under delegation of legislative powers , have the possibility to oppose a text proposed by the Commission .
In this scenario the latter would indeed either renounce its text , modify it or present a legislative proposal .
To conclude , I can assure you that the Commission will endeavour to achieve progress on this issue in the Council .
I would like to conclude that the Commission needs Parliament 's support in negotiating the strengthening of the European Parliament 's prerogatives with the Council .
I am confident that the Commission can count on Parliament 's continued support in the process of clarifying the roles and competences of the executive and the legislator .
Mr Bourlanges , that was not a point of order .
Mr President , the Commission is wrong in insisting on maintaining the word ' possibly ' , especially if we are offering it a menu of different options anyway .
It should be obliged to choose one of those options and either modify its proposal to take account of our objections or withdraw it - I would underline that we are not obliging it to withdraw the proposal , it is just one of the options - or present a proposal under the legislative procedure .
Since the Commission has those three options I really think the word ' possibly ' should disappear .
Otherwise it would have the right to choose no option whatsoever and to completely ignore the objections made by Parliament , which would be thoroughly undemocratic .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.51 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon . )

I think that is clear to everyone .
We shall take a single vote , taking account of the comments on substance made just now by our rapporteur .
Before the vote on the draft legislative resolution
. I would like to hear from the Commission whether it can accept the amendments proposed by Parliament .
On that basis , Mr Corbett , do you wish to invoke Rule 69 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure ?

Mr President , I would invite Parliament to avail itself of Article 69 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure and refer the report back to committee to pursue negotiations with the Commission .
What the Commissioner has just said amounts to insisting on the word ' possibly ' remaining in the text .
In other words , the Commission would ' possibly ' take account of Parliament 's objections and the Commission would ' possibly ' amend its text to take account of our views .
That would be unacceptable to Parliament and I therefore ask for the report to be referred back to committee .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , I therefore put to the House the rapporteur 's proposal to defer the final vote on the draft legislative resolution .
( Parliament decided to defer the final vote )
Report ( A5-0123 / 2003 ) by Mr Sacconi , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on environmental agreements at Community level within the framework of the Action Plan ' Simplifying and Improving the Regulatory Environment ' [ COM ( 2002 ) 412 - C5-0622 / 2002 - 2002 / 2278 ( INI ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0124 / 2003 ) by Mr Miranda , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in 2002 [ 2002 / 2018 ( INI ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
.
( PT ) In the context of achieving the aims of the Lisbon Strategy - which are intended to increase employment , economic reform and social cohesion in a knowledge-based economy - and of the open method of coordination in the field of social inclusion , a common framework must be created for the systematic production of statistics . The aim is to enable rigorous and timely comparisons to be made between the situations of Member States on income distribution , levels of poverty and social exclusion .
This is an instrument of the utmost importance , which has been lacking .
I therefore voted in favour of this Recommendation , which accepts the Common Position adopted by the Council on the approval of the European Parliament and Council Directive .
This framework provides for the use of common indicators , flexibility in the field of data source and for integrating new sources into national statistics systems , which will enable proper monitoring of the situation and new developments in the Member States .
From 2004 , the Member States will transmit their data to Eurostat on an annual basis and Eurostat will undertake methodological studies to assess the impact on the comparability of national data sources and to identify the best practices to follow .
. ( PT ) I agree with the approach pursued by the rapporteur who , having decided not to draw up a report for second reading , has accepted without amendment the Council 's common position on statistics on income and living conditions in the EU .
The unanimity achieved in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs also confirms the aptness of the Council 's common position .
If the intention is to draw up an annual synthesis report containing Community statistics , the process of compiling data on the Member States must use harmonised definitions and methods .
Unless this happens , we risk ending up with a study that uses differing variables , which change from Member State to Member State , and which consequently do not make comparison easy .
The EU 's financial contribution to each Member State , for four years , for the costs entailed by their work , will ensure the first edition , in 2007 , of a belated initiative , which stands out even more clearly due to the way in which the EU addresses one trivial issue after another .
. ( PT ) I support this report , which has examined a draft regulation forming an integral part of the ' Action Plan on EMU Statistical Requirements ' .
In order to be consistent in promoting the objectives of the European Employment Strategy , it is clearly crucial to harmonise national accounts employment data , transmitting this data in the unit ' hours worked ' , as a means of clarifying labour relations , and of making the measures consistent and the aims viable .
The European Commission initiative : the future of the European Employment Strategy ' A strategy of full employment and better jobs for all ' ( COM ( 2003 ) 6 final ) , principally laid down three wide-ranging objectives : full employment , quality and productivity in work and an inclusive labour market .
The Lisbon and Stockholm targets for overall employment rates ( an EU average of 67 % in 2005 and 70 % in 2010 ) , for women 's employment ( 57 % and 60 % respectively ) and for the employment of older workers ( 50 % in 2010 ) can therefore only be achieved if both the particular nature of labour relations , and the quantitative indicators , in particular the ' number of hours worked ' are determined by uniform methodologies .
. ( PT ) This report should be seen as part of the process of creating an internal energy market for the EU , in response to the call made at the Lisbon European Council of 23 and 24 March 2000 and reaffirmed at the Barcelona and Brussels Spring Councils , to speed up the process of liberalising the electricity and gas markets , which entails further deregulation of the market and stepping up cross-border trade between Member States .
Furthermore , it seeks to speed up the privatisation of state-owned companies , given their historically dominant position in this sector and to speed up the process of concentrations and mergers at Community level .
I have always been opposed to this process , not only for socioeconomic reasons and for reasons of quality and concerns about guarantees of public service provision , but also because this sector is of strategic importance to development , which affects the independence , sovereignty and security of energy .
The Commission proposal therefore seeks to adapt VAT rules , in the field of gas and electricity , to the needs of the markets that have been liberalised .
The amendments that have been proposed will essentially mean that taxes collected are returned to the Member States in which the final consumption takes place , thereby facilitating cross-border trade in energy .
The ultimate aim remains , therefore , that of meeting the needs of the single European market in the energy sector .
The situation of the shipbuilding industry is increasingly worrying , given the major fall in world demand seen in shipyards in 2002 .
New orders represent less than 60 % of those made in 2000 , although in the European Union this figure was 77 % , to which we can add falling prices .
The unilateral application by the EU of the principles established in the 1994 OECD agreement , intended to end aid to the shipbuilding industry , was one of the main causes , since the current temporary defence mechanism proved to be inadequate in the face of the unfair competition and dumping by South Korean shipyards , which have negative margins that vary from 20 % to 40 % , supported by State aid .
The EU 's share of the shipbuilding market fell from 19 % , in 2000 , to 10 % in the first quarter of 2002 , resulting in the closure of several European shipyards , unemployment and ever-present threats of further cuts , as I saw on a visit to the shipyards at Viana do Castelo .
The EU must , therefore , propose new mechanisms to preserve and develop the strategic shipbuilding sector , through a genuine Community programme that promotes research and vocational training and which takes account of the priorities of modernising the Community fleet , ship repairs , maritime transport and fisheries .
. ( EL ) The policy of restructuring the shipbuilding industry and the resultant cutbacks in it have resulted in tens of thousands of unemployed workers .
The loss of half the EU 's share of the global market within a mere two years is due to the stand taken by the ? U and the Member States which , instead of supporting and improving this strategic sector , are supporting and multiplying the profits of the monopolies , mainly in Germany and Denmark .
This once highly developed sector has been especially hard hit in Greece , a country with a long maritime history and one of the largest fleets in the world .
The ship repair industry could , with another policy , have become an important sector of the economy rather than all but disappearing .
Small businesses are today being persecuted , while the larger shipyards have been sold off to the private sector for a pottage of lentils and their activities cut back .
Thousands of workers in this sector are literally starving and entire areas are being condemned to decline , with unemployment over 80 % .
Another wooden shipbuilding company , Hippokambos , closed just recently , turning a further 300 workers out into the street .
Those working in this sector are beginning to realise that they cannot wait for answers from the ? U , its policies and the international imperialist agreements being proposed , which is why they are joining forces and fighting for a different , anti-monopolistic , and anti-imperialist policy .
. ( PT ) The European Strategy for sustainable development adopted at the Gothenburg summit must involve Corporate Social Responsibility ( CSR ) .
Companies have obligations above and beyond the legitimate aim of maximising profits .
Today , SMEs and large multinationals must realise that their success depends on responsible behaviour , in terms of the environment and respect for fundamental rights and in terms of promoting social cohesion .
It is an accepted fact that social and environmental responsibility increase competitiveness .
Consequently , Corporate Social Responsibility must be supported and encouraged and good practices must be disseminated , involving companies , social partners and educational and training establishments .
I wish to highlight the importance :
of including gender-related issues in the principles of Corporate Social Responsibility , specifically promoting entrepreneurship amongst women and helping women to combine professional and private life ;
of the role of the Multi-Stakeholder Forum on CSR , which will enable us to hear all partners , help to define the limits and challenges facing companies and to share good practices ;
of the European Eco-label as a guarantee of quality for consumers and companies , because consumers are placing increasing value on Corporate Social Responsibility in their buying decisions .
The EP must be involved in this process , specifically at the final meeting of the Forum and in the exchanges of information between the institutions .
. ( PT ) This report is simply an enormous cosmetic and marketing operation designed to favour employers at European level , as a result both of the deliberate intentions of the entire process and of the EU 's economic and social guidelines , which seek to promote the deregulation of the economy , in particular in the labour market , through wage flexibility and job instability .
Taking Portugal as an example , we could actually talk about corporate social irresponsibility , with multinationals closing and relocating to countries where salaries are lower and social and environmental laws are more flexible where profit is concerned , making thousands of workers redundant , calling into question the development of the least-favoured regions , breaking contracts with local authorities and States that have guaranteed them considerable amounts of public aid and tax benefits .
Reality shows that many of these companies wishing to promote themselves internationally have no sense of social responsibility whatsoever .
What they do is make use of job instability , short-term contracts , salaries in arrears and precarious labour conditions . They unfairly and illegally lay off employees , forcibly impose flexible working hours , encourage child labour and demonstrate a lack of responsibility for pollution .
There is a climate of impunity and non-compliance with legislation in force , which must be brought to an end .
. ( PT ) The resolution on the ' Intelligent Energy for Europe ' Programme ( 2003-2006 ) broadly warrants our support , given that :
it seeks to ensure continuity by means of a programme in the field of energy that follows on from the current framework programme ( 1998-2002 ) in this field , with regard to sustainable development , security of energy supply , energy efficiency and electricity produced from renewable energy sources , amongst other aspects ;
it recommends an increase in budget appropriations for this programme , although only to a level that is still extremely inadequate ( from EUR 190 million to EUR 200 million ) , given the strategic importance of the fields covered : energy efficiency and rational use of energy ; new and renewable energies ; the energy aspects of transport and international cooperation , particularly with developing countries ;
it calls for an appropriate balance to be struck between monitoring the programme 's implementation and the need to ensure that its allocations are fully spent , and proposes easier access for prospective proposers .
As to the issue of creating a European Intelligent Energy Agency , we believe that the issue is essentially a political one and hinges on concerns over whether or not we should have effective policies for researching and promoting energies that provide environmental and economic advantages .
. ( PT ) I broadly agree with the report , although I believe that the case for creating a European Intelligent Energy Agency - one of the solutions suggested by the rapporteur for increasing energy efficiency and the use of renewable sources of energy - remains to be proven .
Simply creating yet another bureaucratic body is no guarantee that the best use will be made of resources , whereas , according to the principle of subsidiarity , we should first consider the possibility of promoting the exchange of information between Member States and adopting good practices , without overruling national legal provisions or creating artificial structures that come into conflict with these .
Despite this difference of opinion as to the method , I share the environmental and efficiency concerns expressed by the rapporteur , and her conviction that without the participation of local and national organisations , the recommended measures will not be properly implemented .
By the same token , I feel that the concern and the particular care the rapporteur demonstrates towards the enlargement countries and the changes they will need to make when they join the Union are extremely clear-sighted .
. Overall , the amendments adopted by the ITRE Committee on 23rd April do not improve on the Commission 's text .
The amendments have produced an extremely complicated proposal which would be even more harmful to the generally large industrial CHP plants which are the main UK interest , than the Commission 's original proposal .
These amendments taken as a whole are based on the assumption that all cogeneration ' with an efficiency level of at least 80 % always leads to substantial energy savings in comparison to the separate generation of energy and heat and may therefore be regarded as efficient . '
It is not true that an efficiency of 80 % will guarantee substantial energy savings is disputable .
Schemes with the same overall efficiency do not necessarily save the most fuel and displace the most CO2 emissions .
It is important to value electrical efficiency more than heat efficiency and the report as tabled does not do this .
Overall , the approach is too academic and takes little account of the practical difficulties of implementing the approach at industrial sites - some of which can be extremely complex .
Adoption of the proposal would seriously damage the prospects for cogeneration in the UK .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( PT ) I broadly share the rapporteur 's concerns with regard to the need to promote the rational use of energy and to the strategic preference for non-polluting forms of energy .
In fact , in addition to the lower volume of CO2 emissions that it will lead to , the decentralising nature of cogeneration generally hampers the construction of major energy-producing units , thereby diminishing the environmental effects of their infrastructures and their lines of transmission .
It has become clear from the discussion on this issue that this is not fundamentally a political issue , but rather a technical one . This is why instead of the expected split between right and left , we have seen the various approaches that northern and southern Europe are bound to bring to the problem due to the differences in their climates .
These differences must be taken into account , just as we will have to look into the feasibility of the requirement for Member States to present detailed reports on their national potentials .
Despite the perception that some procedures and technical definitions concerning the use of cogeneration remain contradictory , I believe the principles guiding the drafting of this report to be broadly correct , and I agree with the compromise approach that ultimately emerged from the work undertaken in the Commission .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
. ( PT ) I agree with the rapporteur on the need to adopt a regulation on insurance requirements for air carriers and aircraft operators , thereby affording greater protection to users of this mode of transport , and extending this protection to all users .
I also share the rapporteur 's concern about the application of the principle of equality , and welcome the solution he recommends - which provides for different treatment for small and large carriers - without which these measures could , in practice , allow this specific market surreptitiously to become an oligopoly , due to the excessive burden of insurance requirements .
Despite agreeing in principle , which has led me to vote in favour of this report , I cannot conceal my doubts as to the feasibility of some of the measures that are advocated , for example , monitoring the validity of operating licences or air operator certificates , which would make it necessary to monitor compliance with the requirements that have been set on an ongoing basis .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report , which I believe is balanced and promotes a greater degree of environmental protection .
I welcome in particular its concern for the ' applicability ' of the mechanisms provided for .
In fact , since the Treaty of Maastricht , the Union has been committed to including environmental protection in all its policies .
In order genuinely to protect the environment and safeguard biodiversity , we must have the cooperation of all economic actors because , as the report also concludes , today ' the sources of environmental pollution are no longer concentrated in industrial facilities but lie in manifold economic activities and consumer behaviour ' , which means that a new , more creative approach is required , in order to achieve the targets for a high degree of environmental protection , targets which are as ambitious as they are crucial .
The European Commission has moved in this direction , with its proposal , as has the rapporteur , with his suggestions .
The mechanisms for self-regulation amongst operators and for co-regulation , in some kind of coordination with the public authorities are , of course , avenues worth exploring .
Furthermore , setting objectives and practical targets and trying out a more simplified and operational legislative framework that is immediately understandable to all actors involved , will certainly lead to greater awareness and to more effective environmental protection .
. ( PT ) This report comes at a crucial , not to say extremely difficult time in the history of the ACP / EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly : the result of the session planned for November 2002 , in Brussels , being cancelled due to disagreements between the ACP and EP Members on what to do about the delegates sent by the Zimbabwean Government , despite the entry ban imposed on them .
The text that was ultimately adopted in committee prefers to emphasise that part of this crisis falls outside the competence of the APP ( and specifically concerns the coherence and the hierarchy of the decisions taken by the Council and the European Parliament ) , and welcomes the normalisation of relations between the two parties , illustrated by the fact that that the March session took place in Brazzaville in favourable circumstances and by the positive outcome that was achieved .
I agree with this interpretation and therefore intended to vote in favour of the report .
The fact that plenary rejected the proposals for amendments tabled by the UEN Group , however , which sought to correct a serious injustice and discrimination in the composition and operation of permanent bodies of the APP led me to abstain from the final vote .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the Council statement on SARS ( severe acute respiratory syndrome ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very satisfied to be here with you today in order to present to you the results so far from the Council 's work on severe acute respiratory syndrome .
As you know , the Presidency convened an Extraordinary Council on 6 May in order to examine this serious issue which , in addition to the obvious and significant repercussions on public health and the economy , is causing understandable concern among our citizens , which are often exacerbated by the way in which this issue is presented in the media .
Before telling you about the results of the Council , allow me to make a preliminary comment .
The case of severe acute respiratory syndrome shows once again that communicable diseases , like many other problems which touch on the public health sector , are another example of bio-terrorism which go well beyond the level of the Member States and point to the need for institutional changes that will raise health protection to a basic priority of united Europe .
This prospect will make it much easier to coordinate prevention , control and timely intervention to deal with diseases , both in the Community and internationally .
Allow me to remind you that health still does not hold the position which behoves it at Community level .
I am convinced that Europe is the best way to promote ambitious policies in the public health sector in each of our countries , especially with regard to disease prevention and control .
In today 's Europe , especially after enlargement , health must acquire a stable and strong legal basis which allows for immediate , coordinated , scientific , reliable , efficient intervention .
I should like now to tell you about the results of the work of the Extraordinary Council .
I would remind you that the Council on 6 May was attended for the first time by the Ministers for Health of the acceding countries and by Mrs Brundtland , the General Director of the WHO , so that she could bring us up to date with current developments in atypical pneumonia at worldwide level .
As for the scientific , epidemiological side of the problem , according to the experts at the international organisations , we know in brief that a coronavirus which was unrecognised until its recent emergence is the cause of the syndrome .
The molecular structure of the virus was identified in a very short space of time , if you remember how long it took to identify the AIDS HIV virus .
Although it has been identified , we still do not know its exact natural history , just as we still have no special anti-viral medication to treat it and are a long way from finding a vaccine to prevent it .
As for the method of transmission , there are strong signs that it is transmitted by close contact , most probably via droplets .
There is no evidence that goods arriving in the European Union from SARS-infected areas pose a threat to public health .
As far as the epidemiology is concerned , the number of confirmed or suspected cases in the Member States of the European Union remains limited and patients have been effectively isolated and treated , thus so far avoiding further spread of infection and , most importantly , there have been no fatal cases .
The Council had a thorough and constructive exchange of views with Mrs Brundtland and noted that the World Health Assembly which is to meet next week will provide an excellent opportunity to review the prevailing situation worldwide and evaluate efforts being made to deal with it .
As far as Community measures to deal with the problem are concerned , I would start by recalling that the application of health protection measures falls to the authorities of the Member States .
At Community level , a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases is already operating and is responsible for coordinating measures .
The network has provided a very effective basis for the exchange of information , in which the acceding countries have fully participated .
The Council endorsed the guidelines agreed on 10 April 2003 by the Network Committee .
They are summarised as follows :
rapid detection of all suspect cases through good surveillance ,
protection of those at risk of infection through effective isolation in hospitals , with special emphasis on measures to protect carers ,
particular attention to be paid to air travel , which appears to have been an important factor in the spread of SARS , notably through screening of passengers leaving affected areas , onboard advice to passengers and , finally , through information at airports of entry .
These measures must be applied in all the Member States .
As far as future action is concerned , the Council decided that Community action and efforts being made via the communicable diseases surveillance network and the new programme in the public health sector should continue .
Cooperation between the Member States , the Commission and the World Health Organisation also needs to continue in order to contain and eventually stop the spread of this atypical pneumonia .
This cooperation must aim mainly to assist the affected areas and develop diagnostic tests to promote research on vaccines and their availability in sufficient quantities .
The Council also urged the Member States and the acceding countries to implement fully all the guidelines of the surveillance network , to contribute actively to setting up a specific expert group on severe acute respiratory syndrome under the Network Committee and to provide by 15 May all relevant information to the Commission on measures taken to address SARS .
Finally , I would point out that we encouraged the Commission to continue coordinating the Member States ' action and keep the orientations of the surveillance network under regular review .
The Council will review the situation and developments at its meeting on 2 June , at which the Commission will submit a report on measures taken by the Member States .
On the basis of this report , the Council will take any further action it deems necessary .
Similarly , it supports the Commission 's intention to submit an initial draft proposal to create a European Centre for disease prevention and control .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have confined myself to this brief presentation of the work of the Council and am available to answer your questions .
Mr President , today 's second reading on serious acute respiratory syndrome comes , I think , at exactly the right time once again because , as we see , there are new cases every day and people are dying from SARS .
What is important , as the Minister said , are the immediate measures that need to be taken to protect the public .
He mentioned some of these immediate measures , but the main point is what the next steps will be to deal with these diseases , which have significant social and economic repercussions , because with current levels of mobility , with millions of people travelling all over the planet , tremendous potential has been given to communicable diseases .
SARS is a typical example , with cases occurring from China , where the disease originated , to places a very long way from the original source .
The second important issue is that we are seeing sudden epidemics of new diseases .
Thirty new infectious diseases or variations on old diseases due to mutating viruses have been reported over the last twenty years .
Even old diseases , such as tuberculosis , are reoccurring .
There is also talk of an imminent pandemic , an outbreak of influenza .
We therefore need constant vigilance and monitoring and to find a coordinated response to health threats .
The Minister quite rightly stressed that there is the network set up under Decision 2119 in 1998 , for the surveillance of communicable diseases but unfortunately , Minister , this network is inadequate for an organised and coordinated response to these health threats .
I agree with you that you need to push for a monitoring centre to be set up in accordance with the Commission proposal , like the one in the United States .
We need a monitoring centre at European Union level to coordinate the various national centres , because it is of course the Member States ' responsibility , but also to coordinate reference laboratories , so that we can have a fast , coordinated response to communicable diseases and even to bio-terrorism , which is what threats with viruses or bacteria spores are .
You also quite rightly said that public health must take its proper place in the new Treaties for Europe .
I am sorry to say that , so far , the constitutional Convention has not sent us this message or this position .
As you quite rightly said .
Just as the environment has an eminent position in the Treaties , so should public health .
Health services are one thing - there is the question of subsidiarity - and public health protection is another because , as you know , viruses and various diseases and bio-terrorism do not recognise borders and can pass from country to country , from Member State to Member State and we must be able to respond in a coordinated manner .
If we are to be able to do so , we need public health to have an eminent position in the Treaty of the European Union .
So I agree with you and I would ask for you to persuade the other ministers to agree to set up this communicable diseases monitoring and control centre at European level and for us to persuade the constitutional Convention and the Council to give public health an eminent position in the new constitution of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to thank you for your report from the Council and I am well aware that messengers , or bringers of bad news , should not be shot , which is why that is far from my mind .
Nevertheless , I do admit that I found the results of this Extraordinary Council meeting very disappointing , if we consider that where SARS is concerned all we have are questions .
This is an unknown virus .
We do not really know what the routes of infection are .
We do not know of any way of treating it , and we do not really know anything about the mortality rate .
There are so many questions that the debate about a centre is just a distraction .
I may be happy to discuss it in six months ' time , but at the moment that is a course of action that glosses over and covers up what is really necessary .
I feel exactly the same when I hear that the Member States have had a constructive exchange of views and are responsible for taking preventive measures .
This is something that we have to change .
It is high time that there was a Community competence for health policy , and I mean in the Treaty .
If we do not recognise that now then I do not know when we will .
We ought to have realised this even in the days of BSE .
Much of what I am hearing today and have heard in the past is familiar to me : the economic impact - we said that too in the days of BSE .
In the Minutes it says not to talk out loud about the dangers of BSE because heaven knows what economic consequences it will have .
What consequences did it have in the end ?
What I would have liked from the Council is for it to have done something practical for once .
Incidentally , I would have liked to see the Commission do the same .
Mrs Schreyer , I regret having to say this to you ; I know that you are not responsible for this .
I will repeat it to Mr Byrne ; indeed , I have already said as much to him in this House .
It is not acceptable for Mr Byrne to say , yes , research funding is a tricky one , the funds are tied up for such a long time .
He should have gone straight to the Commission and said : come on then , chop-chop , release funds from the research framework programme , and do it now !
We need money for research immediately , so that we can get things moving and mobilise all of our researchers so that we can establish what kind of a virus it is , whether it is possible to treat it and what vaccines are available .
The Member States ought to have done exactly the same .
When they were dispersing last week after the extraordinary meeting of the Council , I would have expected them to say : each of us is committed to putting x % or so many hundreds of thousands of euros on the table straight away for research .
I should like to make another unpopular statement : why are we not talking about restricting travel ?
Other countries are doing that .
There are countries that have introduced entry restrictions .
Why are we not doing so ?
Why are planes from my German airline and other airlines still able to travel around all over the place ?
We do not know anything about the infection channels .
We have no idea how long the incubation period is .
Is that as it should be ?
Why are we not having an honest discussion about quarantining ?
I think it would be responsible to do so , and I think that what the Member States have done and also what the Commission has done is both insufficient and irresponsible .
I am denouncing that here and I would like you - that is those who bear the responsibility for this - to justify it to the people of Europe .
Mr President , I would like to thank the minister for his explanation .
The Council meeting naturally took place at a time when rumours and speculation about SARS were taking on huge proportions .
The risk of confusion and misunderstandings about this highly infectious disease is therefore also increasing at an alarming rate .
At the moment , however , we are still seeing different Member States giving conflicting travel advice about the so-called infected areas .
It is the European Union 's duty to try to avoid this kind of confusion and misunderstandings .
My country , for example , only issues negative travel advice on Beijing , Hong Kong and the Guangdong province .
Other Member States are doing so for all infected areas .
Why is there no clear European line on this point ?
The European Union , not only the Member States , should be taking action in this regard .
That is not enough , however .
SARS is pre-eminently a problem that does not respect national borders , and reminds us that problems such as these may also arise with other infectious diseases .
When we see how quickly SARS has spread - perhaps not yet in Europe but certainly elsewhere - we must learn lessons from this , and not only now in respect of SARS .
The Council of 6 May called on the Commission to continue to coordinate the EU 's action in respect of SARS and to consider developing a plan concerning a general preparedness for transmittable diseases and public health threats .
The European Centre has once again been mentioned .
Perhaps this is enough at this point .
Perhaps SARS is indeed something that has not spread so far that more stringent measures are needed .
What would we have done , however , if something like this had got out of hand ?
That might have happened .
That could already have happened .
Take the situation in Toronto - hardly a developing country , but a city with top-quality medical facilities that was suddenly gripped by SARS .
That could have happened to us .
What would we have done ?
Would we have asked the European Commission to do some consulting and coordinating ?
Would we have convened a meeting to see what we could do about it ?
No , what is lacking is the possibility of the European Commission implementing crisis management measures at such a time .
I think that the European Commission should develop an emergency plan for this kind of situation , a plan which enables us to take concrete action in response to emergencies and then take measures such as those our American and Canadian colleagues are taking : quarantining people suspected of having the infection , providing additional funds for preventing the spread of the virus and support for people who are in voluntary or enforced quarantine .
The problems are broader than this .
It is not just about SARS .
Commissioner Byrne informed Parliament on 7 April about the possibility that the SARS virus was transferred to humans from animals .
Take the Hong Kong flu last century , the Spanish flu last century , viruses that mutate , the fowl pest in the Netherlands at the moment , about which the World Health Organisation has expressed its concern .
What should we do about these ?
The European Commission needs to be able to implement practical crisis-management measures quickly for these kinds of situations in particular .
I also welcome what the minister has said about this .
The role of public health in the Treaty really must be laid down and reinforced now .
Mr President , people cannot be vaccinated against new diseases in advance .
They can also not be healed with medicines afterwards .
There are only three ways of limiting the consequences .
The first is to limit the chance of infection .
The second is to reinforce and accelerate scientific research into preventing and fighting such diseases .
The third is to offer help to those with the disease so as to increase their chances of survival .
In the fight against the advance of SARS , only this third opportunity is being paid full attention .
Hospitals are being prepared to ensure that they have quarantine rooms and breathing equipment available .
It is a good thing that we are already taking on board the possibility that this infection could gain a significant foothold in Europe , but it looks as if this is as far as we are going .
The second method is not being given much thought .
In the past , various Member States of the European Union have cut back on scientific research into new diseases .
Today 's experts are interested volunteers who have been taken away from other medical and biological research .
That must change if we are to be able to effectively fight and eradicate new diseases in the short term .
Our biggest shortcomings relate to the first method ; containing the spread on a global scale .
People from South-East Asia can quickly export SARS over great distances because of international air travel .
Checks on incoming traffic at Schiphol Airport in the Netherlands , Europe 's fifth biggest airport , seem to be minimal .
Passengers arriving from South-East Asia are allowed to just pass straight through .
It is actually a miracle that more people have not been infected in Europe .
Following a declaration by the European Commission , I asked on 7 April for action to be taken against the risks posed by incoming air traffic , involving a previously announced compulsory period of quarantine for people at risk of infection if necessary .
I am surprised that on 6 May , after consultation with the World Health Organisation , the Council decided not to do this and to rely instead on checks in the country of departure and written declarations by interested parties .
Let us avoid a situation in which we find out afterwards that we failed seriously in our attempts to keep this disease out of our countries , and let us be pleased with our free press which , unlike in China , informed us in good time .
Mr President , Minister , members of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , on 7 April last , we addressed the issue of the SARS crisis in an attempt to stop the spread of the virus , a matter which concerned more or less all the Member States and other countries as well .
I must point out that the proposals advanced to the Commission by the UEN Group on that occasion have almost all been adopted by some of the Member States , including Italy .
In the same speech , I warned that the virus could be transmitted via goods and animals from infected countries which were not yet known to be carrying the infection .
After that difficult period of heated discussion between optimistic and pessimistic viewpoints on the possibility and necessity of stopping the spread of the virus , the European countries are now paying more heed to the issue , and more preventive measures are being taken too , but the time has come to concern ourselves with another factor .
The problem which is gradually emerging in many Member States is that of public healthcare - are there enough staff , resources and facilities available to assist SARS patients ?
It is time to ask ourselves whether each Member State has these resources and appropriate centres for treating virulent infectious diseases such as SARS ; if they do not , then all the measures taken to delay its arrival in Europe will be in vain .
Today , I would add , the issues which need to be addressed most urgently are these : the lack , not to say complete absence , of negative pressure isolation rooms , necessary to prevent nosocomial infection , in the principal hospitals of the States of the European Union ; the impossibility of quarantining a patient highly likely to have the disease but who refuses to be placed in isolation , due to the fact that there are no laws imposing enforced hospitalisation except on grounds of mental health ; we need to start thinking about training , setting up specialised healthcare teams in the individual states to treat patients with diseases such as SARS , who cannot be given specific treatment but only adjunct treatment and who require input from a wide range of specialists - lung specialists , virologists , anaesthetists , resuscitation specialists , internists , dieticians - and nursing staff capable of managing and caring for patients suffering from SARS .
I would like to invite you to consider this viral disease as proof for Europe of the possibility of the transmission of diseases which are currently unknown to us or which we have stamped out in the past but which globalisation could bring back to Europe , as I said in my speech on 14 November 2001 .
The European Parliament and , in this case , the Commission - which I am addressing here - must learn from this experience and recognise the crucial role played by public health services .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 7 May , a Commissioner who is not present in the House today - and I regret that because , for once , I would have liked to congratulate a Commissioner - said : as regards the prevention of animal epidemics we have developed a cutting-edge system , creating a Committee of Veterinary Experts which lays down the law for every Member State , whereas , when it comes to human health , we have no say on the matter .
I reiterate , we have no say on the matter . Incidentally , thus far , the Commission has had no say on the matter in this House either .
This absurd situation does , however , reflect the times in which we live .
I agree with some of the points made by Mr Mussa just now , but we must bear in mind that you , Antonio , are calling - like of many of us , moreover - for structural reforms , reform of nosocomial , hospital and even scientific structures .
Structural reforms need to be first adopted by vote , desired and then implemented ; then come the bribes and all the rest of it .
In any case , we must have guidelines .
Today , however , there is an aspect which , as far as our area is concerned , is related to trade privileges , which sometimes play the role here which political and system interests play in the communist states , in the totalitarian - let us call them communist - states .
( There are some minor fascist , nazi variations but the essence is the same ) .
In actual fact , we have a situation of impending rampant zoonosis : in other words , diseases can be transmitted from animal to human being .
Public health in Europe - here in our own countries - is under ever-increasing , extremely serious threat , for the world is becoming increasingly globalised and there are an increasing number of densely populated areas .
Now , and I quote , Europe has been suffering for many months from orthomyxovirus strains causing - I repeat , which are currently causing , in other words this is happening right now , President-in-Office of the Council - extremely dangerous centres of avian influenza .
Here in Europe , there are currently a number of extremely dangerous centres of avian influenza , the danger of which is often played down .
Why is that ?
So as not to block the huge flows of foodstuffs exports .
The introduction of a vaccination would , of course , affect the export of these foodstuffs .
We therefore chose to stamp out the disease instead , culling entire farm herds - 25 million head were destroyed in Holland and Belgium alone !
It is true that these animals cost us a dollar a day - money which we do not give the world or even our unemployed in some cases - but it is also true that the culling is subsidised .
We are therefore in a situation where we lack specific knowledge - even after some , after many years , I am still not at all sure what the difference is between HIV and AIDS .
All we can say is that infection experts fear an explosion in the autumn over and above the usual seasonal variation .
I would point out that 600 000 died in Italy from Spanish influenza alone - as many as in a major world war .
Take heed !
This is not Europe - it is an absence of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is less than two months since we were first informed of the spread of this disease and there have already been over 7 000 cases reported and over 500 deaths , with more than 20 cases of infection reported in the Member States of the Union .
Minister , the Extraordinary Council called for by the Italian Minister for Health , Professor Sirchia , yielded results which , although not minimum , were minimal and unsatisfactory .
The outcome was a proposal to introduce medical protection in airports within a deadline of two months to check passengers leaving for these countries , in other words people returning to China , Hong Kong and the other areas where there is an epidemic situation already declared .
In addition , the Extraordinary Council decided to create a European Coordination Centre to address health crises , which is only due to become operational in 2005 .
Well then , I believe that , despite the requests made essentially by Italy and Spain , we have given in to purely economic reasoning .
It was you , Minister , who said that a difficult climate for the economy and society would be created .
We believe that the citizens ' health is a question of much more than the mere short-term economic impact , although that is , of course , a consideration to be borne in mind , but it must not take priority over the citizens ' health .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt rightly said that we know nothing about the disease , and that is true , but we have not set up a European-scale filter which could be genuinely uniform and effective .
Then Mr Panella pointed out the absurdity of the fact that we are equipped with a cutting-edge system for preventing animal epidemics but we have nothing for human beings .
Everything is still in the hands of the states , which are giving economic considerations priority over respect for citizens ' health .
It has been said that Spanish influenza claimed hundreds of thousands of victims .
That is not true , ladies and gentlemen - it claimed over 20 million !
More recently , in 1957 , Asian influenza claimed a million human lives , and then , in 1968 , the Hong Kong variety caused 700 000 deaths .
I wonder what we are doing to monitor the risk of an epidemic situation occurring in countries such as Africa or India , whose health systems would be totally incapable of controlling it at all , considering that even Toronto has been thrown into crisis .
I therefore believe , Minister , that the Council or the Commission must change their tune , speed up their decision-making and alter the citizens ' health policies .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Health Council , serious acute respiratory syndrome is yet another reminder of the need for coordinated action in the public health sector .
We cannot talk of prevention , control and timely intervention with communicable or other diseases unless we put the conditions in place for Community cooperation , especially today with enlargement and with citizens able to travel easily and quickly .
I am delighted that all the honourable Members who spoke referred unanimously to this need in their speeches ; this has never happened in the past .
Just like environmental problems , communicable diseases know no frontiers .
Epidemics such as this atypical pneumonia epidemic call for transparency and direct information , a surveillance system that operates efficiently and health systems that get beyond bureaucratic malfunctions and offer the best possible services in the public interest .
The role of the World Health Organisation is fundamental , which is why cooperation between the WHO , the European Commission and the Member States has been effective .
It is important to emphasise that the measures introduced at European Union level have restricted the spread of the disease and , most importantly , there have as yet been no fatalities in any Member State .
As regards the Extraordinary Council held last week , I think it is important that the Council is pushing for the setting up of a special expert group on SARS to draw up joint programmes and advice on hygiene measures throughout Europe and provide information on measures taken so far and their results .
It is also necessary to provide all manner of assistance to the affected areas .
Exit points must be controlled in the same way as - if not more so than - entry points , using all administrative and scientific means .
Allow me to express my concern about the adequate application of measures decided so far .
It would be advisable for the Commission to exercise as much influence as it can in this direction .
Finally , may I congratulate the Greek Presidency on the sensitivity and readiness it demonstrated in convening the Extraordinary Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , people are worried about SARS ; as has already been said many times , there is a great deal of uncertainty , and that of course makes the whole thing very difficult .
I have personal experience of this : some of my family are about to travel to China on business .
This is a situation that is facing many families in Europe , and we are not actually able to offer any definite advice , which is very difficult .
I should like to take up that keyword , China .
We must denounce the complete inadequacy of the action taken by the Chinese Government here .
It first played the issue down and kept it under wraps and then - at least in some cases - overreacted , even taking measures appropriate to a police state .
In my view this provides yet more proof that in a dictatorship the challenges of modern society are not properly handled .
That is one of the many reasons why we should continue to speak up for human rights and democracy , including in China .
What are we doing now in Europe ?
I am very grateful to Professor Stéfanis , the President-in-Office , but also to Professors Sirchia and Mattei , who were very active in supporting the initiative , and very grateful that this issue has been put on the Council agenda .
The results are obviously not what we would have liked , but it is important to make a start and we may have more success at the next Council meeting .
In Europe we have an internal market .
I think that this is once again a time to point out that we can only have an internal market and that its advantages can only really be felt if we also take into account other aspects apart from the more narrow economic situation .
There are many examples here and health is one of them .
There are some people in my country who say that Europe should not have any competence for health protection .
I am not one of them .
I believe that at least when it comes to providing protection from infectious diseases and where bioterrorism is concerned we need additional competencies for the European Union .
I have already discussed this problem with Commissioner Byrne and also with our Members in the Convention .
Mr Brok , the chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the Convention , has of course followed this debate and he agrees with me that we need additional competencies here .
This will not , however , be a universal panacea .
We cannot now shift the current crisis into a Convention debate , but must look carefully at what measures it might be appropriate to take even now .
That is why it is right , for example , as Mrs Roth-Behrendt said , to mobilise research funds quickly .
It is right , as Mr Maaten pointed out , to issue uniform recommendations on travel into and out of the EU .
I believe that we should do these things quickly , but at the same time we should send out the right signals in the Convention .
Mr President , SARS poses a huge challenge to the EU and the applicant states and , as the minister says , we do not know what causes the virus .
As the global death toll rises and infection increases in China , there have also been cases in the EU , although the disease would appear to be very much under control here .
However , 6 % of people who contract SARS will die .
To take the example of one survivor , Dr Henry Likyuen Chan was only 34 years old , but he had a high fever , was racked with a cough and when taking a shower felt as if he was running a marathon .
The concept of an EU centre for disease control and prevention similar to the US model in Atlanta , which is not a new concept and is being promoted through the public health programme , goes some way towards coordination .
However , it will take until 2005 to have such an agency up and running .
Is this too little too late ?
It may be the right step to take for the future but it is very important for the Council to be open about the extra resources that it will make available for the centre , to deal not just with SARS but also with the issues surrounding TB , smallpox and bio-terrorism .
The added value of working together is what the EU is all about in public health policy , but this all comes at a cost and we should be very open about that .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Liese have talked about the research aspect and it is my understanding also that the money for this is being made available through DG Research .
It is important for this to be clarified , and perhaps the minister could tell us a little more about it .
As we know , and he has stated , the source of this terrible mutant virus is still to be identified and we need to know more about what causes it .
Sadly , SARS is here and it is here to stay .
We can do everything possible through research , early warning systems , disease control centres , education and information , but this should be a wake-up call to everyone concerned with public health .
We need to work together across the EU and the globe to protect public health in the future and we must think seriously about how to do this .
Mr President , SARS may not be a cause of hype in politics , but it certainly is for our citizens .
The response of the Council and the European Commission last week was , I think , adequate .
However , those of us who know what possibly should have happened were rightly disappointed .
It is true that there have not yet been any deaths attributable to SARS on our European Continent .
But I would like to join my fellow Members Mrs Roth-Behrendt , Mr Maaten and Mr Liese in making the point that this does not mean and it seemed rather like this that everything is therefore all right at the moment .

We actually know far too little about where it comes from and how it is transmitted .
We have no knowledge of any vaccines .
All these things were held over at the time at that meeting of the Council .
I regret that .
The second thing that I regret is that it has been agreed not to take any additional measures to check everyone leaving an aircraft , because that would be a false security .
What do I see ?
Days later the Italian Government is busy enacting these very measures .
What security can I offer citizens now ?
I think that this is also the background to much of the criticism of my fellow Members .
As a second element I should like to mention the sixth action programme on public health .
This programme was based on two things : rapid alert and prevention .
What must I now actually conclude ?
That the Commission points out to us for the first time actually to have done something in the area of health , even though it is not within its competence .
In this regard I note that the Commission did in fact already have this competence through that sixth action programme .

Then I come to the remarks of my fellow Member Mr Maaten , Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Trakatellis who ask why no extra money is being released immediately for tracing the connections , for making vaccines , for doing something .
Mr President , in my opinion that means we have fallen short and we must now immediately try better to support and to trace the problems and the ignorance , not only with SARS , but everything else that comes our way , to respond more alertly , as we set out in the sixth action programme .
But , Mr President , consider also the competences in the area of public health .
They are needed more than ever .
Mr President , Mr Stefanis , two Dutch hospital workers who had been working in China voluntarily went into quarantine on their return to the Netherlands .
Their sense of responsibility should be an example to the authorities , not only those in the Netherlands , but also to their European counterparts .
The measures against SARS are inadequate .
Unfortunately no other conclusion is possible at the moment .
SARS is a disease whose risks and dangers are still largely unknown .
The mortality rate was initially estimated at 4 % , now there are estimates of 19 % .
Infection was originally thought only to occur through the air .
Now it seems that the virus can enter the human body in various other ways .
We must take the greatest of care in dealing with SARS .
Firstly , and it has been said many times before , there must be joint action .
Confidence in the government is important .
We cannot have one country maintaining that there really is nothing the matter and another making quarantine compulsory , that does not create confidence .
We must also have joint travel advice because there certainly is something the matter .
Secondly , the measures must , of course , be convincing .
The disease has proved more serious and more infectious than was thought .
It is a good thing to trace people who may be carriers , but our first concern is , of course , to prevent infection occurring in the European Union .
Italy is quite right to make quarantine compulsory for people coming from areas of risk .
Everyone who says that draconian measures do not offer definitive protection are right as well of course , but this does not make it the false security that is being suggested .
These measures do help to reduce the number of carriers .
You prevent panic by taking adequate measures and not by acting as if there is nothing amiss .
Mr President , the European Union and the Member States must now take responsibility .
Cases of SARS have also been discovered in Greece and Finland .
We cannot allow quarantine to be an individual decision of responsible people .
Let the sense of responsibility of some hospital workers act as an example .
Finally , Mr Stefanis , you have heard in this debate that there is a very great consensus for a stricter and clearer approach .
What are you going to do as a result of this debate ?
Thank you very much , ladies and gentlemen , for your very interesting questions , which I shall try to answer .
I cannot answer them all in detail because , as far as I understand , time is limited , but I shall try to do what I can .
First , the general state of affairs as far as atypical pneumonia or SARS is concerned .
As I said , we know from the Commission and from Mrs Brundtland herself , who has a global view of the matter , that although it has been identified - and this is a fact - in record time compared with what has been done in the past and we have identified the molecular structure of the virus on the one hand ; on the other hand , however , no substantial progress has been made in the field of its natural history , in other words on how the virus is transmitted , and there is at present no visible progress on an efficient vaccine to prevent the disease or any anti-viral medication to treat it .
Consequently , treatment is merely palliative and what we really need , for patients at least , is for them to be isolated so that the virus does not spread and cause hospital infections , meaning that we need to recommend that every country that does not have negative pressure chambers should acquire them .
This is a very basic measure in order to restrict the spread of the virus and prevent hospital infections .
I would just like to offer some clarification on the cases in Holland and Greece . There has been a suspected - not a confirmed - case in Greece since yesterday , which is being investigated .
In all events , the fact is that there are also cases in Europe .
Luckily , however , as we said , no case has yet been fatal .
I am especially pleased that there is a broad consensus about the need for public health to be given top priority in the EU Treaty and in all EU activities in general .
I listened to Mr Panella talk of the paradox , and it is indeed a paradox , that we have protection from zoonoses and no protection for human health .
This is something that must also be addressed at the Convention ; but perhaps there could be joint actions in this direction even now .
This prospect is now a possibility and we , the presidency , agree with - and we do not just agree , we are backing - the Commission 's efforts to promote the foundation of a disease prevention and control centre in general , not just for communicable diseases .
There are diseases which are as important and harmful as communicable diseases .
Something like the Centre of Disease Control in the United States .
I should like to say something about what was to be expected from this Extraordinary Council and what ultimately came of it . To start with , I think that it was very positive that this Council was held and that , as a result of SARS , public health was the focus of attention not just of the ministers but of public opinion in Europe .
Secondly , as a text of commonly accepted conclusions had somehow to be drafted , it was only natural for this text not to contain contradictory positions .
The text in general was the result of compromise .
Nonetheless , there were recommendations on important measures , such as air travel .
Emphasis was put , and is being put in the World Health Organisation , on departure controls at exit points .
However , this does not mean that there should not be controls .
The Commission and the Council recommended that there should at least be some sort of administrative - not public health or medical - control , as the Italian minister , Mr Sirchia insisted .
But however many controls we conduct at entry points , when we are up against a virus with a ten-day incubation period , it is only natural that we should have limited results , because people entering the country are healthy .
Almost all cases in countries other than the basic countries , by which I mean China , Hong Kong and Singapore , are people who entered other countries as healthy people and later manifested the disease .
Consequently , any entry controls will restrict considerably but will not wipe out the danger of bringing in the virus .
A great many topics were touched on . However , everyone agreed on the need for a common European policy on the issue and on health matters in general .
The presidency believes that it is possible , on the basis of the specific conditions which prevail in the country and how the dangers which come from outside are perceived and evaluated , for every Member State to take the corresponding measures .
However , there are some which should be joint measures for all the Member States of the European Union and , first and foremost , there is a need for coordination , at least at the information level .
A common compulsory information centre , as is the case now with the network for compulsory registration of all probable and possible cases is , I think , an important step because this will give us the epidemiological picture on the basis of which certain measures can be taken to deal with the situation .
On the subject of research , the presidency agrees with maximum possible support for research activities at European level .
There should be a common fund , in addition to the fund already set up in Directorate XII , a special fund to deal with this sort of emergency .
However , we should not forget that most research is carried out in universities and large international pharmaceutical companies .
On the other hand , there can be no doubt that we also need European research activity .
Another question arises , the question of support for those areas affected by the virus , so that they can take the necessary measures .
As Mr Liese said , we must not overlook the fact that , if the cases in China had been reported promptly , we probably would not have reached this point .
This is something that should serve as a lesson to us all from now on ; that there are no borders and that , whatever happens anywhere in the world needs to be reported , there should be a reporting centre and that is precisely what the World Health Organisation is .
However , we need similar centres at regional level , such as the surveillance network of the European Union , to which we should report .
To conclude , may I say that , generally , what happened at the Extraordinary Council on 6 May was a very good beginning .
The ordinary Council of Ministers will meet on 2 June , by which time more facts will have been gathered , account will be taken of all the observations made by the honourable Members of the European Parliament and , I think , the Member States of the European Union will be in a position to be more coordinated and more specific about the measures which need to be taken at European level .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , I wish to begin by taking this opportunity to welcome the observers .
I am delighted to see them here in Strasbourg .
We have spent many meetings discussing the arrival of observers in the Committee on Budgets .
It is good to have them here to be able to listen to this important debate .
This is one of the first issues in budgetary terms to affect them directly .
I would also like to thank all my colleagues and the budget secretariat for their work and cooperation in producing these estimates .
2004 is an ' E-year ' : it is a year of enlargement , an electoral year and , if the 1999 election results are anything to go by , the end-of-term year for over 56 % of Members .
All these factors will have significant political , structural and budgetary implications .
Thus these estimates for 2004 involve some profound changes that make budgetary planning a little more challenging .
In addition to the challenges posed by enlargement and the elections , Parliament will also face considerable changes in 2004 , such as the possible adoption of the Statute for Members , the increase in the total number of Members , the revision of staff regulations and a reform of its administrative structure with a view to improving service to Members .
The precise budgetary implications of some of these changes are not yet determined and , therefore , are not fully incorporated into these estimates and will have to be taken into consideration during the first reading of the 2004 budget in the autumn .
However , I would like to expand on some of the issues I have just touched on .
Firstly , the Statute for Members : I very much hope that we will have a Statute for Members in effect next year .
The lack of transparency in the travel regime and the general allowance regime does more to undermine the credibility of this House than any other factor .
Therefore , I would urge this Parliament to do its level best to ensure that the appropriations put in reserve are actually utilised for this purpose .
Whilst I am on perks and privileges , I would like to refer to the amendment by the PPE-DE Group on the extension of the health insurance scheme to former Members .
I am astonished that the right-wing British Conservatives have tabled this .
They always claim that they are the champions of the fight against the gravy train and here they are , in complete contradiction , asking for an extension of the scheme , which is totally unjustifiable , which will only benefit a few Members at enormous cost to the taxpayer , and which will be extremely difficult to administer .
What is even more disappointing is that the Quaestors have sent an e-mail to all Members urging them to vote for this .
It is an absolute disgrace .
I do not know how Mr Balfe and others can justify this particular expenditure to their constituents .
The Bureau has had serious reservations about this , has not entered any funding for this and , owing to legal reasons , has referred it back .
There are also important budgetary considerations .
We cannot simply look at the immediate impact of such a measure , but need to examine what this could cost in the long run .
It could be very expensive .
It is not just the question of the wisdom of agreeing a special deal for the outgoing Members of this Parliament that could be open to all sorts of legal challenges from every other former Member , but it is also morally wrong for us to go down this route .
Therefore , I am advising this House to vote against paragraph 3 in my report , or to support the amendment tabled by the Verts / ALE Group . Let us not fool ourselves .
These two issues are not just technical internal matters ; they will run and run in the press of many countries leading up not just to next year 's election but for many years to come .
Next year 's election - apart from a huge turnover of Members in this House , combined with the increase in its membership by a fifth - will be one of the biggest transitions in the history of this Parliament .
Whilst we have made preparations in our physical environment and our linguistic regime , in the hemicycles and so on , we have not adequately addressed many very important issues concerning information , communication and IT strategies .
We need to ensure that we counter the democratic deficit argument in terms of our say in legislation .
Therefore , for us , the electoral turnout is of paramount importance .
We need to do more to make the citizens aware of Parliament 's work , to increase their interest in our work and to ensure greater participation .
For me , information policy is of key importance .
I know that the Bureau has now adopted a report of activities with a view to the European elections .
However , this lacks ambition and innovation .
Clear strategies and plans need to be in place now if they are to have any effect .
This is not just Parliament 's role .
I have to tell the Commission frankly that I have been disappointed with the lack of progress the Interinstitutional Working Group has made .
It has failed to get our key priorities and messages across to the citizen .
The Commission and the Member States have let us down .
I urge them to act together and make greater progress in this area .
Whilst one of our main objectives in the last few years has been to get closer to the citizen , our technology is still somewhere in the 20th century .
We appear to have a very slow , tortoise-like evolution in our information and communication policy , whilst our costs are haring away .
Given that IT expenditure in Parliament is one of the highest compared with other institutions , I would like an explanation as to why the Europarl site is not state-of-the-art or very user-friendly , and why we have limited access to technology and video-compositing facilities .
Where has this money gone ?
Having said that , I am pleased to note that we are finally making progress in Internet broadcasting .
I believe that our proceedings in this Chamber today are being broadcast live .
We have temporary multilingual information panels across Parliament 's building here .
This is an important step forward on the eve of enlargement next May .
However , concerning other issues , such as canteens , the environment in Brussels , accessibility of the buildings and the car service , we need to be a lot more ambitious .
In the context of all of this , I welcome the efforts by the administration and the Bureau to modernise not just Parliament 's staff policy but the way we deal with staffing matters .
We need to move from a pure administration aspect of staff matters to a more modern , strategic and forward-looking staff management and also recognise that information technology has changed the way we work and look at our administration .
Although this will not have a major impact on the 2004 budget , I would like to invite the Secretary-General to continue to pursue his efforts in this area .
I know there are some very difficult decisions that will have an impact on establishment plans , but it is important that we continue to evolve and look at the best way we can use our human resources .
That brings me to budgetary rigour .
If this is to have real meaning , we have to have more rationalisation and leaner management structures and grasp the nettle of multilingualism to improve efficiency across a number of areas .
Parliament must continue to apply this policy and provide the best value for money for the European taxpayer as well as to continue to make the best use of available resources in the current budget .
We can only convince people externally that we are applying budgetary rigour if we can demonstrate it internally .
We can achieve this through improved presentation and transparency of the budget .
Yet there is very little evidence that a number of our requests have been taken seriously .
We have a classic situation here where ideas are crushed not by suppressing them but by ignoring them .
There are two main areas I want to touch on briefly : we need to improve the presentation and accountability of the budget in every area , and that applies equally to the political groups .
Finally , before we begin the vote I will announce a technical adjustment , namely the fact that we have reached an agreement with the Council on the adjustment of the financial perspective .
There is no need for this phrase in the text any more .
Mr President , I endorse the fact that this budget for Parliament and the other institutions is indeed a very important matter .
With enlargement we have to be most careful that we use money to the best advantage , right across the board .
I would like to go through one or two detailed matters before I tackle the issue of health insurance .
The car service is often abused and we have to make sure that it is very carefully controlled indeed .
Concerning languages , technology and the Internet , we need to expand the services to ensure that we are ever more efficient and put our money to the best use at all times .
Regarding staffing , we have already helped , as far as the PPE-DE is concerned , to trim down some of the expectations .
This relates to assistants to the vice-presidents , where there was going to be considerable extra cost amounting to several hundreds of thousands of euros .
We are making sure that whilst there will be upgradings in line with the promotion aspects of the service commitments , we will not be allowing the fast-tracking that was destined to lead to this enormous extra cost in the coming year or two .
We will also be making sure that there are no assistants helping out committee chairmen .
We see no need for that .
We will also be very carefully monitoring the number of assistants helping out Quaestors .
I would like to make sure that Amendment No 7 is adopted .
This repairs some damage that was done in the earlier versions of this report by Neena Gill .
It concerns the Association of Former Members .
They have produced all the necessary reports , but they have to have meetings in June , which does not tie in with our budget calendar .
It is no place of ours to criticise them and therefore I hope that we can pass Amendment No 7 , which welcomes the decision of the Bureau , concerning the costs of meetings of this association .
It is doing an excellent job in keeping former Members informed .
I turn now to the contentious matter raised and the reference to the Greens ' amendment on health insurance .
If we as Parliamentarians do not safeguard against illness of our Members , I do not believe we are doing our duty .
We must ensure that the onerous duties placed on us of travelling extensively , lengthy debates and discussions and busy programmes in our regions and our countries throughout the European Union are reflected in a proper health insurance which is up and running and cost effective .
I would like to read clause 3 in full , to show that this is not a final decision , but simply open-mindedness with a view to keeping this matter under review .
I quote : ' ? is willing to consider entering appropriations for the extension of the current health insurance scheme to former Members and looks forward to detailed proposals being submitted in due course . '
I would emphasise also that if the MEP Statute comes in , as mentioned earlier , this would probably be embraced within it .
The final decision is one for the Bureau of this Parliament .
All I am saying is that we , as the Committee on Budgets , should take the necessary steps to ensure that we have some allowance and that we will consider the figures in the next few months .
Mr President , I too would like to thank Mrs Gill very much for all the work that she has put into this report .
She has made it the essence of her work to give the taxpayer value for money and I would very much like to support her in this .
One of the most controversial points , as is evident from this debate , is health care costs .
I am really hoping to be able to persuade Mr Dover not to extend the health insurance scheme to former Members .
What is so wrong with it ?
The costs may and Mrs Gill has already gone into detail on this point be limited now , but over the years these costs will of course increase enormously .
But then that is the financial side of the matter .
There is however also a matter of principle to consider , one that Mr Virrankoski has already touched upon .
Until we have a Statute for Members , Members of the European Parliament will continue receiving the same salary as the Members of Parliament in their country of origin .
The Court of Justice has decided that pensions and health insurance all fall under the heading of salary .
I am not even in agreement with the present Members of Parliament receiving this health insurance because I think that it is a bonus on top of salary .
But now to extend this bonus is really unacceptable , it is simply old-fashioned grubbing about in the European cashbox and that we must not do .
Once we have a European Statute , it will be a different matter and then we can talk about it again .
Until that time there is simply no question of us being able to assent to it .
Mr President , since we are talking of waste , the city of Strasbourg suddenly comes to mind .
Which brings me to the fact that last time , during the voting on the calendar of meetings , we took the democratic decision in this place that next year there will be only 10 sessions in Strasbourg .
Now I know perfectly well that a whole box of tricks is going to be opened up to ensure that it will again be 11 or 12 , but this democratic decision that only 10 sessions have been scheduled continues to exist until that time .
I therefore propose that tomorrow the President or the rapporteur actually corrects recital G. It must be stated under G that next year there are not 11 sessions scheduled here in Strasbourg but 10 , as decided by this plenary .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , first of all , to greet our fellow Members from the states which are no longer candidate countries but are not yet full Members .
We are delighted to have them here , to complete what has been a lengthy , at times difficult process , but at the end of which , I am glad to say , the desired result has been fully achieved .
The preliminary draft budget presented today by the Commission is , by force of circumstances , an atypical draft , in that it is to be considered to be in two separate parts .
The first part will enter into force for the current 15 Member States on 1 January 2004 . The second part , however , will apply to the Union of 25 and will enter into force as of 1 May 2004 .
Assessing it is therefore not an easy task , and there are some political aspects which , in my opinion , must not be underestimated : first and foremost , the age-old question of payment appropriations .
At EUR 100.6 billion , the volume of expenditure has been increased by hardly 3.3 % of the 2003 figure ; moreover , the 2003 budget related solely to the Europe of 15 .
This extremely small increase is explained by a reduction of approximately 2 % in the volume of expenditure laid down for the European Union of 15 .
All this is absurd .
Indeed , not only does the Commission not intend , once and for all , to concentrate on resolving the problem of the RALs , which has been one of Parliament 's priorities for years , but , what is more , it is presenting a draft which will lead to exactly the same situation being repeated with regard to the countries joining the Union as of 2004 .
Then there is the question of heading 3 .
The increase in the ceiling , obtained by Parliament , is a significant result , which will allow us to finance some particularly sensitive policies with an easy mind , but I still feel it is not sufficient .
If we genuinely want a political Union , a direction for all the political groupings present in the Chamber - which we can all endeavour to follow - then we must also give them the working tools they need , the instruments necessary to achieve our goals .
Mr President , we can broadly support Mrs Gill 's thorough report .
We warmly endorse the plea for strict budgetary discipline by the European Parliament .
In view of the forthcoming enlargement , Parliament will have to apply itself to its core activities more than ever .
The primary task of this House , the supervision of the European Commission , must have priority , in addition to the responsibility for legislation in which the Parliament has the power of codecision .
Reports and resolutions falling outside this scope should take up less agenda time and staff effort .
An important theme in this report is Parliament 's multilingualism .
Diversity as an essential characteristic of European cultures finds expression in the existence of many languages .
The accessibility and comprehensibility of European political debate for citizens from all the Member States is crucial for the quality of the democracy .
Of course this does not affect the fact that we look critically at the expenditure for multilingualism .
The Bureau of this Parliament should verify whether the scale of the translation and interpreting service for each language is indeed tailored to actual need .
The workload for each language must be divided proportionally .
I have the impression that it varies somewhat from one language to another and is certainly not proportional to the number of Members who speak a language . I understand for example that the degree of use of Dutch and Italian in this House is of the same order of magnitude .
Any overcapacity must be scrapped or redistributed .
Another point , Mr President , is the very high average salary level of officials working for Parliament .
The payment system conceals elements that for the most part stem from the early days and that are now no longer valid .
The salaries of official staff should bear a reasonable relationship to the payments that the Members of Parliament receive , on which point I have to note that there is still no sign of the Statute for Members - a disgrace , for both the Council and the Parliament .
Closely tied up with this are travelling expenses , a topic in which voters have considerable interest .
The importance of tighter criteria that are as objective as possible for allowances is evident .
In view of the experiences in the current session , this House must make a critical review of the weeks in Strasbourg , which must , among other things , consider the additional costs involved with no additional results in return .
Mr President , allow me firstly to thank Mrs Gill for the work she has put into the 2004 budget .
It has been major , important and time-consuming work , because we in actual fact have demanding and important tasks ahead of us .
During my time as budget rapporteur a year ago , I observed that we were in practice concerned with three priorities .
The first of these was the preparations for the forthcoming enlargement , which was less certain then than it is now .
The second was necessary institutional reforms .
These reforms are just as important now as they were then .
The third priority was to deal with all these matters within the budgetary framework .
A year ago , we gave Parliament and other institutions the ability to engage in the long-term financial management of these matters , especially by means of the frontloading carried out during the autumn of last year .
The priorities were then to be converted into figures and the calculations into euros and cents .
The situation is now exactly the same a year later .
When , last December , the Copenhagen European Council decided to adopt a big bang approach , there were no doubt many of us who thought that this was one of the finest moments of all in the entire history of the EU , with a further ten countries in line to become members in time for the next elections to the European Parliament in 2004 .
This was subsequently followed up by decisions here in Parliament on 9 April , the signing of the accession treaties in Athens a week later and a number of successful referendums , most recently in Lithuania , something that imposes extraordinarily large demands , especially upon Europe 's elected parliaments .
We have no greater challenge than this .
We have just had the great pleasure of welcoming 162 observers from all those candidate countries that have carried out their negotiations successfully .
All this is taking place in accordance with the timetable we discussed a year ago .
That the EU and the European Parliament must put these things into effect is , of course , self-evident to all of us who see the reunification of Europe as the most important task of all .
This applies especially , of course , to the present generation of politicians .
There were therefore no great difficulties in supporting the majority of the proposals tabled by Mrs Gill .
I have just one thing to say by way of warning : it is our priorities with which we must be concerned .
We sometimes see a tendency on the part of rapporteurs , as well as on the part of other MEPs , also to want to smuggle in other aspects .
This leads to a risk of the budget 's possibly becoming difficult to manage within the framework set .
It is in this situation that both budgetary authorities need to be firm and decisive .
I at least hope that Parliament and the Council will reach common , early agreement this year , in the same way that we did a year ago .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rapporteurs , observers from the accession countries , it is a great pleasure to be here today to present the 2004 preliminary draft budget in this new setting .
The 2004 Budget is a truly historic one .
For the first time it covers 25 Member States .
From 1 May 2004 , the new Member States will participate in all of the support programmes in the European budget .
It is also the first time that an enlargement is not taking place on 1 January of a particular year , but rather later in the year .
This presents a particular challenge for the budget .
From 1 January to the end of April we will have a budget for an EU of 15 ; thereafter it will be increased for the EU of 25 .
The budget plans therefore contain both the figures for the EU of 15 and those for the enlarged Union , but all of our deliberations will from the outset be in respect of the European Union of 25 Member States .
The third exceptional feature of this budget is that the European Union 's budgetary reform is now fully in force and for the first time the official budget will be broken down by policy area , that is in accordance with the principle of activity-based budgeting .
The budget is however still available to the budgetary authority in its traditional form for information .
In addition , you also have a new working document , which states the targets that are to be met over the next year for each policy area .
This 2004 budgetary procedure will therefore certainly be an innovative one .
The Commission 's preliminary draft budget was subject to the framework that was newly established for the financial perspective in view of enlargement , as adopted by the European Parliament on 9 April , which of course incorporates the results of Copenhagen , that is the results of the negotiations between the Council and the applicant countries , as well as the results of the negotiations between the Council and Parliament .
At this stage I should like once again to thank all of those who were involved in the negotiations .
It was very good that nearly all of the issues surrounding the financial framework in connection with enlargement were cut and dried before the accession treaties were signed and before the beginning of the 2004 budgetary procedure , so that all of the decisions regarding the framework had been made .
What then are the key figures for the 2004 preliminary draft budget ?
In 2004 , commitment appropriations will increase to EUR 112 billion , of which EUR 11.8 billion are earmarked for commitments in the new Member States .
According to our proposal , the European Union of 15 Member States will only receive an increase of 0.7 % , which takes into account the political priorities of stability and sustainable growth .
Expenditure , that is payments , will , according to the Commission proposal , total EUR 100.6 billion in 2004 .
That is a moderate increase of 3.3 % on the 2003 Budget .
This relatively moderate increase is possible because of a 2 % fall in the budget provisions for expenditure for the EU of 15 .
The reason for this is that fewer payment appropriations are needed in the Structural Funds next year than have been this year because the final payments for the old programmes are entered in this year 's budget .
Of the total budget of EUR 100 billion that we are proposing , payments of EUR 5 billion are set aside for the new Member States .
In addition , payments from the pre-accession programmes will also continue to flow into the accession countries next year , so that overall we guarantee that all of the new Member States are net beneficiaries , as was of course intended at the beginning of the negotiations .
Agricultural expenditure - I now turn to the individual categories - is estimated at EUR 48 billion .
Incidentally , in 2004 the reform of agricultural policy will only be visible in a few specific areas , for example in the milk sector ; all of the other effects will only be felt later on .
Of the total of EUR 48 billion , EUR 6.5 billion is earmarked for supporting rural development , EUR 1.7 billion of which for the new Member States .
Overall , next year 's agriculture budget has two unusual features as far as the new Member States are concerned : firstly , the fact that direct payments to farmers in the new Member States will only take effect in the budget in 2005 , because of course we have a time lag in the rules here .
The second unusual feature is that support for developing rural areas in the new Member States is substantially higher - disproportionately so - than it is in the EU of 15 .
A further peculiarity is that the programmes providing support for rural development in the new Member States are so-called differentiated expenditure .
This decision takes account of the fact that the administrative capacity to manage the programmes first has to be built .
As regards the agriculture budget , I might say that , as it does every year , the Commission will also be tabling a letter of amendment to the 2004 Budget in October . This will take into account the latest assessments of developments on the markets and of course also the fact that at the moment there is a great deal of movement in the euro-dollar exchange rate , which of course also influences overall agricultural expenditure .
In the enlarged Union the Structural Funds as a whole will play a very significant role .
They are of course the main instruments through which we grant financial support so as to speed up and support the process of economic convergence .
That is why we provide for an overall increase in commitment appropriations of 20.8 % for the Structural Funds .
A large proportion of this is allocated to the Cohesion Fund , which of course provides funds specifically for cofinancing transport and environmental protection infrastructure .
The greatest increase is for internal policies , in what is termed Category 3 .
Overall , an increase of 27 % in commitment appropriations is provided for here .
This is partly due to the fact that Parliament asked for additional room for manoeuvre in this particular area .
Category 3 of the budget is of course characterised by all of our political priorities : enlargement , stability and sustainable growth .
For the new Member States , funds are , in the first instance , made available to enable them to participate in existing Community programmes , which they already do in some cases .
In accordance with the decisions made in Copenhagen , funds will also be made available for completely new programmes in the enlargement countries : EUR 317 million for implementing the Schengen Agreement , that is , for building the necessary infrastructure to secure the external border ; EUR 221 million for increasing administrative capacity in the accession countries and EUR 138 million for decommissioning nuclear power stations .
Overall , the preliminary draft budget provides for very high increases for promoting an area of security , freedom and justice .
Research expenditure is also permitted to grow next year to EUR 4.8 billion .
This shows that , in the enlarged Union too , supporting the Lisbon objectives of developing a knowledge-based society enjoys a very high priority in the European budget .
Many support programmes such as research , environmental protection and youth exchanges , to name but a few , are multiannual programmes that are adopted by codecision .
That is why new provisions will have to be made for the coming years , that is for the time that these programmes have left to run , to take account of enlargement .
The Commission has tabled proposals for topping up these programmes and we should aim to make the decisions on adapting them to enlargement as quickly as possible , so that we can plan for this .
This is of course particularly important for the accession countries .
In its proposal the Commission has taken into account Parliament 's priorities as set out in the opinions of the individual committees and contained in the report by Mr Colom i Naval and Mr Böge .
As regards foreign policy measures , the Commission is proposing to enter into commitments worth almost EUR 5 billion , which is in line with 2003 levels .
For the Balkans , just to mention a few points , the level of aid should stabilise after the years of reconstruction .
The funds are available for this .
This is also a clear indication of the European Union 's commitments in this region .
In the interests of having a more intensive neighbourhood policy , the Commission is also proposing to increase funds for the MEDA Programme , namely by 14 % , and for Afghanistan the funds are to be adjusted in line with pledges made at international level .
Two countries , Bulgaria and Romania , are still in the pre-accession category of the group of countries with which negotiations have not yet been concluded .
All of the institutions have pledged to grant more aid to these States , so that they can achieve their aim of joining the Union in 2007 .
In the coming year , an increase of 20 % in the aid for Bulgaria and Romania is provided for .
For Turkey , the funds in the pre-accession strategy are also being substantially increased , and I very much hope that the funds for supporting reforms will be able to be used .
Finally , I should mention that next year so-called freestanding lump-sum payments , or cash facilities , of EUR 1.4 billion will be made to the new Member States .
Administrative expenditure will have to be adapted to the new requirements .
The Commission 's proposals contain 780 new posts for the Commission ; this is in line with the plan that we presented to you last year and is intended to ensure firstly that we can manage expenditure on enlargement , secondly that colleagues from the new Member States can gradually be incorporated in the administration and thirdly that we can also cope with the extra languages .
Although the preliminary draft budget contains , as a whole , some very ambitious spending programmes , the principle of budgetary discipline also needs to be observed , and the Commission proposal does so .
Overall , the Commission 's proposed preliminary draft budget is EUR 3.4 billion below the ceiling for commitment appropriations and is well below the ceiling for payment appropriations .
With the exception of the Structural Funds , the preliminary draft budget leaves margins , that is room for manoeuvre , in all areas .
The budget as a percentage of the EU 's economic output , that is the European State share , will even fall this year compared with last year , below 1 % .
This shows that both ambitious spending programmes and enlargement on the one hand and budgetary discipline on the other can be accommodated .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are going to be very many new aspects to the budgetary procedure that lies before us .
This will require all of us to make a great effort , but the decisions that have already been made in the past mean that we have a good basis on which to work , and I think that the wonderful fact alone that this will be the first budget for the enlarged Union will spur all of us on so that we can achieve a good outcome in December .
Thank you very much !
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her explanation and I should also like to say that I am very pleased that we are able to hold this first debate on the budget that affects the new countries in the presence of the observers from these new countries .
The budget procedure , as the Commissioner has already said , will apply to 25 countries .
Parliament 's aim - as we have explained in the guidelines - is to vote on a budget for 25 countries in December , on the understanding that the budget for the ten new countries will not take effect until 1 May of next year .
How that will all come about from a legal point of view we shall have to sort out in the course of the year .
Activity-based budgeting , as described by the Commissioner , has many advantages .
The committees will be able to see which budget lines concern them individually and how they can amend them .
I think that it is also important for Parliament to know , and I shall also be referring to this , what relationship this new system bears to the prospects , because we shall always as far as possible have to respond to what was agreed in all the categories in Copenhagen .
Another general point : as a Parliament we consider it important for the budget powers , the budget procedure , to keep pace with the legislative procedure as developed by the Commission in the course of the year .
When I look at the guidelines adopted by this Parliament in March during the vote on the standpoint of the Parliament , then at first sight the Commission has acted wonderfully well in accordance with those guidelines .
The Parliament had sought an austerity budget .
As the Commissioner has already said , the payment credits are currently 0.99 % of GNP for 25 countries , last year they were also 0.99 % , but then for 15 Member States .
So in this regard they have remained the same .
How things pan out though we shall only see in the course of the year .
Parliament has the same priority as the Commission : to make a success of enlargement .
The Parliament mentions a number of points in this regard , including in particular the enlargement of the administrative capacity of the Member States .
They must be able to make the plans for receiving the money , they must be able to put them into effect and the financial control must be effective .
We shall most certainly see whether the 221 million that the Commission has set aside for this is sufficient .
As the Commissioner has already said , a great many parts of category III must be determined under the codecision procedure .
We shall have to see whether or not the 2.5 billion that the Commission has proposed is sufficient .
A third point , also made by the Parliament , is the elaboration of the Lisbon strategy .
The Commission devotes a whole page to everything it can do .
We shall also be looking at this item by item .
Now I come to the individual chapters of the financial prospects .
Agriculture : at present , we find little in the Commission 's proposals of what the Parliament proposed in the guidelines .
It may come later .
Development of marker vaccines , insurance systems , things of that kind , are not to be found .
We have noted that there is a 1.4 billion margin in the budget .
We are hoping that it is sufficient even if the euro rises more in relation to the dollar .
Structural policy : the slogan is that we must do what we have promised .
The big question is whether that is possible with the current level of payment appropriations .
They are not being increased very much .
There is still an enormous amount as yet unpaid .
What relationship does it bear ?
This too is an issue for Parliament .
The biggest increase , as the Commissioner has already said , takes place in chapter III : internal policy .
Strengthening of border controls , the position of Kaliningrad , attention to nuclear safety and so on and so forth .
One thing we have not yet mentioned since Parliament 's guidelines and since the budget was printed , is the disturbing development of SARS all over the world .
Perhaps Europe will have to do something about it .
The Commissioner has already gone into detail about Chapter IV , on foreign policy .
As far as Afghanistan is concerned , we shall probably have to adhere to the international accords .
No mention has yet been made of Iraq .
What does the Commissioner - or what do we - expect to happen there ?
This we shall also have to discuss .
My final point , Mr President , has to do with administrative costs : a very sharp increase in staffing levels with 780 new posts and also a very sharp rise in the costs of buildings .
In all categories , in all policy areas , we see a steep increase for buildings .
It cannot come from Berlaymont alone .
Where it does come from , we shall also have to sort out in the course of the year .
Finally , category 7 , the title of which has been changed .
We do not yet know precisely what implications this will have , what kind of openings might still come .
I do not know if it will be the case as soon as next year , but it could be .
We have noted the increase for Turkey , Romania and Bulgaria , which are quite diverse countries .
This too we shall examine critically .
Mr President , I can only express the hope , as did the Commissioner , that by December we shall have a good level of cooperation between Commission , Council and Parliament to produce a good budget for 25 countries .
Mr President , I just want to raise two points : one concerns the extra money in category 3 that we negotiated with the Council at the last Conciliation Committee meeting concerning the deal at Copenhagen , mainly concerned with the codecision procedures .
I would like to remind the other committees that what we are trying to do , or at least what we and the Commission are trying to do is to ensure a legislative proposal is presented to Parliament and to the Council this year , hopefully between July and September , so that we can actually enshrine in legislation the amounts needed between now and the end of 2006 .
That of course means the committees which are involved in codecision reacting rather swiftly to make sure that we have that information so that we can make sure that this budget is complete .
This is because what we want to do is to have a trialogue and a conciliation meeting with the Council in July to formalise this , not just for the 2004 budget , but also for the other two budgets .
The other point I want to make concerns the format in which the budget is now presented .
This is the new ABB format which Parliament asked for and insisted upon and which the Commission has now presented .
The trouble is we do not know how to use it .
We had a presentation last year to inform everyone , which we all conveniently forgot , and have had another presentation this year , but now we have the reality of the situation .
We have actually seen the documents in their real true-life format , which means that we do not know how to make amendments to them .
The fact that we work to financial perspectives within different categories or with different categories means that if we use the ABB system we will not know what the ceilings are within the different categories .
So in the next 20 minutes , when we meet as the Committee on Budgets , Members - because we are simple souls after all - will have the new budget presented in two formats : one in the ABB which we have insisted upon , and one in the old format which we can understand .
What we have to decide , when it comes to the votes later in the year , is how we are going to vote .
This is an important issue and I want to thank the Commission for presenting the budget in the new format , whatever problems we have with it .
I am sure it will give a lot more transparency and enable a lot more understanding in the long run .
When we have a new financial perspective - who knows - it may even be in line with the ABB format of budgeting . Who knows ? !
That concludes the item .
The next item is the Commission communication on Euromed cooperation in the energy sector .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that is an extraordinarily bright idea , but we will first have to read your document and see what is proposed in detail .
I could envisage us concluding treaties with the states surrounding the European Union , and all the technical integral parts of the Treaty on European Union or of our future constitution then applying to these states as well , so that - in the area of energy , for example - these states would have a share in the liberalisation of the energy market , in the projects for trans-European networks , and so on .
If that is what it is to boil down to , then it is a very good idea .
I do , though , see this as raising a number of questions , to some of which you have referred .
For a start , why , if there is to be cooperation with the Mediterranean - for the thing is called Euromed - then why not with Russia and with other states ?
Why , in point of fact , is this cooperation to be only in the field of energy ?
Are there no other integral parts of the Treaty that could be used in exactly the same way ?
It is unfortunate that we will then , in accordance with our own Euratom Treaty , always have to divide our activities into nuclear and non-nuclear , so it would appear that we need two different treaties .
Far from the least important question is whether this sort of cooperation in competition - and competition is what this is about - has to be backed up by joint undertakings in research , and whether there is also financial support for one project or another .
So I look forward with eager expectation to what you are going to put before us on this ; perhaps you could respond to one or other of these questions right now ?
As I have said , I think this is a brilliant idea , one that needs specific elements added to it .
I am sure that we will have discussions on that in Parliament as well .
I do not want to be a bore , but , as you said I had not put a question , let me ask what response we have had from these countries .
Are they interested in such a solution ?
I am sure you have had talks with some of them .
Perhaps you could say something further on the subject .
Yes , they do have a great interest .
As I have said , on Wednesday of next week we will present this communication to all the countries of the Mediterranean Rim .
As is well known , we have a structured dialogue with Russia in the field of energy .
And with other countries as well , such as Norway .
In the case of the Balkans , the whole issue of the electricity market has been raised ; in relation to the Balkan electricity market , we expect to be able to ensure that it is continued with a similar integration , by means of gas .
I could also mention the dialogue we are holding with all the other countries , which have an interest in this whole global approach , which provides a picture of what the objective is and will facilitate the rationalisation of investments in the future .
There is clear interest , not only on the part of the Mediterranean countries - I would insist - but also on the part of all the other countries , including those with which there is already a structured dialogue in place .
That concludes the item .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.22 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

The next item is Question Time ( B5-0089 / 2003 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
The Commission proposes that Question No 25 by Mr Collins be taken following Questions Nos 26 and 27 .
I imagine there is no problem with this .
It will make the order more logical .
Part I
Question No 26 by Paulo Casaca ( H-0254 / 03 ) :
Subject : Storm of 11-12 April 2003 in the Azores
On 11 and 12 April 2003 , the Portuguese Autonomous Region of the Azores was hit by a severe storm which caused substantial damage to housing and public infrastructures on all the islands of the archipelago , and had a particularly destructive impact on agriculture .
The author of this question was able to ascertain in person the extent and severity of the damage caused to the various forms of greenhouse cultivation , especially to the pineapple greenhouses on the island of São Miguel .
Fruit and vegetable production ( above all , bananas , oranges and passion-fruit ) is severely affected , and the vineyards have been all but wiped out .
In view of the frequency of such storms in the Azores , the regional programme under the Structural Funds ( PRODESA ) already provides for specific actions in case of natural disasters .
However , there remain two aspects for which further information from the Commission would be helpful .
Can the Commission state whether the impact of this storm will be taken into account in the decisions to be taken on the regional allocation of the programming and efficiency reserves under the Community support framework ?
Can it also state whether , on similar lines to those applied this summer to Central European farmers affected by bad weather conditions , it is considering specific measures for the farmers affected with a view to minimising the adverse effect on their income ?
Mr President , I wish first of all to thank the Commissioner for her words , which of course express the Commission 's position on the disastrous effect of the storms that we experienced in the Azores on 11 and 12 April .
I should like to say first that it is extremely hard to put into words the things that I witnessed over those few days , because this was a storm made up of incredibly strong cyclonic winds , which caused extremely widespread damage , both to buildings and to fruit trees and forestry in general .
Above all , however , because this storm led to an invasion of salt , which covered the entire lower part of all the islands in the Azores .
This salt completely covered Graciosa , for example , resulting in the chemical destruction of practically everything that lived there .
The losses to farming as a whole are enormous , with vines and vegetable crops being totally destroyed .
I know , as the Commissioner said , that the regional authorities have not yet sent the Commission a report on this disaster and I know that this report will reach the Commission very soon , but I wanted to note now what has been said about the programming reserve and I also wanted to note the willingness demonstrated by the Commission to adopt measures for the agricultural sector .
I just wish to say that we are awaiting this information and we will of course give it our full attention .
As a result of my professional experience , I am well aware of what can happen with disasters in the agricultural sector and that there is particular fragility in this sector .
In this regard - as I said before - I would like to express my solidarity and I am sure that , at the appropriate moment , the Commission will make every effort possible within the framework of the relevant legislation .
I would remind the honourable Members that this is a time for specific questions to be dealt with in one minute .
It is not a time for statements or debates , although I understand that this serious storm warranted an additional explanation .
Question No 27 by Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines ( H-0289 / 03 ) :
Subject : Discharges of oil in Gibraltar
For years now , the area around Gibraltar has been the scene of constant discharges of oil into the sea during the refuelling , loading and unloading of vessels .
This has enormous environmental and economic impacts on nearby areas in Spain , since the economic activities there centre fundamentally on fishing and tourism .
This is just one example of highly polluting substances being discharged , but there are many others .
These discharges create eyesores for the public , have major economic repercussions and cause incalculable damage to the environment since they make any kind of normal activity impossible in the contaminated zone for a long time afterwards .
In view of disasters of this type and the Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on improving safety at sea in response to the Prestige accident ( COM / 2002 / 0681 final ) , when will the Commission present the assessment of whether current legislative and policy instruments for protecting the environment should be adapted in order to minimise the risk of accidents and the damage associated with them occurring ?
ESPart II
Mr President , I have asked for the floor , on the one hand , to congratulate the Commissioner on this vast and intelligent range of measures being adopted on oil spills and , at the same time , to ask a supplementary question about vessels cleaning out their hulls , which is becoming a real scourge on Portuguese coasts .
All countries which , like Portugal , are fortunate enough to have long coastlines , occasionally experience spills that turn up on beaches with no indication of where they have come from or of who is responsible .
I know that the measures that are being drawn up and which will be applied address this problem .
There is , however , a fundamental issue ; vigilance and monitoring .
The difficulty lies in identifying those who are responsible for spilling these substances .
I wish to ask the Commissioner whether measures are also being considered in the field of vigilance and monitoring .
Question No 28 by Carlos Lage ( H-0222 / 03 ) :
Subject : Appointment of a Portuguese official as Director-General for Press and Communication
During a parliamentary debate held on 26 March this year , in connection with a motion of censure , the Portuguese Prime Minister interpreted the appointment of a Portuguese as a director-general in the Commission as a diplomatic coup for his government and criticised the previous Socialist government 's alleged inability in this sphere .
Subsequently , the Commission 's representation in Portugal publicly explained that senior appointments in the Commission are based on merit and competence , the principle of equal opportunities and geographical balance .
The choice of a Portuguese for this position was doubtless due to a favourable judgment of his merits .
However , the statements made by the Prime Minister may give rise to doubts .
In view of this , can the Commission say whether the appointment of a Portuguese as Director-General for Press and Communication was based solely on an assessment of his abilities with reference to the relevant criteria or on diplomatic pressure on the part of the Portuguese Government ?
Mr President , I wish to thank Commissioner Kinnock for his answer .
It was clear , precise , and rigorous and I already believed that this senior official 's appointment had been inspired solely by criteria of merit and of geographical balance .
My question was clearly not intended to question this appointment , which gives me great pleasure , since it involves an extremely talented Portuguese citizen who will be occupying a key role in the Commission 's structure .
It is also clear , however , from the words that the Commissioner has just spoken , that no government , no prime minister , can claim any praise for this appointment or can claim it to be a matter for national self-congratulation , as if this were a heroic achievement .
I know perfectly well that governments and prime ministers , sometimes getting carried away on flights of rhetoric , like to pin European medals on their own chests .
This harms no one and I felt the form , content and subtleties of the Commissioner 's answer to be extremely enlightening .
Question No 29 by Christopher Heaton-Harris ( H-0267 / 03 ) :
Subject : Commission disciplinary procedure
Could the Commission state when Marta Andreasen was suspended from her work at the Commission ?
When were disciplinary proceedings started ?
At what stage are these disciplinary proceedings ?
How many other Commission staff have been suspended on full pay for over six months during the past four years ?
Questions to Commissioner Nielson
As the author is not present , Question No 30 lapses .
If the Commissioner will allow me , we will spend a little longer than twenty minutes in order to take advantage of the time saved with other Commissioners , if you are in agreement .
A little more than twenty minutes .
Question No 31 by Michl Ebner ( H-0219 / 03 ) :
Subject : Drinking water in developing countries and industrialised countries
Many countries , particularly developing countries , have no safe water supply .
Very often this is the cause of a variety of diseases and of the high infant mortality rate in third world countries .
What development aid measures is the European Commission taking in order to provide people in third world countries with access to clean drinking water ?
The drinking water problem is now affecting the industrialised countries as well , however .
In these countries people must be made aware of the need to save precious drinking water resources .
What steps is the European Commission taking in this area ?
What steps has it already taken ?
Mr President , I would like to warmly thank Commissioner Nielson for his statement , which was both informative and extensive .
The idea of establishing a water fund strikes me as very positive and , I believe , highly conducive to enabling the developing countries to be helped in a very special way , as this is direct , on-the-spot aid for specific projects , some of which give vast stretches of land the prospect of a future .
As regards the situation in the industrialised countries here in the European Union , I believe it to be an absolute necessity that , along with this new Water Framework Directive , we give priority to stepping up the monitoring , so that , when involving all the decision-makers and - as you said - coordinating policies on the environment , research , and the regions , not only will all the stakeholders be brought together , but the benefits will also be checked as they need to be .
Very briefly , the fund will not mean that we are asking for new money , additional money , from Member States .
It is mainly a method by which we would hope to accelerate the actual use of the funds which are already allocated for the 9th European Development Fund .
But I agree and I am happy about the support given to this idea .
On monitoring , I think it is quite clear that in our European Union framework it is really for Member States to deliver on the important issue of monitoring what has been decided carefully and highly professionally .
Commissioner , I wanted to put a question supplementary to Mr Ebner 's , one concerning development aid , which is your core responsibility .
To what extent does water policy , relating not only to drinking water but also to water for agriculture , play a pivotal role in two especially important war zones that we have to deal with at present , namely the area around the Euphrates and the Tigris - which also involves Turkey - and the Palestinian problem as a whole ?
I wanted to ask you whether you are conducting separate negotiations in these areas , where water both has an important part to play in peacemaking and could also trigger armed conflicts .
Question No 32 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0224 / 03 ) :
Subject : Reproductive health
What is the Commission doing to actively prevent abortions from being funded under international population and health programmes and related measures encompassing the area of ' reproductive health ' ?
Can the Commission rule this out with absolute certainty ?
Just two more brief supplementary questions : firstly , does the Commission check to see that all the organisations that are promoted or supported do not , in fact , fund abortions ?
Secondly , does development aid comply under all circumstances with the laws of developing countries on abortion , or is the attempt being made here to exert influence on legislation in those countries ?
As the author is not present , Question No 33 lapses .
Question No 34 by José Ribeiro e Castro ( H-0244 / 03 ) :
Subject : Angola : current situation and outlook for democracy
In view of the changing situation in Angola and its strategic importance at regional and international level , it is a priority to develop a range of policies which will contribute to the consolidation of peace , the development of democracy and the reconstruction of the country .
What is the Commission 's assessment of the current situation in Angola and its immediate future ?
What consideration is being given to the most serious humanitarian problems and the reintegration of ex-combatants ?
Has the Commission continued and strengthened the dialogue opened with all the political parties represented in the National Assembly , and with the churches and civil society ?
What is the state of play with regard to the Donors ' Conference ?
What progress has been made as regards the transparency of public accounts and revenue accruing from the exploitation of the country 's natural resources ?
Has the Commission been monitoring the specific situation of Cabinda , and what prospect is there that here too it might be possible to find a basis for democratic dialogue ?
What specific information does it have on the process of preparing and monitoring democratic , free and fair elections ?
What are the main measures being taken or prepared by the Commission in the context of cooperation with Angola in the following four areas : humanitarian aid ; social development ; reconstruction ; training for democracy ?
How does it see the future development of these programmes ?
Commissioner , I thank you for your extensive answer to my question .
I wish to encourage the Commission to pursue a more wide-ranging and more open dialogue with all political forces represented in the Angolan parliament and indeed with all forces in civil society and the churches .
This open dialogue is our best chance of helping to consolidate pluralism in Angola and this , in the long term , is our best chance of consolidating democracy and freedom in that country .
This has been demonstrated recently in a project with the Inter-denominational Committee for Peace in Angola ( COIEPA ) , and I would encourage the development of other Commission-funded projects .
On the other hand , the situation of the UNITA ex-combatants is extremely worrying .
I was part of an EP delegation that visited one of the camps and our feeling was that whilst the camps are working , things are more or less all right .
Difficult , but all right .
The worry is what will happen when the camps close , since things are extremely fragile , and it is taking a very long time to implement reintegration measures .
My question is whether the Commission would be willing to direct resources specifically to programmes for the vocational training and social reintegration of UNITA ex-combatants and for these programmes to be monitored by both sides .
This could be a way of following up the agreement of April last year in a practical way and of consolidating confidence and stability in Angola .
Commissioner , you should not be surprised by the fact that I too am congratulating you on the answer you have given us .
The Portuguese Members closely follow everything that happens in Angola and the European Union must pay particular attention to Angola , given that other countries , such as the United States , are extremely interested in Angola 's natural wealth .
It would also be rather negligent of the European Union not to view that country with solidarity in mind , which is crucial , but also bearing in mind the interests of the EU itself .
I genuinely believe , Commissioner , that the major test of Angola 's situation will be the presidential and legislative elections .
These elections will give us an accurate reading of the democratic and civil situation in Angola , and will be decisive . We must therefore pay the utmost attention to them .
Lastly , Commissioner , I wish to ask a question on Angola 's intervention in neighbouring countries - because the Angolan Government and its armed forces have indeed been involved in various conflicts in neighbouring countries .
Have there been any developments ?
Has Angola retreated to its borders and stopped intervening actively in the affairs of its neighbours ?
Question No 35 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0250 / 03 ) :
Subject : Convention on the Future of Europe
Would the Commission outline its views on whether the Convention on the Future of Europe is giving sufficient emphasis to the EU 's development cooperation priorities ?
The Commission believes that the draft text presented on 23 April contains many valuable elements .
In an effort to restructure , simplify and streamline texts some serious improvements were made .
As for the development cooperation priorities , draft Article 1 provides a good basis , but at the same time we sympathise with the draft amendments proposed by Parliament 's Committee on Development and Cooperation , notably where it suggests introducing references to good governance , environmental aspects and prevention of HIV / Aids .
The Commission believes that further improvements in the text are necessary .
The Commission submitted on 5 May suggestions to the Convention to do so , including the following important points .
Firstly , policy coherence ( Article 1 ( 3 ) ) , where we want the text to say that the EU will respect - this is the word - the principles and objectives of Article 1 in the development and implementation of external aspects of other Union policies .
Secondly , poverty focus ( Article 25 ) , where the Commission has proposed to make an explicit reference to the primary aim of eradicating poverty for EU policies in the sphere of development cooperation .
Thirdly , budgetisation of EDF ( Article 26 ( 4 ) ) , where the Commission wants to terminate the exceptional position of the ACP countries by deleting this paragraph and bringing , as a consequence , the EDF into the Union 's budget .
We have also noted the idea to set up a European voluntary Humanitarian Aid Corps .
It is not clear at this stage how it would operate .
We should not forget that the delivery of EU humanitarian aid is a serious business , which requires technical expertise , experience and a high degree of professionalism .
We work in dangerous corners of the world , where even the best-trained professionals are exposed to risks .
Therefore , it will not be easy to create this sort of peace corps .
We are committed to deliver effective support to people in often desperate situations , and we are working through the organisations we are funding .
We are capable of doing this better than most other donors .
Much needs to be done to bring this idea of a European voluntary Humanitarian Aid Corps into the arena of what I would recommend .
For the time being I remain sceptical about the idea .
Could I associate myself with the comments made by Mrs Kinnock and in particular support what she has said about good governance within developing countries .
May I ask about another priority within the Convention in relation to development , and something that he has prioritised , which is the causes of migration from developing countries , and that we maintain an emphasis on Commission activity in this area , that we understand the causes , extreme poverty and instability of migration from developing countries and we incorporate this continually in the debate on the causes of migration to the European Union , including applications for asylum .
We realise there are real development criteria here to be looked at and a need for an emphasis to be maintained .
My first reaction to this is to warn against talking about migration in general and then getting into the aspect of applications for asylum .
It is very important to keep to a high level of linguistic clarity .
The best thing we have done in several years to address the causes of migration was the decision and announcement in Monterey a year ago about increasing official development assistance from the Member States of the European Union .
This is reality .
The point about governance and democracy is also true .
People do not only want to get out of countries that are poor ; they also want to leave , even as asylum seekers , to get somewhere else , away from countries that do not deliver governance .
This is another aspect we have to work on .
It is about money but it is also about decency and safety .
Question No 36 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0253 / 03 ) will not be replied to since it is included in the agenda for the present part-session - in this week 's debate on Iraq .
Question No 37 by Margrietus J. van den Berg ( H-0260 / 03 ) :
Subject : Recommitment exercise and support for the Fast Track Initiative
What progress has the Commission made to date in its exercise to identify and recommit dormant EDF resources for ACP countries to the Fast Track Initiative ( FTI ) ?
Has the Commission prioritised those countries whose FTI plans have already been approved ?
Is the Commission planning to undertake this exercise in all ACP countries now that all countries are part of the Analytical Fast Track ?
What is the timetable for completing this exercise and , once all dormant commitments have been identified , what is the process for recommitting them to the Fast Track Initiative ?
How long does the Commission estimate that such an exercise could take ?
Questions to Commissioner Schreyer
We cannot launch anything in today 's world without making a new acronym .
This is the FTI - which , by the way , is also supported by the IFIs - but I am a member of Acronyms Anonymous and so are many other people .
I think I will talk about ' education for all ' and the ' fast track initiative ' .
The objectives set in Dakar and the Millennium Development Goals in this field of education are the basis of our policy in developing countries .
Overall , the Community has allocated an estimated EUR 1.3 billion to education in developing countries for the next 5 years .
This is the global figure .
It is also providing substantial financing to ACP countries under the 9th EDF in the form of general budget support - EUR 1.66 billion - part of which will benefit the education sector .
It is difficult to say exactly how much , and with what sort of direct focus , but one part of this is clearly relevant .
In this context we devote full attention to the fast track initiative as a means to accelerate progress towards education for all .
So far only 10 countries have an approved proposal for the fast track initiative , including 7 ACP countries .
Unfortunately these 7 ACP countries have not chosen education as a priority sector in their cooperation with the Community .
The Commission is therefore looking into the possibility of using old , dormant funds to support the fast track initiative in these 7 countries .
The initiative has been prioritised as one of a number of possible so-called ' fast disbursement ' mechanisms for the use of dormant amounts of old European Development Fund money .
This process is now being discussed with the ACP partner countries .
In addition to the 10 countries that have an approved proposal for the fast track initiative , all other developing countries that meet the eligibility criteria for this , such as a full poverty reduction strategy paper and a credible sector plan , can expect further support to implement their plans .
Where possible , the Commission will participate even through existing mechanisms or by recommitting dormant funds .
This is now an ongoing effort .
As far as the analytical fast track is concerned , its exact role is still being defined .
A specific working group has been set up to further develop this concept .
The timetable is also part of the issue .
We recognise that further efforts are required this year and next year to ensure that the implementation of European Development Fund resources is managed in the most efficient manner possible .
To this end , seminars were organised in February and March 2003 , bringing together the different players in the project management cycle within the process .
Delegations , DG-Development and AIDCO .
During the seminars , in order to free up idle resources , a substantial effort went into identifying dormant commitments lying under previous EDFs .
Targets were agreed with all delegations for decommitments to be achieved by the end of this year .
Decommitments imply an administrative procedure that also involves the headquarter .
The same goes for recommitting the money , which will take place in the annual reviews .
Partner countries of course have the final say on decisions to use these dormant funds for the fast-track initiative .
This is not the only use of the money that we try to free up and accelerate the use of , but the fast-track initiative is clearly identified as one of the priorities .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for the intensive effort to secure the availability of the dormant funds for the initiative .
I believe that even in its technical form , in its institutional form , in the cooperation with the World Bank and a number of countries in Europe and the role that Europe can play in it as coordinator or initiator , the fast track initiative can be exceptionally effective .
Perhaps the Commissioner could say something more , without specific reference to each of these countries , about the role that he envisages for the European Union .
I understand that he also says that we are prepared to play a coordinating role so that we can deliver added value to the relations with - for example - the ACP countries .
I am rather curious about this added value role , not just in financial terms , but also in terms of political leadership and institutional support .
I would maintain that the budget support which the Commission and Parliament discussed in great detail a couple of years ago is an extremely important tool where a partner country has reached a reasonable level of quality in its sector policy for education .
We have a basis that is good enough to inject money through budgetary support relating to the more detailed work carried out by Member States or other donors working very directly at a technical level in that country .
On this issue of money , we are doing important things .
In addition , in having this initiative organised as broadly and energetically as it is , we are inspiring - not to say pushing - African and other countries to lift education higher up the ladder of priorities .
Our water initiative has the same effect , and we offer real assistance to those governments that face up to this .
It is quite helpful but , again , successful coordination and approaching the problems via sector programmes is exactly what this initiative can also accelerate .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , Questions Nos 38 and 39 will be replied to in writing .
Question No 40 by Dana Rosemary Scallon ( H-0286 / 03 ) :
Subject : EU Regulation on reproductive and sexual health and rights in developing countries
Could the Commission clarify the position of the Commission proposal with regard to ' reproductive and sexual health and rights in developing countries ' , where Item B7-6312 has been increased from EUR 55.8 to EUR 73.98 million increase , as announced by the ' Council of Ministers ' .
Could it please inform me if the above-mentioned increase was actually proposed by the Commission or not ?
How will this increase be funded , given that the general budget of the EU for 2003 has already been implemented and in the light of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
The Commission 's recent amended proposal ( COM / 2003 / 0083 final ) states that ' the financial framework adopted by the European Parliament for this regulation can be accommodated within Heading 4 of the Financial perspective and , in particular , within the increased envelope foreseen for ABB Policy Area Development ' and that ' the Commission can therefore accept in its entirety Parliament 's position at first reading ' : is it legitimate to approve such funding from next year 's budget been applied before the normal European Parliament procedure has first been applied ?
Mr President , the Commission proposal for a legal basis for reproductive and sexual health and related rights in developing countries was put before the legislative authority - in this instance , the Council and Parliament in a codecision procedure - on 7 March 2002 .
In accordance with item 33 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 , it is the legislative authority that lays down the financial framework for the entire duration of the programme .
The amount mentioned by Mrs Scallon relates to the budget allocation for the four-year period from 2003 to 2006 .
The estimate proposed by Parliament was in excess of the amount originally proposed by the Commission , and so the Commission was asked to check whether this greater amount could be funded under the revised programming for heading 4 of the Budget without exceeding the upper limit imposed on this heading in the Financial Perspective .
The Commission was able to give a binding assurance to the budgetary authority that , in accordance with the policy priorities for future expenditure , as redefined by a resolution of 5 March 2003 in the course of annual strategic planning , such funding was very definitely available .
First , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her response .
I would like to make a special reference to the people of Ireland .
Remembering that funding of any kind of abortion is unconstitutional and illegal in Ireland and that so-called safe abortion is included within this development aid programme , yet also remembering that Ireland has the lowest level of maternal mortality in the world - two in every 100 000 births - what is the response of the Commission to the majority of Irish citizens who are deeply concerned at this unconstitutional use of Irish tax-payers ' money ?
Mr President , Mrs Scallon , all funds from the European Budget are spent in accordance with the Treaty bases .
The programme in question has to do with the protection of health , both reproductive and sexual , and I believe that my fellow Commissioner Mr Nielson , in anticipation of further interventions by you , has also stated in writing in his letters to you that the relevant programmes are in accordance with the overall international programming in this area .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
We have come to the end of Questions to Mrs Schreyer .
We thank you for your cooperation .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure and with the well-established customs of this House , the remaining questions will be replied to in writing .
In any event , Mr Alavanos has the floor .
Mr President , these are oral questions . We still have 10 minutes left .
The first question is my question .
These are not second class questions , nor is there any such practice .
It is that usually we run out of time and , in this sense , I should like to put my question , hear the Commission 's answer and proceed to the secondary question to which I am entitled under the Rules of Procedure .
Look , I will explain it to you : I believe I said ' in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and with custom ' , because never before has a question from the third part been answered in this Parliament .
What has happened is that the Commissioner only had one question to answer .
I believe that the Commission is not in a position to deal with this question as such .
If the Commission is prepared to do so , I will immediately give the floor to Mrs Schreyer , because we are going to set a precedent .

Mrs Schreyer , does the Commission have a response to the question by Mr Alavanos , Question No 41 , which is a very interesting question dealing with support for the tourist industry by means of the budget ?
I repeat that this is the first time this problem has arisen in all these years .
Mr President , this was not planned to be included in Question Time , and so we will of course provide a written reply .
I am going to give the floor once again to Mr Alavanos so that he can express his opinion and to all the Members who have raised a point of order .
Mr President , I shall not insist , despite the fact that I think that , as a matter of principle , this part of Question Time is included if there is time . I shall not insist because I know that you always demonstrate flexibility on matters to do with questions and the Members of Parliament .
Nonetheless , however , I have one query : the very title of the question mentions a matter to do with the budget .
Why was it included in part three , rather than with the questions to Commissioner Schreyer ?
Nonetheless , as I say , I have no general wish to insist .
As a former Member and an expert on this House - and an even older one than me , and that is saying something - you will know that it is not we temporary Presidents who give the questions their names , but they come already named , already christened , and I can therefore only take note of the issue and explain that we always lack time , but today we have had five minutes left over , and I do not believe - and you will excuse me if I speak to you as just another Member - that we should deal with every debate on the basis of just one five-minute experience .
But I have taken good note of what has happened today and it provides a precedent so that there may be a solution on future occasions .
Three Members will take the floor .
Firstly , Mr Rübig , in accordance with the order in which the floor was requested .
Mr President , I would like to put a question .
As it is the case that various questions are submitted for question times , what method is used to determine the order in which the questions are taken ?
I would be interested to know how it is done .
Mr President , on a point of order , I support Mr Alavanos in what he says .
If you are not going to allow him to take the floor , I would like to put a supplementary question to Commissioner Schreyer on Mrs Scallon 's question .
So either you give the floor to Mr Alavanos , or I would like to ask the Commissioner a supplementary question .
Excuse me .
Mrs Ahern , Mrs Scallon 's question ended several minutes ago .
You had the perfect right to put a supplementary question .
Now , if you want to put a supplementary question to Mrs Schreyer and she wishes to reply , I have no problem with that , of course .
Mrs Schreyer ?
Mrs Ahern , please put your question .
I should like to refer to the question referring to ' misuse of the budget to fund abortion ' .
This was a really dishonest question , because the funds go into the reserve and they are used for purposes such as HIV .
Abortion rates in Ireland were referred to .
Everybody knows that if you want to have an abortion in Ireland , you go to London !
This is just a completely dishonest expression of the reality .
I just want to make it clear to Mrs Schreyer that , as far as I am concerned , if the money goes into the reserve , it is perfectly reasonable for them to be funding things such as HIV and AIDS in the developing world , particularly in Africa .
I understand that was what the money was actually used for .
Can Mrs Schreyer confirm that ?
Mrs Ahern , this Budget line was discussed in depth in the debates leading up to the resolutions on the 2003 Budget .
It is the case that this programme is now in the hands of the legislative authority , that discussions are ongoing , and I believe it to be a matter of general consensus that the European Union should continue to give support in the health sector .
Indeed , this was one reason why we have , among other things , made provision for the European Budget to endow the Global Health Fund with substantial sums , and the programme we are discussing makes an important contribution to putting health care in the developing world on a firmer foundation .
Mrs Ferrer , I am going to give you the explanation which , in this case , I can give you .
The Commission is perfectly well informed , because it has received the questions and has put them in order .
The situation is that questions which are not personal and which have not been scheduled have never before been answered in this Parliament .
Why do they appear in the document ?
So that they can be answered in writing .
That is why they are there .
And today is the first time this has happened , and we take very good note of the fact .
If I had allowed Commissioner Nielson to speak for five or six minutes more - something which I had intended , or at least imagined doing - we would have used up the time , but the Commissioner , rather than speaking for 20 minutes , has spoken for 48 minutes , and we have therefore given him permission to leave , because he has spoken for an extra 28 minutes and we would have been asking too much of him .
In the question put to Mrs Schreyer , nobody asked supplementary questions , and we therefore had five minutes left over .
Then , a Member who had not asked any supplementary question , when the debate had ended , said , ' then I will put a supplementary question now ' .
You witnessed that just as I did .
I believe I have given you a full explanation in accordance with my competences , but I agree with you that there should be prior warning of the questions which are going to be replied to in writing .
And other Members , like yourself , must be aware that these questions are not scheduled to be replied to orally .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , since the time allotted to Questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 41 to 74 will be replied to in writing .
The next item is the Commission statement on the search made of the Ankara headquarters of the Human Rights Association of Turkey .
Mr President , honourable Members , I wish to make a statement on behalf of the Commission .
The Commission is greatly concerned about the Turkish authorities ' most recent raid on the offices of the Human Rights Association in Ankara , in the course of which documents and other material were seized .
The persecution of associations such as this one is difficult to understand at a time when , as has happened recently , political reforms have taken place and the fundamental rights of free expression of opinion and freedom of association have been extended .
The Commission has mentioned similar cases in its regular reports , and it takes the view that such incidents are contrary to the objectives of current efforts at reform .
This demonstrates anew how great a gulf there is between political reforms on the one hand and , on the other , the attitude taken by the executive and the judiciary to their implementation .
In connection with this , I would like to emphasise that the implementation of these reforms will be a determining factor in evaluating to what extent the Copenhagen political criteria have been fulfilled .
I will be pointing this out to the Turkish foreign minister , Abdullah Gül , when I have talks with him on Thursday in Brussels .
I have information to the effect that the Turkish minister of justice has , in the meantime , publicly expressed regret for the what the Turkish authorities did in the offices of the Human Rights Association , acknowledging at the same time the great importance of political reforms being implemented across the board .
He also made it clear that any future recurrence of such incidents would not be tolerated .
I would like to expressly draw attention to the fact that the Turkish Human Rights Association enjoys the Commission 's active support , having , in the period from 1992 to 1999 , had funds to a total of EUR 309 000 made available to it .
Further funding is planned for as part of measures to support fulfilment of the political criteria .
Only recently , on 25 March , the Commission submitted a revised communication on an improved pre-accession strategy for Turkey .
I cannot do other than re-emphasise at this point how vitally important it is that Turkey should , fully and without exceptions , implement all legal reforms as part of everyday practice .
At the end of the day , that is the yardstick by which Turkey 's fitness for accession will be assessed .
Human rights organisations must be able to do their work without hindrance , and their activities will continue to be supported by the Commission in future .
Thank you .
Mr President , Commissioner , once again the European Parliament is being called on to address what is , without doubt , the most problematic of all the countries associated with the European Union under some sort of special relationship which , in the case of Turkey , goes as far as qualifying as a candidate country .
This time it is about what is , even by Turkish standards , an unprecedented case of unhesitating disregard for the basic tenets of the rule of law and democratic intergovernmentalism and , what is worse , under the supervision of a high-ranking judicial officer who ostentatiously confirmed a prevalent Turkish practice and state of affairs , within the framework of which Turkey systematically and blatantly infringes even the most fundamental obligations which it is supposed to have undertaken in order to justify and support its application to join the European Union .
The raid by an anti-terrorist squad on the Human Rights Association of Turkey in Ankara adds yet another black mark to the long , sad list of Turkish repression of political , religious and minority human rights and freedoms in Turkey and belies , without any excuse whatsoever , the extravagant promises and assurances given by each Turkish Government in succession that they are allegedly taking and applying the institutional and other measures needed in order to comply with the Copenhagen criteria .
Many hastened to extol these proclamations with superfluous optimism and now obviously realise with equal disappointment that , in treating the Turkish system with understanding and tolerance , they have achieved precisely the opposite effect and have basically encouraged and supported everyone in Turkey who opposes moves to bring the country into line with the recognised moral values of internal legal order and international conduct .
That is why the European Union and , more particularly , the European Parliament , as the elected representative body of its people , must severely and unreservedly condemn this new intolerable incident and the more general standard Turkish stance in the field of human rights and international law and make it perfectly clear to the Turkish Government that any thought of accepting Turkey into the bosom of the European family is out of the question under these circumstances , as the exceptional report by Mr Oostlander quite rightly emphasises .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must start by making it abundantly clear , on behalf of my group , that we find this raid unacceptable , and we are of course protesting against the fact that police officers and a public prosecutor from the State Security Court in Ankara have been able to take such action in the first place .
We take it for granted that the Turkish Government , in a case such as this , will act in an exemplary way and sort the matter out .
It is quite proper that we should be discussing this here this evening , but I think we should avoid making the mistake of playing the game the way the hawks in Turkey expect us to .
What is actually going on in Turkey at the moment is that the opponents of the EU within the state apparatus , who continue , regrettably , to wield a great deal of power , are full of fear of Turkey ever joining the European Union , when they will no longer be allowed to do those things that have been permitted to them until now .
It is these forces within the apparatus of the Turkish state who have a natural interest in exploiting every opportunity and engage in provocative behaviour as often as possible .
On the day in question , 6 May , a meeting had actually been planned between non-governmental organisations , the Turkish foreign minister , and the minister responsible for human rights issues .
It was on the afternoon of that day that the raid was carried out .
This shows that those forces that actually want to use all available means to create a different mood in Turkey , had deliberately chosen this day to mount an operation that we would regard as unacceptable , with the resultant situation inducing us to hold this evening 's debate , in which Turkey would yet again be the subject of much adverse comment , and we would end up doing a favour for those who do not want to see European democracy in Turkey .
The one fact of which we have to take note is that Turkey at present has a government that wants to carry out necessary reforms , and is making the effort to do so ; it responded to this raid by saying that everything possible would be done to resolve this case .
For this reason , I would like to ask my fellow Members of this House to help and support those in Turkey who are really campaigning for democracy and human rights , and , when faced with provocations such as this , to be very careful in what they do and not allow themselves to be provoked and misused by the wrong side .
Mr President , I too should like , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , to express our great disappointment at the search made of the human rights office and take strong exception to this event .
I agree , however , with Mr Ceyhun that we must be cautious in our interpretation of it .
As the Commissioner mentioned , we are in fact seeing an express desire for reform in Turkey and a desire to comply with the political criteria , as required if the country is to embark upon negotiations concerning EU membership .
We saw this with the amendments to the constitution last August , when the death penalty was abolished in peace-time and a series of other freedoms was established . Further reforms are on the way , moreover .
I myself took part in the Turkish National Assembly 's symposium at the end of April when it was discussed what changes there needed to be to the Turkish legal system if it were to comply with the political criteria .
What I witnessed was an objective and open debate , in which , for example , legal experts and representatives of the judiciary provided clear and incisive descriptions of the reforms that would guarantee the independence of the courts and the observance of fundamental human rights .
If the National Assembly follows the good advice and adopts reforms that guarantee the independence of a legal system that is also in accordance with human rights , Turkey will be another step on the way towards negotiating for accession to the EU , and - just as importantly - the Turkish population will be guaranteed the fundamental and democratic rights I believe they really desire .
The fact of the matter is , of course , that it is not enough to amend legislation if changes do not also take place in practice . We should then be back to square one , as the Commissioner emphasised , and I think it important that we emphasise this .
It is therefore very sad that we continue to receive reports of torture in Turkish prisons and of other infringements of human rights , including violations of freedom of expression .
The events of 6 May unfortunately show that there are still forces in Turkish society that either do not understand the need for changes or do not approve of them and who act on that basis .
This is unacceptable .
Turkey is a very complex country with many different cultures .
It is also a very dynamic country with major resources and a lot of talent , and continued cooperation between the EU and Turkey is in the interests of both Turkey and the EU .
Membership of the EU requires , however , that specific principles be observed .
We often hear Turkish politicians say that tougher demands are being made upon Turkey than upon other countries where accession to the EU is concerned .
This is not the case .
The ten countries that are to accede in May 2004 have had to implement difficult reforms for which there was often little grass-roots support and which were also opposed internally .
For all countries , democracy is a process , and we need to be on our guard against human rights violations and any imbalance between institutions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , human rights have yet again been trampled on in Turkey .
With a representative of the Turkish Public Prosecutor 's office present , the offices of the IHD in Ankara were searched by the authorities and everything in them seized .
Yet again it was the largest human rights organisation in Turkey that was on the receiving end of this treatment , and , yet again , it was terrorism that served as the pretext for it .
What I ask you is this : how much longer are things to go on like this ?
Is this what Turkey 's reform process adds up to ?
Can it still seriously be believed that it matters to Turkey whether or not it fulfils the Copenhagen criteria ?
The Confederal Group of the United European Left / Nordic Green Left protests emphatically against the Turkish authorities ' actions .
The latest raid on the IHD is but the last in a series of hostile acts against this human rights organisation .
Let us remind ourselves that , since 1991 , over ten members of the IHD have been murdered , and that , in May 1998 , the organisation 's chairman , Akin Birdal , was gunned down in his office .
In the last parliamentary elections , neither he nor other representatives of HADEP were allowed to stand as candidates .
According to Amnesty International , in the last couple of years alone , over four hundred separate court actions have been commenced against the IHD , to which must be added the innumerable cases brought against individual members .
Mrs Eren Keskin , a lawyer and deputy chairman of the IHD , has just been barred from practising law for a year .
Over and over again , the charge is ' separatist propaganda ' .
Is this Turkey 's new way of handling human rights ?
It was with a great deal of sympathy that we all watched as the reform process in Turkey was inaugurated .
Both in the European Union and among the Turkish people , there were high hopes for a new policy on the part of the Turkish Government , but these hopes have so far been in vain .
Turkey must make changes to critical aspects of its policies , not merely to forms of words , but also in practice .
Only then will it have a realistic prospect of acceding to the EU .
Recent months have shown that there is no shortage of problem areas .
Let us mention first the banning of HADEP , yet another ban imposed on a party that champions in particular the concerns of minorities in Turkey .
Turkey still relies on the banning of political parties as a means of silencing the voices of those who take a critical view of the government 's policies .
In the meantime , the DEHAP - the alliance of parties as part of which HADEP contested the latest parliamentary elections - is also threatened with a ban .
Is that , I ask you , democracy ? Is that freedom of opinion ?
Then there is the legal action against Mrs Leyla Zana , a former member of the Turkish parliament , whose party , the DEP , was also proscribed .
While we must welcome the fact that there is at last a retrial , what does it amount to ?
So far , it appears to be a repeat of the proceedings in 1994 , which the European Court of Human Rights categorised as unfair .
The judges are , admittedly , no longer military men , but there is a massive military presence in the courtroom .
Even after two days of proceedings , there is no prospect of Mrs Zana being released .
Let us remind ourselves that her offence , for which she was sentenced to fifteen years in jail , was a sentence spoken in the Turkish parliament - in Kurdish , her mother tongue .
Then there is the authorities ' continuing arbitrary treatment of the Kurds , who , even after formal changes to the law , are far from being treated as having equal rights .
Harassment and sweeping accusations of separatism continue to be the order of the day .
The use of the Kurdish language , too , is still subject to considerable restrictions .
There continues to be no evidence that Turkey is making any effort to set in motion a real process of democratisation , or to involve all elements in Turkish society in seeking solutions to its manifold problems .
Then there are the conditions in police stations and prisons .
Anyone who is put into custody in Turkey can reckon , with a high degree of probability , on being mistreated , especially if he or she is a member of a minority group .
Elementary rights , such as the right to have contact with family members and legal counsel , are often granted only on a restricted basis or disregarded altogether .
The most prominent example of this is Abdullah Öcalan , who has for months had virtually no contact with the outside world .
The list could go on and on .
This is where we might bear Cyprus in mind .
It has to be said , for all these reasons , that the road Turkey must travel before it joins Europe is still , alas , a long one .
The assumption that Turkey can hope for accession negotiations with the EU without fundamental changes to its policies is an illusion .
Turkey will have a prospect of accession only if it proves that it takes the Copenhagen criteria seriously .
It is up to Turkey to show by its policies what value it really places upon accession to the EU .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as regards the raid on the human rights association IHD itself I can be brief .
One reason why my group also condemns it in the strongest possible terms is that it is totally inconsistent with the reforms that are designed to bring Turkey closer to the EU .
But what I find more interesting is the background against which this raid took place .
Mr Ceyhun has already spoken about it and I endorse what he had to say .
I am convinced that there is a struggle going on not only in public , but also - and in particular - behind the scenes at the moment , between on the one hand the reformers , the new government , the new Parliament , many human rights organisations and other reformers and on the other the conservatives , who are still very strongly represented , in the army , in the bureaucracy , and also in the judiciary .
Fellow Members , it is no coincidence that on the very day that this human rights association was invited to the Ministry for Foreign Affairs for discussions on Turkey 's new strategy with a view to accession , the conservatives respond by breaking into the association 's offices .
Nor is it any coincidence that this happens by way of the state security courts - a bastion of conservatism in the Turkish legal system .
That is , as far as I am concerned , also a reason to call on the Turkish Government again to press ahead with the abolition of these state security courts - which has already been announced - because they are once again the source of much misery .
If there is a struggle between the conservatives on the one hand and the reformers on the other , then I am convinced that it is the task of Parliament to support the reformers .
I therefore contest the analysis of Turkish affairs that is heard in this House from some of our Members , that is that it never was anything , it is nothing and it never will be anything .
That is not the situation .
Look for example at the reactions of Mr Gül , the Minister of Foreign Affairs , and Mr Cicek , the Minister of Justice .
They are ashamed of what happened in this raid and new measures have again been announced to make this impossible in the future .
It is the role of our Parliament to be critical if things go wrong in Turkey , that is what we are doing this evening , that is what we shall be doing in the Oostlander report , but it is also the task of the Parliament to support reformers and reforms so that raids of this kind become a thing of the past .
Mr President , first I should like to thank my colleague Mr Oostlander for letting me move up the speakers ' list so that I can go back to my visitors ' group .
This debate , on which there is a great degree of consensus , is not about whether Turkey joins the EU , but about what sort of country Turkey is .
In the raid that was authorised by the state security corps , in the words of the Human Rights Association , and I quote , ' all of our private notebooks , all notes , all of our computers , our files and all our reports were taken , all faxes and e-mails sent to the offices were read and some were taken away ' .
Not only is this not good for Turkey , it is also highly destabilising that an agent of the state , namely the state security corps , is acting so clearly against the interests of Turkey .
The message it is sending outside is that it is trying to subvert the very democracy that the Turkish Government is trying to build .
Is it not ironic that immediately after the raid the officials go to meet the foreign minister and the minister for human rights ?
It is our job as a Parliament to place ourselves firmly behind those people in Turkey who are promoting democracy , to make it quite clear that we support those agents of the state who are saying that this is not the way to run it and that we support people like Abdullah Gul , who clearly was deeply upset by this activity .
The fact of the matter is that in a modern democratic state , the state security corps and the military have to be subordinate to the civilian power - that is the definition of a modern democratic state .
There are many people in Turkey working towards those aims and I believe that this Parliament , in passing this resolution , can give support to those people .
We are not saying yes or no to Turkey in the EU ; we are saying we want to back the people of Turkey in making their country a decent , good sort of place that they will all be proud to live in .
Mr President , it is not the first time that this Parliament has discussed issues concerning the violation of human rights by the Turkish Government .
Unless we are seen to defend the charters and treaties which we have designed ourselves , such as the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and legislation on human rights , then we run the risk of becoming a laughing stock within the international community .
I personally have had occasion in the past to condemn the Turkish Government for the imprisonment without trial of many among the Kurdish community , as I have also condemned the 14-year imprisonment sentence imposed on Leyla Zana and three of her colleagues .
They all campaigned for the rights of the Kurds and in 1995 Leyla Zana won our own European Parliament Sakharov Prize .
A retrial of Leyla Zana was ordered following a ruling of the European Court of Human Rights here in Strasbourg , a court the international community established itself , because the original trial of Leyla Zana and her colleagues was deemed not to be equitable .
Once again we have to raise in this Parliament a further breach of human rights standards in the wake of a search of the Ankara headquarters of the Human Rights Association of Turkey .
The Human Rights Association performs internationally recognised work in the realm of human rights in Turkey and provides Members of this Parliament with invaluable data on human rights atrocities . Therefore we regard it as a violation of the defence of human rights when the promotion of these standards is thus impeded .
Is it any wonder that some of us once more ask whether Turkey 's request for membership of the European Union should be supported ?
For the record , the Human Rights Association has found that 183 people were subjected to torture , ill-treatment and detention in Turkey in the first quarter of this year alone .
A Union presidency that prides itself on defending the human rights of minorities and the oppressed everywhere cannot stand by and allow such violations to continue .
Mr President , the Turkish legal system is based on the idea that collective order and security very definitely take precedence over individual human rights .
I am very well aware of the views of the Ankara public prosecutor .
I have heard terms of this kind from his own lips ; no wonder , then , that in such a system a raid on the human rights bureau in Ankara should be seen by the perpetrators as normal .
That is how life is lived there .
The Minister for Justice has expressed regret for the raid , and that is , of course , all very fine and good , but the problem is whether he actually has the power over the public prosecutor to prevent the latter simply carrying on without further ado .
Is this not once again the so-called deep state , with its generals and pashas , that rumbles through everything , as it did with the attempts of Prime Minister Erdogan to find a solution to the Cyprus problem , the restoration of the ban on HADEP and the continuing detention of Mrs Zana who , as a Sakharov prizewinner , has very special symbolic value for us ?
Such behaviour amounts to downright defiance of the norms and values of the European Union .
The views of the deep state on good administration differ markedly from those in the European Union .
Successive examples of this can be found in every embassy of Member States .
Mr Ceyhun points out that it is the opponents of the European Union in Turkey who are in favour of such damaging acts .
I do not believe that there are people in Turkey , and certainly not amongst the pashas and the generals , who do not want to join the European Union .
This is because there is status and all kinds of other benefits attached to it .
They do want to join , but they want Turkey to join the European Union on their terms .
This we must prevent at all costs and make clear to the citizens and to every person of goodwill in Turkey that we do not want that .
I think that it must also be made clear to the Turkish public where we stand , that there are conditions attached to accession and that whenever there is a violation it will be said over and over again that we do not accept that , so that the deep state knows that in the European Union there is no future for its way of thinking and acting .
I hope that Commissioner Verheugen can make this visible in Turkey too , possibly through measures relating to the support for human rights organisations in that country .
Mr President , the raid on the offices of the Human Rights Association of Turkey is not the first attack on this organisation , which has played and is playing a leading part in the fight against the repression of the people of Turkey , Turks , Kurds and national minorities .
There have been repeated , even more savage raids in the past .
I need only remind you of the armed raid on the previous president of the Association , Akin Birdal , who was repeatedly fired on .
That attack too was condemned by the then Minister for Justice , and yet the victim was ultimately locked up in gaol for several years .
Just so that we understand what condemnations by serving ministers mean !
So this raid is particularly significant , because it was carried out at a time when the new government of Turkey is trying to stop the democratic mask which Mr Erdogan and his cohorts were wearing before and after the elections from slipping .
As far as we are concerned , there can be no doubt that the government of Islamists , by reason of its very ideological base , was and is not in a position to lead Turkey towards democracy .
It had to be elected , taking account of the thirsting and the fight of the Turkish people , but under no circumstances has it changed its ideological political orientation .
Without doubt , the basic reason for this raid is the intrepid , heroic fight of the Human Rights Association in Turkey and the rights of the Kurdish people .
Neither the military establishment that always directs political life in Turkey nor the Islamic party entertain any sympathy for this sort of impropriety .
The raid was carried out on the basis of Articles 169 and 312 of the Criminal Code and the anti-terrorism law respectively , which criminalise any support for the hunger strike of political prisoners and their fight against the white cells as an act of terrorism .
The ban on the Turkish communist party and the HADEP party was decided in the same spirit .
We express our brotherly solidarity with the people of Turkey and stand by their side in their fight for democracy and peace , as recently expressed during the attack on Iraq .
Thank you very much , Mr Korakas .
I wish to inform you that I have received six motions for resolutions , tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A5-0146 / 2003 , by Mrs Gebhardt , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the Statute for a European Cooperative Society ( 9923 / 2002 - C5-0485 / 2002 - 1991 / 0388 ( COD ) ) ;
A5-0127 / 2003 , by Mr De Rossa , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Draft Council directive on supplementing the Statute for a European Cooperative Society with regard to the involvement of employees ( renewed consultation ) ( 9924 / 2002 - C5-0494 / 2002 - 1991 / 0389 ( CNS ) .
Mr President , honourable Members , I would like to start by extending the Commission 's thanks to the rapporteurs of both the leading Committees for the outstanding work they have done , both on the regulation on European Cooperative Societies and on the related directive on the involvement of employees .
There are , in the European Union , at least 130 000 cooperative societies , which have 2.3 million employees and well in excess of 80 million members .
The regulations will put in the hands of these cooperative societies an instrument for cross-border transactions right across the internal market similar to that already enacted for public limited companies in the form of the Statute for a European Limited Company .
Associations of cooperative societies in Europe have been demanding this sort of statute for some years now , and the text of the regulation now before you has met with their approval .
The Statute will also make it possible to form cross-border syndicates on the basis of cooperative society structures , enabling enterprises of this type to build up joint activities , become more competitive , and enter more diverse markets .
Parliament expressed its approval for the Statute for a European Cooperative Society at first reading , which was on 20 January 1993 .
This initial position taken by Parliament resulted in numerous improvements to the text of the Commission proposal as later amended , which Parliament approved on 2 December 1993 , reconfirming that approval on 27 October 1999 .
Although the regulation is not perfect , it reflects a broad consensus on what rules should apply to this new form of cooperative enterprise .
At Council level , it met with the Member States ' unanimous approval , something that constitutes considerable progress in view of the individual Member States ' divergent regulations on cooperative societies .
From the outset , the Commission has had the objective of creating an instrument that would be , on the one hand , flexible and modern , whilst , on the other , taking into account the particular characteristics of cooperative societies and the principles underlying them .
We are glad that this balance is maintained in the Regulation in its present form .
Article 79 offers the possibility of removing any inadequacies brought to light by the experience of the first five years of implementation , and so the Commission will monitor the application of the Statute with a view to the possible revision of the Regulation .
The Members of this Parliament regard as extremely dubious the Council 's unilateral and unanimous decision to change the legal basis in such a way as to deprive Parliament of its right of codecision , and it is understandable that they should do so .
The Commission took Article 95 as the legal basis for its proposal on the grounds that this article has the completion of the internal market as its objective .
We continue to believe that Article 95 provides the right legal basis .
With almost no exceptions , the amendments proposed for a second time have to do with the protection of the employees ' interests .
The Commission takes the view that the directive must fully protect their rights , and that it must be complied with when a European Cooperative Society is set up .
The directive is the right place for this rule , and so we cannot support the proposed amendments .
Let me now turn to the directive on the involvement of employees , which complements the Regulation and represents a very comprehensive piece of legislation intended to guarantee in an appropriate way employees ' rights to information , consultation and co-determination .
In its essentials , the text is based on the corresponding directive on the European Limited Company , adopted one and a half years ago , and the Commission believes that it merits your support .
Parliament now wishes to make a number of amendments to it , many of which are undoubted improvements .
Having examined in detail all the amendments proposed by Parliament , the Commission is prepared to agree , either fully or in part , to half of them and to support these in the Council .
Amendments Nos 5 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 19 and 22 can be accepted as they stand .
The Commission is also in agreement with a number of other amendments , which , however , still require certain minor changes of formulation in order to take into account the concerns of certain Member States .
The amendments in question are Nos 4 , 14 , 17 , 20 and 21 .
Leaving to one side the debate on the legal basis , we believe that the Council , too , is open to most of these amendments .
We hope that this means that both the Regulation and the directive can be adopted by the Council in June , so that there will be a legal framework conducive to those European Cooperative Societies that want to extend their activities across frontiers , with , at the same time , their employees being guaranteed appropriate protection of their interests .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I thank you . We do indeed have before us a very important report , a very important piece of legislation for the very large number of people in the European Union who have joined together in common enterprises in order to pool their strengths and bring those strengths to market more effectively .
In a European Union in which more and more work is done across borders , this sort of collaborative effort across borders is quite clearly very much needed and very deserving of support .
It was as long ago as 13 April 1983 that Parliament first adopted a resolution on European Cooperative Societies , which fact shows what great importance Parliament has always attached to legislation in this area .
The Commission also took on board our concerns , and , as Commissioner Schreyer has just said , we did indeed , after some time , have the beginnings of legislation .
I find it very regrettable that the Council - after Parliament , in 1993 , had given its position , and a very good position at that - took all of eleven years to adopt a resolution on the subject , and had ulterior motives , some of them quite unrelated to the matter in hand , for not taking action in this area .
The fact is that we find that unacceptable , and so , above all , do the people that this is all about .
I also have to say in relation to this that I cannot commend the Council for the way in which it simply changed the legal basis , and , when forwarding the new text to Parliament , did not even think it necessary to explain why this change had been made and on what arguments it was actually founded .
At any rate , there is nothing on the subject in the official documents we have been given .
I do not think this is any way for Parliament and the Council to work together .
The fact is that , naturally enough , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market gave particular attention to the legal basis , for what is at stake here is a weighty matter , namely the rights of Parliament , and it would be a strange parliament that simply said ' yes ' and agreed to waive its right of codecision on the grounds that a unanimous Council resolution had to be respected .
No parliament - not even this one - can afford to do such a thing , and so the Committee reaffirmed , and by a clear and unambiguous majority , that Article 95 was the right legal basis .
There are eminently clear arguments in favour of that , as Commissioner Schreyer has just again confirmed , and they cannot simply be swept aside .
The proposed Regulation creates an independent structure under Community law in parallel to national forms of association .
Article 8 makes it clear that the regulation does not govern the structure by itself , but does so in conjunction with the statutes of the cooperative society in question and the company law of the Member State in which that cooperative society has its registered office .
This is not , then , about superimposing a European model on the fifteen national company models , but about harmonisation , that is to say , the approximation of laws , thereby reducing the legal obstacles to the operation of the internal market .
That is what it should be , and as such it should be adhered to !
While I am still on this subject , please permit me to add a personal note , for , as rapporteur of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , I now of course have to recommend that , tomorrow , this House should vote against all the amendments with the exception of the first , as these are all resubmitted amendments that were rejected by the Committee .
That is how it is , and a rapporteur 's duty is of course to reflect the views of his or her committee .
What I say , though , on my own behalf is that I trust you will not mind if I vote , with my group , in favour of these amendments , on the grounds that they reinforce workers ' rights .
The fact is that , as a Social Democrat , I regard the reinforcement of such rights as an obligation without the possibility of any exceptions , and so I will self-evidently vote in favour of it , even if , when we vote tomorrow , it will be said that I recommend that you do the opposite .
Mr President , I would also ask to be allowed to repeat that before the vote tomorrow .
- Mr President , Members will be aware that the debate in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , as indeed in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , was dominated by the concerns we had about the legal basis which was used , which only provides for consultation with Parliament .
Like everybody else in this Parliament I share those concerns .
But I also believe that we have a responsibility to seek to improve the draft directive presented to us , a view shared unanimously by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
What we have here is a proposal from the Council and Commission concerning workers and representatives on the boards of a European Cooperative Society , and this is a welcome development .
The cooperative sector has been waiting 30 years for this legislation , because of the extremely diverse nature of this sector .
Obviously it has been difficult to achieve a common position .
Even so , 30 years is far too long for the estimated eight million people employed in the social economy across the Member States .
I know that many of them are keen that we complete our business here tomorrow and enable the Council to arrive at an early decision .
The social economy is an important sector in terms of employment in the Union and in terms of gross domestic product .
Cooperatives are an important part of that social economy .
It is estimated that cooperatives in the consumer and production areas alone have over 78 million members in the Union .
By facilitating at long last the formation of European cooperatives and guaranteeing the involvement of workers at board level in such new enterprises we will be sending a positive message to the cooperative movement .
This , I hope , will have a particular impact on emerging cooperatives in the accession countries and serve also to strengthen the European social model throughout the enlarged Union .
Important amendments relating to gender equality in the selection of workers ' representatives , trade union rights and corporate social responsibility have been adopted in committee and I am pleased to hear that there are indications that both the Commission and the Council are favourably disposed towards many of them .
We regret that the Commission is unable to recommend the amendments to the regulation which my group are putting forward .
But with regard to the level of agreement that we have achieved in relation to the directive , I want to thank the Council and the Commission , the staff of the Employment Committee and the staff of my own group for their assistance .
Without the cooperation of all the members of the Employment Committee , we could not have arrived at the unanimous decision that underpinned the amendments that are going forward to the Council .
We can look forward to working closely with those involved in the social economy sector across the Union and to further developing the social economy .
Other pieces of legislation are required to complete the coverage needed in this area and I would urge the Commission and the Council not to delay further in agreeing what is necessary .
Could I also suggest that they might consider using the Treaty of Nice provision which allows for decisions of this nature to be taken by QMV rather than unanimity .
This would provide for codecision with this Parliament in any further legislation they bring forward in this area .
Mr President , my wife and I have had the privilege of having our three children in a parents ' cooperative in my home town in Dalarna .
A parents ' child care cooperative is not perhaps a model for a European Cooperative Society , but we have very good experience of cooperative work .
The regulation on a Statute for a European Cooperative Society and the Directive on the involvement of employees are inseparable .
The Statute concerns how the mechanisms that are to guarantee employees ' right of codecision in European Cooperative Societies are to operate in practice .
In the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , we have chosen to adopt three political priorities .
Firstly , the European Parliament must demand a legal base guaranteeing Parliament the right of codecision .
Secondly , current provisions concerning the right to information and consultation must be fully respected during the procedure before a European Cooperative Society is registered or restructured .
Thirdly , the rights that employees enjoyed before the European Cooperative Society was created must be guaranteed .
Parliament has warned the Council that it would not tolerate a repeat of the Council 's position on the European Company Statute .
The Council has ignored that warning in this case .
In order to defend Parliament 's role in the legislative process , and with reference to Parliament 's legal service , those of us in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs have highlighted Article 95 of the Treaty as the correct legal base .
It is a question of bringing about an approximation between the Member States ' legislation , not of transferring the right of decision from national legislation to the EU .
- ( DE ) Mr President , as I have only two minutes , please allow me to combine what I have to say about the Regulation and the directive , as I have essentially the same things to say about each of them .
What happened with the European Limited Company has happened in exactly the same way with the European Cooperative Society ; the Council of Ministers has , quite out of hand , robbed us of our power of codecision .
This is something that we must not tolerate .
There is little doubt that the majority on the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market takes the view that , this time , we should appeal to the Court of Justice against the choice of the legal basis .
My original agreement with Mrs Gebhardt was that the Committee on Legal Affairs would restrict itself to amendments on the legal basis .
We now have an array of amendments to vote on , both to the Regulation and to the directive .
I gather that the Commission intends to support the amendments to the directive , whilst rejecting those to the Regulation .
I take the same view .
The legal issue is , however , a topic of great importance in terms of the future , for one cannot exclude the possibility of the Council of Ministers doing the same thing in other areas of company law - the other types of company are waiting to be dealt with .
As far as the Regulation is concerned , we share the view expressed by the Commission , that Article 95 is the proper legal basis .
We have already heard that a number of times , but , with reference to the directive on the involvement of employees , I would like to go into further detail .
Article 137 ( 1 ) ( e ) is the rule on jurisdiction for informing and consulting employees and provides for no exception to the co-determination procedure in Article 251 .
Article 137 ( 1 ) ( f ) , however , is the rule on jurisdiction for employee participation ; it requires a unanimous vote in the Council , with Parliament merely being required to be consulted .
In this instance , however , the Council can decide by unanimous vote to apply the codecision procedure .
This directive treats both objectives - co-determination and consultation - equally .
It is my contention that , in a situation like this , where there are two equivalent legal bases alongside each other , option is downgraded to obligation and the Council 's discretion is correspondingly limited .
If this were not so , the requirement for unanimity in the Council as regards the one legal basis would nullify the codecision procedure in its equivalent counterpart .
Such a curtailment of the European Parliament 's rights as a legislature enjoying democratic legitimacy is unacceptable .
An appeal will not put the European Cooperative Society at risk .
Firstly , the validity of the Cooperative Society Regulation is coupled to the expiry of the time limit for the transposition of the directive .
This period should in fact allow sufficient leeway for the ECJ to hand down a clarificatory ruling .
Secondly , the ECJ can be asked to rule that the Regulation and the directive continue to have legal effect .
Quite deliberately , then , it is the choice of legal basis that is being contested , not the subject-matter of either the Regulation or the directive .
Mr President , I want to make a point of thanking Mrs Gebhardt and Mr De Rossa for their efforts in relation to these two reports and for the painstaking work they have put into them .
Here in plenary , those of us in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats have tabled a number of amendments on the Statute for a European Cooperative Society .
We believe that , as far as possible , the procedure for developing a European Cooperative Society must be characterised by scrutiny and transparency .
Current provisions concerning employees ' right to information and consultation must be fully complied with .
A number of amendments involve guarantees that , right from the start , an express account should be given of the expected consequences for employment of establishing a European Cooperative Society .
Employees ' representatives must be given time to submit an opinion before decisions are taken .
Because the proposal for a regulation concerns the various stages in the life cycle of a European Cooperative Society , such as its establishment , the transfer of headquarters and liquidation , a number of different amendments are required if it is to be possible to apply these principles to the different situations described in the proposal for a regulation .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , of whose opinion I had the privilege of being the draftsman , also believes that the establishment of a European Cooperative Society must not lead to employees ' losing rights they enjoyed before its establishment .
Allow me also to say very specifically , regarding Mr De Rossa 's report , how important it is to emphasise that , in connection with establishing a European Cooperative Society and in cases of extensive structural changes , there should be the right to engage in negotiations concerning employee involvement .
All contributions must constitute an ongoing process .
Our report also calls for the removal of the general clause according to which the Member States may be exempted from the provisions concerning employee involvement when a European Cooperative Society is established as a result of a merger between two cooperatives .
I also wish to emphasise that the employee representatives on the management and supervisory bodies should be chosen or designated in accordance with national legislation .
Mr President , we are going to have to wait and see what the Council makes of the points we are raising tonight in relation to the legal basis .
I hope the Commission will think again about the acceptability of Amendments Nos 14 , 15 , 17 and 19 on the statute , concerning the inclusion of the consideration of employment effects in the case of a merger , transfer or conversion involving an ECS , because I think they are entirely justifiable .
In the meantime I would like to take the opportunity to look beyond the institutional and legal basis arguments and look at the implications these proposals might have for the development of the social economy in a European Union which is trying to deal with a range of profound changes .
The globalisation of markets and the decreased competitiveness of traditional sectors call for the diversification of economic activities and an exploration of new means of creating job opportunities .
Technological progress calls for a highly-qualified , flexible workforce , which in turn expects a more participative working situation .
Increased female participation rates and an ageing population with longer life expectancy increase the demand for household and caring services .
These increasing and more diversified social needs , compounded by budgetary restrictions , have led public authorities to decentralise the provision of services or to reduce the range or level of services they are providing .
The social economy can play a part in meeting the challenges and seizing the opportunities arising from these and other processes of change , and in a way can help shape a new model of society and an economy based on solidarity , inclusion and participation on the one hand , and innovation and knowledge on the other .
I can say these things with certainty because I have been looking back at the evaluation of the third-sector initiative which ran from 1997 to 1998 , thanks to a budgetary initiative by Mrs Ghilardotti , who is here tonight .
That evaluation underlined the fact that the development of the social economy to satisfy unmet needs could create as many as 120 000 jobs in the United Kingdom , 380 000 in Germany and 100 000 in France .
But perhaps one statistic from the evaluation best illustrates the potential scale of future job creation relating to communal services : the gap between employment rates in the USA and the EU is largest in communal services , which include social services , recreation , education , health and social care .
Equalising the rates would be equivalent to up to 7 million jobs .
The promotion of the third system could contribute to an increased demand for and supply of these services and one , moreover , which could help close the employment gap most among the very social groups where it is greatest .
We have a very well-established cooperative sector in my own region of England .
It has interests in retail , manufacturing , services , farming , housing , banking and a wide range of other areas .
The sector in my own region provides 13 000 jobs in the north-east of England .
I know that many there will welcome these new instruments as opening the way for a fresh boost to the social economy and employment through transnational developments .
That would be particularly useful in the context of enlargement .
I also think that the Commission really ought to look back at the evaluation of that third-sector initiative .
It supported us at the time and there was much talk of mainstreaming the results into the ESF , ERDF and relevant programmes .
Yet just four and a half years later I was deeply disappointed to see that the modest reference to the social economy under the enterprise pillar of the old employment guidelines had completely disappeared under the heading ' fostering enterprise and promoting job creation ' in the new , streamlined employment guidelines .
In this case , new and streamlined does not mean better , and that needs to be rectified as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , it is twelve years since the Commission tabled this proposal concerning the Statute for a European Cooperative Society , and , exactly as Mr De Rossa said , this discussion has in actual fact gone on for more than thirty years .
The European Parliament addressed the issue at a first reading in 1993 .
I was not then a Member of the European Parliament but was an adviser working with small companies and cooperative societies .
My then colleagues and I could not have dreamed that it would have taken such a long time to get to the point where the Statute for a European Cooperative Society was concerned .
This delay has in actual fact put a damper on a very great many proposals and ideas for cooperation when it comes to the European social economy .
Cooperatives are a form of company that should be given every support , especially in political quarters , because they represent participatory democracy in action .
We cannot now wait any longer for this Statute .
On behalf of my group , I wish therefore to appeal to the European Parliament and to my fellow MEPs to avoid further delays and not to take issue with the Council concerning the legal base and our right of codecision , even though I in principle agree with the reasons presented concerning the legal base .
That is because I am afraid that a legal dispute would not benefit the cooperative companies and the social economy .
Because there are so many tasks for the social economy in the new Europe , we need this Statute .
Do not let it get marooned in principles and disputes concerning the legal base .
Mr President , I too would like to join my colleagues in thanking the rapporteurs for their work on what is a very difficult issue .
It is a testament to their abilities and initiatives that there was such overwhelming support for the positions that they took .
However , like Mrs Schörling , I would hope that we do not get into a fight which would further delay us on the question of the legal basis .
As Mr De Rossa has rightly pointed out , 30 years is far too long for any legislative proposal to be waiting to be brought about .
Whilst we have to pick our fights or arguments with the other institutions , we also have to keep an eye on the bigger picture of ensuring that we can put in place legislation that facilitates and allows for the fostering of new opportunities within the social economy .
That is why I want to give as much support as possible to the rapporteurs and the reports that they have brought forward , and indeed to some of the amendments that have been tabled and which I , like Mrs Gebhardt , believe will improve the text and not detract from it .
I also hope that the Commission will understand from this debate tonight that we are not willing , as a Parliament , to lie down and be walked over by anyone .
We have in our midst enough innovation , ingenuity and compromise to bring forward positive , new initiatives to ensure that all the peoples within Europe can benefit from what we are trying to create here today .
My last point is that our legal services have drafted an opinion for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market with regard to the ability of using Article 95 .
However , that opinion is not as cast-iron or as tight as we would like to think it is .
Indeed , if we use the analogy of what happened with the European Company Statute , the legal basis is different despite the fact that there are similarities between the two proposals put forward .
It is vitally important that we support Mr De Rossa 's opinion with regard to greater employee participation and consultation in the areas of mergers and developments .
Mr President , I am very glad to be here this evening .
I was a Member of this Parliament in 1993 .
I must say that we had the impression then that this would take some time .
In those days proposals did not make such rapid progress as they do now .
Perhaps we did not imagine that it would take as long as is now the case , but it has taken a long time .
Really this should be a reason for great joy .
Everyone has said how important the cooperatives in the different European countries are and it is also very good of course that we can bring about a European Statute for them .
This we have always supported .
I should also like to warmly thank the two rapporteurs for their efforts .
The whole thing is , of course , not entirely problem-free .
That cannot be denied .
Because of the difficulties with the European Company we are still confronted by some old frustrations and these frustrations will have to be cleared up at some point .
The problem is that the Council never learns .
If the Council were to learn , this would of course be an easy debate .
We gave it the benefit of the doubt with the European Company and what does the Council do the next time ?
At the first opportunity it abuses its position again !
Mr President , there are of course very many people who are then glad to give way , who say that it is an important matter .
I agree with that , but I nonetheless think that we must not allow ourselves to be led astray by the Old Testament story of Jacob who sells his birthright for a plate of lentils .
I agree with Mr Mayer who says that we must keep it reasonably tight here .
I am also totally astonished that the Greens are now suddenly calling on us not to remain true to our principles .
I reproach the Greens for actually being too principled , but I am glad that this time we in the PPE-DE Group are more principled than the Greens .
I think that it is possible and in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs we have done everything to avoid making this just a debate on a matter of principle .
The possibility exists that it will be fought out on principle , but the amendments submitted by us mean that this may not be necessary .
The Council can simply adopt our amendments .
I regret that the Commission has actually rejected all the amendments to the Regulation , and do not think they have been sensible in doing so .
I think that they will have to come back to this at some future time , but the opportunity now is with the Council .
This I find quite proper .
Let him who sets calamity in motion do the clearing-up afterwards .
That is what we are letting them do , Mr President .
I think that it could ultimately come to a solution if the Council is sensible , but I personally always refuse to go along with those who keep on wanting to give way .
The next time we will have to fight the same fight again because , unfortunately , the Council never learns .
The Commission learns with difficulty .
The Council never learns .
This Parliament learns , but not always .
Mr President , more than 10 years after the Commission 's attempt to create a suitable legislative framework to regulate the matter of the statute for a European Cooperative Society , the Council is today showing the political will to progress with and close the matter .
Even if this time , however , it appears to have interpreted the relevant proposal for a regulation from the Commission correctly , the legal basis it has chosen is creating tremendous problems .
In essence , as other honourable Members have said , it is undermining the role of the European Parliament by selecting Article 308 , the simple consultation procedure .
Keeping to the same tactic used during the adoption of the relevant regulation and directive on the European society .
The arguments expounded by the Committee on Legal Affairs in favour of Article 95 are right , but it is also right to look at how relations between the European Parliament and the Council are going to shape up in the future .
This tactic of discordance of opinions cannot go on and the question is , why is the Council afraid of the European Parliament ?
However , it is not right for the debate at this stage to be delayed or for the creation of the cooperative society to be put off .
We therefore have to use every possible means to foster approval both of the regulation and of the directive on the statute of the European Cooperative Society , taking account of the fact that the European Cooperative Society will constitute the necessary complement to the European company .
In adopting them , we shall help to develop cross-border cooperative activities in the social work sector which , according to the more general strategy on employment in Europe , will constitute an important source of employment .
Cooperative organisations will acquire a strong legal tool which will facilitate the foundation and operation of cooperative societies at cross-border level .
As with the European company , here too , if we are to be consistent , the corresponding term for the workers must be safeguarded , their rights must be safeguarded and the building of the European social standard must be promoted , in this instance even more so , I think , than with the European company .
In this light , I should like to congratulate the two Socialist Group rapporteurs who agreed to proceed jointly and adopt a joint strategy .
To be precise , the directive needs to take account of the three points that Mr De Rossa raises in his report .
First , the right to negotiations on worker participation cannot be limited to the period in which an SCE is being created .
This right must be safeguarded during other crucial stages in the operation of the company , such as mergers , transfers etc .
For the same reason , the terms of the worker participation procedure must not be a one-off right ; it must be redefined if there are substantial structural changes in the European Cooperative Society with fresh negotiations .
It is also rightly proposed that , when electing workers ' representatives to supervisory or administrative organs , national law should take priority , as in the case of the European company .
To conclude : it is not enough for us to refer each time to our faith in the European social model .
We have to sit examinations every day and prove that we believe in it .
Mr President , I too welcome the movement at long last on these dossiers and the work of the rapporteurs involved , and of those who have worked hard to put forward their opinions .
Like others I regret the legal base chosen .
The arguments are totally unconvincing , in so far as we have actually heard any .
One of the few things we can say about what we have got in front of us is that we have at long last got some sort of parity here with the company statute .
That parity of status in a modern economy is extremely important at a time when many people are looking for added value .
I do not see that we should actually be advocating or allowing an advantage to one particular form of company organisation while , as it were , putting barriers in the way of a different form of organisation .
It is important that we safeguard cooperatives and their parity of status , particularly at a time of increased competition and threats of globalisation , when there is a considerable threat of undermining the cooperative ethos and its way of operating .
We have heard that this is an important sector , not least in terms of the employment opportunities outlined so ably by Mr Hughes .
It is also a question about democracy and participation and the feeling of being in control of either your workplace or indeed the company with which you are dealing .
Cooperatives are particularly important when we are talking so much - or indeed today so little - about corporate social responsibility , when we are looking at companies which have a great deal to teach , at major corporations that already operate across borders , in terms of their responsibility towards staff .
I welcome many of the amendments put forward in terms of employee involvement and greater safeguards there , responsibility towards customers , wider society and indeed , for many of them as well , the investment they make in ethical finance , which again has a lot to teach major corporations .
Mr President , many Members have already spoken about the Council 's failure to take the opportunity to observe and recognise the European Parliament 's prerogatives laid down by the Treaty and to propose a legal base providing for Parliamentary codecision in respect of the regulation on the Statute for a European Cooperative Society .
It is important to remember that , as early as 1991 , the Council specified this legal basis in respect of the three proposals for regulations it presented at that time , on a European Cooperative Society , a European association and a European mutual society respectively , as well in respect of the original proposal on the European company .
The Council 's attitude is even more incomprehensible in the light of its previous actions , and so I hope that it will reconsider its position after the House votes tomorrow .
In this connection - as the rapporteur has already explained - the aim of the proposal for a regulation on the Statute for a Cooperative Society is harmonisation , to approximate Member States ' laws , in other words to remove all the barriers hindering the functioning of the internal market .
It does not regulate matters of taxation or competition - although these are important and will have to be addressed in future - or matters of copyright or insolvency , but merely the structure of the societies , referring systematically to the national law of the country in which the cooperative society has its registered office .
That said , we cannot fail to agree that it is important and urgent that we find a solution for the creation of the cooperative society , given that work on this project has been at a standstill for decades and that it was only in December 2000 that the Council finally reached political agreement on the substance , the content of the regulation and the Directive on Worker Involvement , which is linked to the creation of the European Cooperative Society .
Over these years - or decades , rather - the world of cooperatives in Europe has expanded greatly , acquired economic weight and shown that it actually has a key social role to play , particularly in terms of employment .
On a number of occasions during these years , the European Parliament has expressed itself , through various reports , on the importance of the third sector for the economy , on the essential role it plays in preserving society , on its proven ability - borne out by numerous studies - to create jobs , not least high-quality jobs .
Mr Hughes mentioned a successful European Parliament initiative which revealed the zeal and skill shown by the third sector and the cooperative sector in responding to the challenges of employment and social cohesion .
With the proposed amendments , which I hope will be adopted tomorrow and taken into consideration by the Commission and the Council , the European Parliament is enhancing the proposal , introducing into the regulation the changes necessary to harmonise the statute and the provisions of the Directive on Worker Involvement .
Information and consultation rights are laid down , to ensure that they are fully respected during the pre-legislative phase and whenever any structural changes or modifications are made .
I will end , Mr President , by congratulating the two rapporteurs for my part too , for they have worked together and developed these two important reports side by side .
The next item is the report ( A5-0119 / 2003 ) by Mr Callanan , on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on amending Directive 94 / 25 / EC on the approximation of the laws , regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to recreational craft ( PE - CONS [ 3615 / 2003 - C5-0109 / 2003 - 2000 / 0262 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , I thank the Commission , all Members , and the industry and user groups who have taken an interest in this subject and who have sent me many contributions about their problems , suggestions as to how they might be resolved and the difficulties with the original proposal .
If the Commission was honest it would agree that the original proposal it presented to this House had many problems , particularly related to the retrospective element of the proposals .
I come from a country where it is generally regarded that retrospective law is bad law , that people should always have the certainty of knowing under what rules and regulations they perform their duties .
To make something retrospective and apply to what has happened in the past is bad .
Thankfully we have managed , between us , to agree to remove virtually all of the retrospective elements from this legislation .
The process of going through it has been helpful to many .
We have improved the comitology proposals , we have improved the proposals relating to craft built for own use .
We have put in proposals from the Verts / ALE Group on biodegradable oils and we have satisfied user groups and the industries by putting forward the 3dB noise allowance .
The outcome from virtually all sides has been satisfactory .
I have received emails in the last few days from the user groups saying that they are relatively satisfied , and also from the industry saying that it is relatively satisfied .
As long as the Commission is relatively satisfied , that really is an incredible outcome .
Within the legislation , the Commission is asked to produce further reports .
I would warn the Commission about the danger of over-regulation in this sector .
The proposals were originally produced to reduce the emissions from recreational craft .
Recreational craft in the European Union account for 0.5 % of all emissions .
With this proposal we would see a substantial reduction in that fraction of emissions .
I hope that the Commission will bear in mind that it will come up against the law of diminishing returns if it tries to regulate even further in this sector .
The large amount of cost and inconvenience that would be involved for users to produce even smaller fractional improvements in environmental performance would be very difficult to justify .
In the field of in-use compliance testing , the Commission has also been asked to produce proposals .
Bearing in mind that many Member States - I am thinking particularly of Finland here - have thousands of small boats on very remote and inaccessible lakes , when and if it brings forward proposals for a system of in-use compliance testing , I hope that the Commission will bear in mind the difficulty of implementing them in many Member States .
I hope that it will also bear in mind that the improvements in environmental performance that it wishes to bring about will be very fractional and may not justify the large amounts of cost and inconvenience for all concerned .
After those few , relatively negative comments , let me thank the Commission for its help in producing these proposals .
I thank all those Members - none of whom have turned up - for their contributions .
We have reached a satisfactory outcome for all concerned .
I commend the proposal to the House .
Mr President , honourable Members , Mr Callanan , I would like to start by thanking Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee and you above all , Mr Callanan , for the outstanding work that has speedily produced the compromise text that is before us today .
The Commission proposal to amend the Recreational Craft Directive is intended to take environmental concerns into account in a directive on the internal market , and so it is a good example of the synergies that the achievement of sustainable development requires between environmental and industrial policies .
The compromise reached in the trilogue between representatives of this House and of the Council represents a balance between these two pillars of sustainable development .
The Commission 's expectation is that this dossier will be brought to successful completion , by which is meant the adoption of the accompanying text by this House and by the Council .
That is the final procedural step towards the long-awaited Community-wide regulatory system limiting emissions from recreational craft , and I thank this House , and again in particular the rapporteur , for their help in achieving this objective .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to thank the rapporteur for his constructive work and , like the rapporteur , regret that we are holding the debate at this hour , but I believe it is our common love of boats , sailing and shipbuilding that brings us here this evening .
There is of course a saying that goes , Navigare necesse est , vivere non est necesse .
Anyway , it is one of the most important things in life we are dealing with here .
At the same time , the issue is also extremely important to , for example , those regions I represent , in which boat building is an important industry .
I have been following the genesis of this directive ever since Germany and Sweden proposed that we should introduce uniform standards .
Today , we can see that the agreement concerning this directive has stopped the European market from fragmenting .
In the same way , I am glad that we have finally agreed between ourselves upon similar standards in connection with lakes and seas .
I believe that the rapporteur has had a very important role to play in this connection .
In the speech he made today , he has also shown that he is familiar with what applies in different parts of Europe .
I am grateful for his having mentioned my own country .
We have arrived at a sensible proposal , and one that is important in terms of the environment .
The directive also entails the introduction of something essential : noise regulations for water scooters .
The new water scooters released onto the market as from 1 January 2005 will have to comply with the directive .
When , before the end of 2006 , the Commission goes on to review the directive , it is important for the issue of noise from water scooters to be examined in detail , because water scooters at present constitute the greatest nuisance in terms of noise in many areas of the vulnerable Scandinavian archipelago .
I am also delighted that it has been possible to agree upon a review of the various categories of boat .
You cannot imagine the anxiety that has been felt in Finland concerning what would happen in connection with what are known as the Savolax boats .
There was concern that they might fall foul of the directive , an issue of which the Finnish Commissioner is well aware .
This matter too would now appear , however , to have been dealt with .
I hope that a new approach can be adopted when reviewing the directive , for we are concerned here with thoroughly detailed regulation that should perhaps take a different turn in the future .
Finally , I agree with the rapporteur that it is a good solution not to require the Commission to go in for in-use compliance testing .
There are certainly many alternatives , including voluntary systems , for achieving precisely what we are seeking , and at a more reasonable cost .
On behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , I wish to recommend that we , by acclamation , approve the report by the conciliation delegation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , in Portugal , and more precisely in the Algarve region , which I represent here , recreational craft and jet skis are an undeniable fact of everyday life due to the abundance of bathing resorts and the tourist activities associated with them .
With the aim of updating Directive 94 / 25 / EC ( 16.06.1994 ) , the European Commission has decided to keep up with technological developments in engines and the most recent environmental protection requirements .
We welcome the European Commission 's original initiative of making craft more compatible with environmental laws currently in force , specifically those concerning :
exhaust and particulate emissions that degrade the quality of bathing waters ;
and also engine noise , which damages both the environment and the well-being of local populations and holiday-makers .
I therefore have paid particular attention to the work that led to the report now before us .
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate Mr Callanan on the quality of his report , on which I have already had the opportunity to express my position , at the second reading in the European Parliament in September 2002 .
I welcome the final outcome of the conciliation procedure , in which the European Parliament was able to impose its views , for example applying the three-decibel noise emission allowance to all engine types .
Nevertheless , I must add that I support the idea of a system of exemptions for craft designed for competitions and for commercial passenger transport , which are both important aspects in developing tourism , the main activity in my region .
With regard to competitions , I shall simply give the example of the annual staging in the Algarve of one leg of the World Formula 1 championship in Motonaútica , which attracts thousands of tourists from Portugal and from abroad to the region .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , recreational craft can look back on a very important development .
They were originally powered by two-stroke engines that really did pollute the environment and also produced a great deal of noise .
What is noticeable about modern boats is that research and development have already achieved a great deal , and development can go ahead .
I believe that we have found a joint solution here , one that also provides an incentive for the further development of this new technology , and I would like to thank Mr Callanan most warmly for seizing the initiative .
What matters to us at the end of the day is that mobility should be ensured in the future , not only for the purposes of carrying on a business or profession , where it can of course very often be vital , but also in the sphere of sporting activity , where , so I believe , quite a bit has been achieved recently .
What matters at the end of the day is that exhaust gases and noise should be kept to a minimum so that these are appropriate to the surroundings in question .
I therefore believe that we have now found a solution with which we can all be happy .
Let me again express my heartfelt gratitude and my hope that this may bring us an agreed outcome in Parliament too .
Thank you , Mr Rübig .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Mr President , honourable Members , the travel and tourist industry has been hard hit by the military conflict in Iraq , whilst SARS has also been a cause of new insecurity .
The adverse effects on tourism in general should not , however , be overestimated .
We have every right to hope that tourism will recover at most of the European tourist destinations .
Tourism is one of the European Union 's major branches of industry , with a direct contribution to the gross domestic product and to employment amounting to about 5 % , and its indirect contribution to some 12 % .

In its 13 November 2001 communication entitled ' Working together for the future of European tourism ' , the Commission proposed an operational framework and measures aimed at invigorating the European tourist industry , an area in which it is backing close collaboration between all participants in the public and private sectors .
The Commission 's legislative and work programme for 2003 envisages a new communication on the further transposition of parts of the 2001 communication , with specific reference to the issue of the sustainability of European tourism .
This will be an initiative specifically aimed at coordinating action by all interested parties to revive the European tourist industry .
If the Member States and the tourist industry agree to the Commission initiating further coordinated action to help the European tourist industry recover from markedly adverse circumstances , the Commission would be willing to do so under Community competences defined in the Treaty .
Mention of Community competences leads me to refer to the Convention , which , to a large degree , works with a view to legal continuity .
In the present Treaty on the European Communities , tourism is listed under Article 3 ( 1 ) ( u ) .
As regards reference to tourism as a complementary responsibility in the future constitution , we must wait and see what proposals the praesidium will put forward on the subject and how the Convention responds to them .
As far as its legislative programme for 2003 is concerned , the Commission has listed over 40 items of proposed legislation that can be expected to have some effect on tourism , 24 of them to a more or less marked degree .
These include proposals relating to the policy priorities for 2003 , as well as other items of proposed legislation that will probably be put forward in 2003 .
They cover a multiplicity of policy areas , mainly transport - with 40 % of all proposals and half of the most important - followed by taxation issues with 5 proposals .
It is to be hoped that these initiatives by the Commission will receive this House 's support .
Mr President , Commissioner , there can be no doubt that , especially recently , tourism in Europe is going through a serious crisis , due in part to the Iraqi crisis .
I think that there should be action to deal with this problem at European level .
We would expect more substantial steps in this direction but , of course , the basic problem is the lack of a legal basis in the Treaty .
And that is what I shall focus on in my intervention .
I know that from time to time the Commissioner , Mr Liikanen , also does what he can and what he is allowed to do on the basis of the current legislative framework ; however , there are initiatives which affect the tourism sector and do not fit into a single approach and , at the same time , there is the strange phenomenon that , although we have policy for industry , we do not have policy for the most important part of industry or , in all events , a part which is becoming more and more important , which is tourism .
It is also strange , I think , that there are policies on various individual issues , such as fisheries , and rightly so , while the tourism sector , which provides work for a great many workers , the number of which rises year by year , is ignored .
No-one here in this Parliament , Commissioner , is talking about replacing the role of the Member States .
On the contrary .
We are talking about added value at Brussels level .
We are talking about coordinating action , we are talking about imitating what is basically happening in other sectors , as in the example of industry I mentioned to you .
The constitutional Convention is an important opportunity that should not be missed .
Your reply , the reply of the Commission , not you personally , because I know that you are not responsible for the issue , you are merely so kind as to represent the Commission here , does not , I must say , satisfy Parliament .
If you look at the positions taken by Parliament from time to time , your reply is rather neutral .
One expects a stronger commitment on the part of the Commission for the Convention .
There are members of the Convention who are addressing the issue .
Our honourable friend , Mr Lamassoure , has tabled an amendment so that tourism becomes an additional responsibility of the European Union and we are waiting for substantial steps and a strong commitment on this particular issue on the part of the European Commission , because the Convention cannot and must not go unexploited .
This is an opportunity for us to make a fresh start on tourism at European level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , approximately one year ago , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the future of tourism in Europe , for which I was rapporteur , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism . This resolution expressly proposed that the tourism sector should have a solid legal base in the future European Constitution in order to allow the Commission to react effectively to the various problems that might arise .
Since this is one of the largest sectors of activity in Europe , which is the top tourist region in the world , and since it is one of the sectors with the brightest future in terms of jobs and wealth creation , it is hard to understand the lack of political recognition and means for intervention provided in the current Treaties .
Since the growing trend in our manufacturing industry is to relocate outside Europe , tourism emerges as a labour-intensive activity involving a multitude of services that cannot be relocated , which Europe has now and on which it can continue to count in future .
Because of its cross-border definition , however , should this activity remain outside the scope of the European institutions ?
Can Europe refuse to intervene in a sector that is one of the most promising for its future development ?
Can the European Union remain unprepared to confront and respond to the needs of the industries involved in this activity , simply because there is no legal base that would enable it to intervene effectively ?
This is the situation we must now address .
In fact , the provisions of the new Constitution presented by the Praesidium do not contain a single reference to tourism .
There is not even a proposal to maintain what has been achieved in the Treaties currently in force .
We in the European Parliament maintain our position of wanting tourism to be referred to expressly as a sector of competences shared between the European Union and the Member States , being referred to specifically in the first part of the Constitution and in the part concerning the policies of the future European Constitution .
Our question is this : what is the Commission doing to achieve this ?
I therefore ask the Commission what its proposals are for strengthening the legal base of tourism in the future European Constitution .
Mr President , Commissioner , as a member of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism I am glad finally to have an opportunity to speak about tourism .
In my view , there are three specific issues .
The first is the environmental impact .
A very large number of Members of this House come from areas where tourism is important as an economic sector and where tourism has a major impact on people and the environment .
I should therefore like to ask the Commission how it intends to manage this impact of tourism on people and the environment .
Further , what is the Commission doing about the conservation of tourism in the context of Agenda 21 ?
I also think of the importance of Article 6 of the Treaty , which obliges the Commission to integrate environmental protection in its policy sectors , thus including the tourist sector , with a view to the promotion of sustainable development .
A second aspect is the link with regional policy .
There is certainly a link with regional development and tourism .
But it must not be the case that a region 's own trump cards , that is its nature and cultural heritage , are destroyed .
The Structural Funds must be expressed far more clearly in this regard .
The third link is transport policy .
There has of course been enormous growth in passenger traffic .
We see growth not only in air traffic , but also in car traffic .
Here we need a specific approach in my view in favour of environmentally friendly and safe transport .
The current disappearance of the international overnight trains proves that we are falling short in this area .
There is also no European regulation on taking bicycles on the train .
I hope that the Commission is prepared to invest in good practices , networking and knowledge development around the problems of mobility and tourism .
Mr President , Commissioner , what I am going to say is not directed at you personally , but , as you are representing the Commission , I trust that you will relay our discussions to your fellow Commissioner , Mr Liikanen .
The fact is that I found your answer rather soothing .
I believe that , as a result of the war in Iraq and of the outbreak of SARS in Asia , tourism in Europe and tourist travel to Europe have - as we say on the German coast - heavy weather to contend with , as does foreign tourism outside Europe .
Air travel alone has seen passenger numbers decline , with a drop of 10 % on flights to the Middle East and as much as 25 % and more for flights to Asia .
The airlines and tourism enterprises are doing their best to get the situation under control , but they need support from the Member States and from the EU .
There are , alas , no indications so far as to how the European Union and the Member States propose to develop a joint strategy to alleviate this crisis and bring it to an end .
So my first question to the Commissioner is to ask whether she is willing to appoint , on an ad hoc basis , a high-level working party , which would involve the tourist industry and whose purpose would be to develop a strategy to reduce the tourist industry 's costs and to stimulate international tourism ?
Secondly , Commissioner , and quite apart from the present crisis , the Commission must , I believe , examine the fundamental aspects underlying tourism and give primary and close attention to the competitive situation in the Member States .
After all , it cannot be right , in a European single market , that the Member States should levy VAT at different rates on similar tourist activities .
That distorts the competition among them .
You will know - and have yourself emphasised the fact - that the tourist industry merits our particular attention precisely because it is in the hands of the same small and medium-sized enterprises that create jobs and training opportunities over wide areas of the European Union .
In conclusion , I want to repeat something that has been said by all the previous speakers , which is that support measures for tourism require legal certainty and legal clarity , and , for that reason , tourism must become a task in its own right in the constitution , with clear powers to act laid down for it .
Commissioner , I admit that we too have problems with our representatives in the Convention , but the Commission , too , has two representatives there , and so I ask you whether the Commission 's two representatives have made an unambiguous request for tourism to be incorporated into the new constitution as a task involving powers to act .
Thank you , Mr Jarzembowski .
As it seems that Mrs Schreyer wishes to respond , she has the floor .
Mr President , as such specific questions have been put , I would again like to take the opportunity of responding to Mr Dhaene .
I had stated that the Commission would , this year , be issuing a communication on the sustainability of tourism .
In view of the issue in the Convention , I can , at present , tell you only that the Commission does of course want to safeguard the present position , but I can certainly concede that you are right to say that we have two representatives in the Convention as against the sixteen from Parliament .
That being so , I am sure that things can be done there .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was closed at 11.06 p.m. )
Situation in Iraq
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Iraq .
The Council has arrived in Strasbourg and the minister is on his way .
I would suggest to the House that we should in any event commence our debate , reversing the normal pattern by beginning with the Commission statement , if this is acceptable to the Commissioner .
Given the pressure on our agenda it is important that we try to proceed on time .
The minister should be here in a few minutes .
Mr President , I wish to begin by giving an account of my visit to Baghdad a week ago .
I travelled there with the overall objective of signalling our continuing humanitarian support and solidarity with the Iraqi people .
As a reminder , ECHO has since 1992 and before the current conflict allocated EUR 157 million in humanitarian aid , mainly for health and sanitation .
This programme was complementary to the oil-for-food programme and , in fact , made ECHO the largest humanitarian donor in the country .
Following the outbreak of the conflict , EUR 100 million was secured overall for humanitarian needs , of which an amount of EUR 22.5 million has now been committed and is being implemented , mainly for activities concerning health and water .
I wanted to get a first-hand impression of the humanitarian situation in the country through discussions with our partners - the UN , Red Cross and NGOs , the US-led Office for Reconstruction and Humanitarian Aid ( ORHA ) - and Member States , and through project visits .
To that effect , I met with ICRC President Kellenberger , Ambassador Ward , who is heading the humanitarian aid pillar of ORHA , the UN Humanitarian Coordinator Mr Lopes da Silva , a large number of NGOs and the Member States present in Baghdad .
I visited the Abu Nawas raw water pumping station and the big Al Yarmouk hospital .
Another objective was to evaluate possibilities for the opening of an ECHO office in Baghdad .
Premises have now been identified and following the administrative procedures the office should open by the end of May .
ECHO staff have been present in Baghdad for some time .
My assessment of the humanitarian situation in Iraq is that it cannot be characterised as a humanitarian catastrophe .
The direct humanitarian impact of the war has fortunately been smaller than was expected by most humanitarian agencies .
No massive population movements have occurred and direct casualties as a result of the conflict have also , fortunately , been far less numerous than some of the initial estimations had predicted .
Nevertheless , there are very real humanitarian needs and the situation remains very fragile , notably in the main urban centres - there are more than two or three cities of importance in this respect - where the problem is still very much the availability of safe water and similar problems .
There could easily be a humanitarian disaster if the occupying powers fail to enforce law and order and institutions are not reactivated and put back in charge .
Safety is still a very real problem for people trying to go to work or return to work in Iraq .
According to the Geneva Conventions , it is the obligation of the occupying powers not only to restore and maintain law and order in all places under their control , but also to ensure that people have full and secure access to vital goods and services , and to make it possible for people to return to their work .
In spite of this , the international community , as such , has a duty to assist the victims of the situation , and the Commission has up to now approved humanitarian aid operations , as I have already mentioned , amounting to EUR 22.5 million .
These include emergency relief , emergency supplies of drugs and medical equipment , water supply and basic , very immediate rehabilitation of health , water and sanitation infrastructures .
ECHO is also supporting OCHA - the UN coordinator - and is making it possible for it to work efficiently .
The remaining EUR 77.5 million of the 100 million secured will be programmed , and decisions made , as further needs are assessed and identified .
The current priorities for ECHO are to support the rapid restoration of social services , especially health care , including the resumption of vaccination campaigns , the effective coordination of humanitarian assistance , mine awareness and de-mining activities .
It also envisages support for the World Food Programme to help cover the gaps in the food distribution programme .
I hope this will be a transitional challenge .
Under the oil-for-food programme the system was well organised : 44 000 local outlets running year-in-year-out provided 60 % of the population 's food requirements .
This was a huge operation , with the Iraqi authorities themselves responsible for the two southern parts of the country , and the UN for the north .
We must ensure the whole thing works , because leaving it to some miracle of the market economy to solve all this from one week to another is a recipe for turmoil and disaster .
This is quite well understood by all the different players involved in the situation .
However , it is a complicated operation .
Concerning the wider political framework , the discussion at the UN Security Council of a draft UN Security Council resolution constitutes a positive step in bringing the debate over Iraq 's future back to the United Nations .
We make a very clear distinction - for many good reasons - between the immediate response to humanitarian needs and the whole discussion concerning reconstruction .
They are very different .
Everything relating to reconstruction brings us immediately into the centre of political discussions about the structure and structuring of power in the new Iraq .
In the case of humanitarian aid , however , the immediate response can and should be handled as a much more focused activity .
This Security Council draft resolution has been tabled , as everybody knows , by the US and the UK to clarify how the occupying powers would like things to be organised .
The Iraqi Assistance Fund is the cornerstone for handling all the decisions and financial management of the country and its resources .
The decisions concerning this Iraqi Assistance Fund and also covering decisions on licensing in the oil industry are to be taken by the occupying powers , and the Iraqi side and the UN are given a consultative role in those decisions on the basis of the draft resolution .
The draft resolution would also provide for immunity for those making these decisions , and the remaining money - the unspent balance from the oil-for-food programme - should also be put into this fund and administered like the rest of it .
It is supposed to run for 12 months , but then to continue unchanged - with all the provisions unchanged - if no new decisions are made to that effect by the Security Council , of which these two main occupying powers are permanent members .
The Commission 's involvement in the reconstruction phase will naturally depend on the outcome of these discussions in the Security Council - this is self-evident .
At the informal ministerial meeting in Rhodes , the Council invited the Commission to undertake some concrete steps to start identifying possibilities for EU involvement in the reconstruction in Iraq .
We have therefore increased our working contacts with the relevant international organisations ( World Bank , IMF and UN ) with a view to taking forward jointly our analysis of the situation in Iraq .
The Commission has developed specific expertise in various aspects of reconstruction and rehabilitation from other crisis situations , such as Kosovo , East Timor , Afghanistan and Ivory Coast .
But , in any case , concrete decisions will need to be taken on the basis of an appropriate political framework and a solid needs assessment , and through a participatory process with the international community and the Iraqis themselves .
A final comment on the regional dimension : the Union is very well placed to offer a regional approach to stabilisation , which will be extremely important in the case of Iraq .
Our ties with the region are already very important .
The Barcelona process , the comprehensive dialogue , the human rights and on-going political and cooperation negotiations with Iran , the on-going negotiations for a free trade area with the Gulf Cooperation Council , the ministerial meetings and our very tight political links with Turkey - all these constitute a solid basis on which to build an active and constructive EU policy in the wake of the Iraqi conflict .
We need to continually assess how best to reinforce our political dialogue and role in the region .
In addition to making a statement on Iraq as planned , Minister Yiannitsis will also comment on the terrorist attack in Saudi Arabia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two days ago there was another terrorist attack in Riad with a significant number of victims , deaths and injuries .
Again a few days ago , a similar terrorist attack in Chechnya gave rise to a significant number of victims .
The presence of violence is strong everywhere .
In my capacity as President-in-Office of the European Union , I should like to roundly condemn these disgusting actions , to express my profound sorrow for the victims and their families , to express the wish for ways to be found to break this tragic form of political intervention and dispense justice and to emphasise the urgent need for us to achieve conditions of stability , security and confidence ; for us to impose the policy against blind violence and fanaticism .
Allow me now to move on to the item on the agenda relating to Iraq .
Today , we face a new situation in Iraq .
From a military point of view , the operations have essentially been completed .
From a political point of view , a series of questions is being raised to which I shall refer in a moment .
From a practical point of view , the predominant issues are humanitarian aid and the safeguarding of security , order and the restoration of normalcy in the area .
Although the overall situation appears to be improving , the rate of progress is slow and it is obvious that considerable difficulties and problems need to be resolved .
At the present stage , the allied forces are responsible for consolidating security and providing humanitarian aid with the presence of Member States of the European Union ; however , the assistance and support of the international community as a whole are needed for there to be a fast , efficient and operational return to normalcy .
The first priority , of course , is the channelling of humanitarian aid and the full restoration of order and security .
Significant sums have been amassed within the framework of the United Nations - approximately USD 1.7 billion - without , however , there being a clear picture of the record of damage and the reconstruction requirements of the country .
The European Commission and , from what I heard , Commissioner Nielson obviously referred to this , has already earmarked EUR 100 million , part of which has already been channelled to the area and an important contribution is being made at bilateral level by the European countries .
There are plans on the part of the European Union for a grant of EUR 250 million for 2003 .
I would point out that , as long as the sanctions regime continues to apply , the United Nations oil for food programme , which was recently extended to 3 June 2003 , continues to operate .
I should like to add at this point that , in order to deal with the humanitarian crisis , cooperation between all the agencies involved is particularly important , so as to safeguard access to the country , as is independent and impartial action on all sides .
There is no need for me to stress that , in addition to the provision of humanitarian aid , the need to protect the cultural heritage of Iraq from a repeat of incidents such as those that took place recently is extremely important .
I should like to express my disgust at the looting and destruction of archaeological treasures , museums and monuments and stress that our immediate objective must be to find the priceless exhibits that have disappeared and seize and return them to the country as and when they appear .
We expect the planning and the administrative work of the military forces occupying Iraq to have tangible results in this sector shortly and we also see coordinated action on the part of the international community on this matter as a top priority .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union , on the basis of its previous experience with regard to the reconstruction of states and areas - I refer to Kosovo , Afghanistan and East Timor - must and can contribute efficiently to the reconstruction of Iraq .
Its active participation can focus on numerous sectors , not just on the humanitarian aid I referred to , but also on replacing infrastructures , on support and the provision of know-how with the democratisation and restructuring of institutions , so-called institutional building , on cooperation within the framework of international financial organisations in order to find a solution to the question of Iraq 's debt and , of course , on the political reconstruction of the country .
It is precisely the joint objective of contributing to the more general reconstruction of the country which is yet another point of convergence and reason for putting the differences which recently split the Member States on the question of Iraq behind us .
At the European summit in Athens on 16 and 17 April , the European Union confirmed its commitment to playing an important role in this direction and asked the High Representative and the Commission to examine this question .
I would point out that this question was also discussed during the course of the informal Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs in Greece two weeks ago and we are examining how and what we can contribute .
In fact , important questions still remain open , such as , in particular , how oil revenues are to be controlled , what the future of the oil for food programme will be , what will happen to the contracts signed by the previous regime , how the weapons of mass destruction will be located , what will happen when UNMOVIC returns and others .
The basic principles governing our action to manage the situation in Iraq , however , remain unchanged . The territorial integrity and sovereignty of the country , the vital role of the United Nations and the right of the Iraqi people to determine their future .
Equally important , of course , is the establishment of a government which is representative of the entire population and the use of the natural wealth of the country for its own benefit .
We believe that the United Nations , and the Security Council in particular , with its special institutional and organisational infrastructure and its political experience from similar situations , have a fundamental role .
The appointment by the Secretary-General of the United Nations of a special representative to Iraq is a positive step in this direction .
A smooth transition to a democratic and stable situation will also contribute towards regional peace and stability .
Within this framework , we have repeatedly pointed out to neighbouring countries the need to demonstrate sangfroid and self-control and to contribute to the reconstruction of Iraq and to combating the humanitarian problem , with the objective of stability in the region .
Both Turkey and Iran are taking a positive approach to the overall question .
Similarly today , attention has also been turned to the question of the road map for peace in the Middle East .
It is clear , as has been said many times , that the promotion of the peace process in the Middle East will have highly positive repercussions overall .
The meeting of the Quartet at ministerial level on 21 May is particularly important within this framework , given that the establishment of positive prospects take precedence and we urgently need to restore a climate of trust with the Arab world .
Regional stability and security will also help substantially to combat the problems linked with Iraq , and will also facilitate the reintegration of the country into the international community after 12 years of sanctions and essential isolation .
The issue of disarming the country must be settled definitively in accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council of the United Nations and must be linked to the adoption at broader regional level of an overall and efficient policy for preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is often easy to agree on general principles , but it is proving to be particularly difficult to agree on specific solutions and decisions , especially when questions are raised of institutions , of international legitimacy , of arrangements which emerge after a war , of situations which have arisen objectively and need to be dealt with .
This naturally has repercussions both on the extent to which and the method by which questions are dealt with .
From the Presidency 's point of view , however , I believe that we can summarise the priorities as follows : first we need to develop a pragmatic , global , cohesive European policy for post-war Iraq , taking account of the long-term aspects of developments in the Middle East as a whole ; to clarify how we , the European Union , see the role of the United Nations in post-war Iraq ; to help Iraq get over the problems it has been through and to set up conditions of peace , security , acceptance , dignity and prosperity for the Iraqi people ; to implement the principles we accepted in our joint decisions at recent Councils ; and to promote regional stability and cooperation by supporting the peace process in the Middle East .

These priorities do not mean that we do not face problems and dangers .
I shall refer specifically to just some of these dangers .
One such danger is that discussions on Iraq will turn from being fruitful dialogue on dealing with the central problems affecting the country to secondary conflicts .
A second issue is the difficulty in agreeing on subsequent measures and subsequent decisions by the Security Council .
A third issue relates to developments in trans-Atlantic relations .
Fourthly , the differences between the European states , although I believe that , on the issues of the post-war phase , these phenomena will be far less acute .
Fifthly , the inability to determine the role we wish to play in Iraq and , finally , any obstacles that might lead us into inertia .
I think that we must bear these dangers in mind so that we deal with them efficiently , so that we arrive at an approach and action which will enable us to deal with the Iraqi question and its repercussions .
In the final analysis , it is the stability , security , normalcy and economic development not only of the country but also of the wider area which are put into doubt or which are linked to these developments .
The whole issue is also connected to the credibility of everyone involved in the Iraqi crisis and , consequently , of Europe also .
In closing , however , I should like to confirm that the Council , as I mentioned , is demonstrating a constructive approach to the formulation of joint answers to the issues of Iraq .
There is close contact between all sides without exception , which is helping us , on the one hand , to prevent splits in contacts between the Member States and , on the other hand - and these intentions are indicative - to reach agreements despite any differences , to have open lines , to see as a matter of priority where there are bridges and how we can make use of them .
It is this constructive stance that also appeared in our discussions in Gimnich and which , I believe , can make us more optimistic about the ability of the European Union to finally play a positive and active role at this stage in Iraq .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on Tuesday night some 90 people died in a brutal terrorist attack in Riyadh , the capital of Saudi Arabia .
The victims included both Saudis and Europeans - as far as we know , French , British , German , one Swiss - and Australians .
This shows once again that the challenges posed by terrorism do not just affect the Americans , they affect us all , and the lesson we should learn from this appalling terrorist attack in Riyadh should be that we need to join together to fight terrorism resolutely throughout the world .
The President-in-Office was right to refer to Chechnya .
The European Parliament - well my group at least , but I think this also applies to the other groups - will be considering very carefully what further progress can be made towards a peaceful solution in Chechnya .
Following the Iraq war , we Europeans need to decide what lessons we can learn from experiences which have been painful for Europe as well , and we must make it clear that there is no cause for defeatism .
During this unhappy period of lack of European unity I have often heard it said this makes nonsense of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
No , we must treat this crisis as an opportunity to be seized and make sure that in future we do better than with the Iraq crisis and the Iraq war .
Above all , we need to make sure that before one Member State or a number of Member States adopt a national position and then go public , we should discuss our respective standpoints within the European Union so that we can arrive at a common position .
This demand is also aimed at the two European members of the United Nations Security Council .
The Maastricht Treaty already stipulates that before Member States who are members of the Security Council vote , they should first consult with their partners in the European Union , and that is the lesson we should learn from the past few weeks .
I would also like to add - and this concerns our relations with the United States - that those people who think that a united Europe should be created in opposition to the United States are on shaky ground , because if we build up Europe in opposition to the United States , then at least half , if not more , of all Europeans would turn their back on a united Europe , so there is in fact no alternative to creating a Europe that does not oppose the United States , but is an equal partner of the USA .
Let me add a further point . One voice in America suggested that Europe could be divided into New Europe and Old Europe .
On a recent visit to Warsaw I realised that they are not happy with that suggestion there .
Warsaw - Poland - is part of the Old Europe and shares our roots , and we should not allow anyone to divide Europe into two halves .
No , it is up to us to act in unison .
Now let me turn to Iraq .
We are bound to have a strong interest in civil order being swiftly re-established , and when we are talking about the relationship between the European Union and the Arab Islamic states we often say that there cannot and must not be any clash of civilisation , and the same of course applies to order in Iraq .
Iraq 's population includes Shiites , Sunnis and Christians , Arabs and Kurds , and I believe that one area where we really may be able to help - and if we can help , then we should - is to ensure that peace and order prevail in Iraq , and that there is no conflict between the various religious or ethnic groups .
I believe that the European Union has an important role to play here , and on behalf of my group I welcome the fact that you have been to Iraq , Commissioner Nielson .
It is of course very difficult to say at this point here in the European Parliament whether the United Nations is to be given an exclusive role , and what role we as the European Union and others are to play - NATO perhaps , and the United States and the United Kingdom as the two powers that intervened there .
That is hard to say , but what we can say is that we call on everyone involved there - and particularly the Europeans , including our Polish partners and friends - for we Europeans to take whatever action we take in concert , once we have agreed on a common position .
There are enormous humanitarian challenges in Iraq , and I believe that we can make a contribution to security there , to the establishment of a police force , to water supply , to healthcare and to a new political order in general .
In conclusion , let me say this : we do of course have questions for our American friends and partners .
So far , no weapons of mass destruction have been found .
I recommend that the search for them should be continued , as that was the basis for intervention , and its political credibility is dependent on that , which is why we need to take that question very seriously indeed .
( Applause )
What we need to achieve now is a peaceful solution in the Middle East between Israel and Palestine , and that was indeed our great hope following the Kuwait crisis in 1991 , when I was very much in favour of the liberation of Kuwait and the firm action against Saddam Hussein that it involved .
We must seize this opportunity now .
The credibility of our policy will also depend on our success in achieving a peaceful solution there , and I call on all of us to make a united and decisive contribution as Europeans .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by joining - on behalf of the Socialist Group - in the condemnation of the massive attacks in Saudi Arabia and Chechnya , and Parliament should also send its condolences to the families of all the victims of this war , particularly the civil population , and stress that we profoundly regret the fact that 14 journalists have died during the conflict , two have disappeared and American troops have bombed media organisations such as Al-Jazeera and also the Palestine hotel , which was occupied by journalists .
Having heard Mr Poettering , I would like to say , on behalf of my group , that we regret even more than you that it has not been considered appropriate to produce a resolution , because we could have agreed on many points and because it is important that the European Parliament 's voice is heard .
We are giving the impression that we are indifferent to what is happening and we have a shared responsibility with the other institutions of the Union .
Firstly , with regard to the emergency situation , I would like to welcome the efforts the Commission is making - the Commissioner has been in Baghdad .
EUR 100 million is being provided , and I would ask you please to include women in the peace negotiations and in aid , because this is a very important element if peace is to be achieved in Iraq .
Furthermore , I believe we must support the restoration of basic services .
The Commissioner has raised a point which I believe to be important : we must not confuse humanitarian aid with reconstruction and , above all , humanitarian aid must not be a political bargaining chip .
You have the support of the Socialist Group in this regard .
With regard to the reconstruction process and the debate under way in the Security Council , I would like firstly to point out that , according to international law , we are in a de facto situation , in which there is a coalition which is acting as an occupying power in occupied territory .
In accordance with the Geneva Convention and the Hague Regulations , the coalition has clear responsibilities and limits to its authority , and this must be incorporated into the current framework , because otherwise everything will depend on the power games in Washington .
I remind you that the first team of American governors in Iraq has already come to an end .
The confusion is increasing all the time and it is therefore important to reaffirm the role of the United Nations Security Council .
We Europeans have responsibilities here .
It is the case that , according to Articles 11 , 12 and 13 of the Treaty , we are obliged to coordinate our positions .
But it is odd that we are able to coordinate them amongst Europeans and with others , in the Middle East Quartet and even with the Arab League , but the same principle is not applied in the Security Council .
Public opinion cannot understand this and furthermore Europe has serious responsibilities here .
It is therefore very important that the agreement reached in Athens on 16 April is now applied , but within the framework of international law .
Why ?
In order to establish a government belonging to the Iraqi people , which respects territorial integrity and also provides the Iraqi people with an opportunity , having finally been liberated from a despotic tyranny .
We are beginning to see the disappearance of political and religious repression and the Iraqi people are being allowed to express themselves .
This is an absolutely essential issue .
The lifting of the embargo - as expressed in several United Nations Resolutions - must be carried out under the authority of those Resolutions .
The inspectors must also return , because paradoxically the only people who have found any traces of weapons of mass destruction have been the teams of Mr Blix and Mr ElBaradei rather than the American inspectors , who are acting illegally , and it is therefore also important to intervene in this regard .
I would like to reiterate , on behalf of my group , that Iraqi oil and its exploitation belongs to the Iraqi people .
Oil - as we have seen too often - is a poisoned gift and there must be genuine respect for its use and the right to access to resources for the Iraqi people .
Finally , Mr President , please allow me to refer to the situation in the Middle East .
We cannot say that action had to be taken because 12 years had passed during which the regime of Saddam Hussein had not respected the United Nations resolutions when we have been waiting three decades for Resolution 242 to be complied with .
We must support the roadmap , Mr Sharon cannot cold-shoulder the Union 's High Representative for Foreign Policy , Mr Solana , because he has met President Arafat .
We must show goodwill , and above all we must defuse the most dangerous time bomb in the Middle East .
And all this requires that we Europeans re-establish our unity and act together .
Mr President , although many of us opposed the basis for the recent war with Iraq , we can unite in rejoicing at the fall of the brutal dictator Saddam Hussein .
The Iraqi people can now rebuild their country as a free democracy , at peace with its neighbours and using its immense natural resources to raise the standard of living .
The question for Europe today is how to unite in rebuilding Iraq so that we can overcome our previous division .
We must project Europe 's voice with the unity of a choir singing from the same hymn sheet , rather than the dissonance of an unruly cacophony .
The informal meeting of foreign ministers leaves me cautiously optimistic .
I welcome the proposals from the Commission and the Greek Presidency to guide our action in post-war Iraq .
While we may not yet have the capacity to wage war in defence of our values , we have long experience at winning the peace .
My group favours an active role for Europe in rebuilding Iraq , but for that we need the legitimacy which can come only from another UN resolution .
We were promised a ' vital ' role for the UN by President Bush .
Our foreign ministers have demanded a ' central ' role for the United Nations .
Yet the draft resolution of the US , the UK and Spain falls far short of either .
You cannot give a vital role to the UN simply by proclaiming it in a recital to a Security Council resolution .
A vital role means that rebuilding Iraq would not be not possible without the UN ; it entails not endorsing for a 12-month period the authority of the self-declared occupying powers , with the right to direct the disbursement of funds from Iraqi oil revenues .
A vital role for the UN means its involvement in setting up , as soon as possible , a legitimate and representative government of Iraqis , in lifting sanctions and in providing urgent humanitarian aid .
Why have running water and electricity not yet been restored ?
How many must die before we get medical supplies into hospitals and clean up the unexploded ordnance ?
Where are the police that the UN could send to help restore law and order ?
We need to give the people of Iraq a better life or their hardship will become anger towards the occupying powers .
A vital or central role for the UN also means readmitting Hans Blix and his weapons inspectors to verify what has happened to the weapons of mass destruction which remain unaccounted for .
Their existence and the claim that they could be used within 45 minutes were central to the case for war .
The weapons inspectors have the international legitimacy and credibility to complete the job they were asked to do , in cooperation with American and British forces on the ground .
The tragic events of Monday night in Saudi Arabia remind us of the continuing instability in the region .
That is why my group welcomes the visit of Colin Powell , marking the re-engagement of the United States in the peace process .
For lasting peace in the region and a successful rebuilding of Iraq , we must simultaneously take forward the Quartet 's roadmap for peace in Israel and Palestine .
Mr President , the last time we took a stance on Iraq was before the war , when Parliament expressed its full support for the United Nations inspectors .
At that time , we stated that none of the reasons put forward at that time justified a war and that ' any further steps must be taken by the Security Council after a full assessment of the situation ' .
Have we nothing to say about the extremely serious events that have taken place since then , which have been in total conflict with this line ?
That is what seems to be indicated by the majority decision of this House not to conclude this debate with the adoption of a resolution .
This petty decision would be rather trivial if it did not reflect a much deeper , serious defect of the European Union , namely its inability to define its identity and defend it with vigour .
This failure to take political responsibility has been spectacular since George Bush first implemented his new strategic doctrine .
To those who , like my group , feel that it is essential to react , in particular by looking towards what the New York Times calls ' the other superpower ' , in other words the general public who are actively opposed to the idea of war , I propose three closely linked priorities .
The first is to refuse to accept a fait accompli in Iraq .
The Iraqi people have been both freed from a dictatorship and plunged into chaos .
Having spoken to long-time opponents of Saddam Hussein , I can tell you that , on 9 April 2003 , many hearts and minds experienced a mixture of joy and suffering , relief and humiliation .
As the days passed , exasperation took over as a result of the blood spilt , the extent of the damage , vandalism and looting , the military occupation and the US civil proconsul .
All this , while the supposed motive for the war - the accumulation of weapons of mass destruction , of which George Bush , Tony Blair and José Maria Aznar all have irrefutable proof , of course - is running out of credibility .
Our second priority must therefore be to make an active commitment to ensuring the effective implementation of the Middle East roadmap .
The Union is co-initiator of this roadmap and therefore cannot rest on its laurels in the fact of the daily attempts by Sharon 's Government to destroy this slim chance of peace , in the belief that the current host in the White House will always understand its reasons .
Finally , we must all help to determine where the mad venture of pre-emptive war will lead us if Europe does not manage to muster the political will to do all in its power to nip it in the bud .
The fight against terrorism and against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is vital .
This dangerous imperial shift , however , is a completely different matter .
I reiterate today , Mr President , for the third time , the request by my group for Parliament 's first major , in-depth debate on the new strategic doctrine published by George Bush on 20 September .
This cynical homage to the law of the most powerful seeks solely to debase all of the principles of the United Nations Charter , as demonstrated once again even now by the US draft resolution to the Security Council .
It is time for Europe to raise the alarm and to take up its responsibilities .
That is what the majority of our citizens , from Strasbourg to Warsaw , expect of us .
Our own roadmap could consist of seeking to meet this expectation .
In any event , my group is ready .
Mr President , there is nothing more unpleasant for a politician than to be right but not to win the argument .
What is even worse is to be wrong and to see ever more clearly how wrong you were .
Very specifically , we all know that the so-called existence of large quantities of weapons of mass destruction was the main official reason for starting this war .
We all recall the presentations by Tony Blair and Colin Powell in the United Nations , where they produced hard evidence of the existence of these weapons of mass destruction .
Now , after weeks of searching by hundreds of American and British soldiers , it seems this evidence does not exist .
Might this perhaps be the reason why the authorities , for which read the Americans and the British , are refusing to let Hans Blix and his UN inspection team in ?
The UN weapons inspectors are the only ones who can demonstrate that Iraq is free of weapons of mass destruction , but they are also the only ones who will very probably demonstrate that Bush and Blair were wrong when they started this war because there were supposed to be weapons of mass destruction .
This refusal is part of a much broader pattern , one of keeping the United Nations at arm 's length .
It is not right and nor is it smart .
Let me give two examples of where the role of the United Nations is crucial .
UNEP , the United Nations environmental organisation , has , rightly in my view , pressed for an investigation as soon as possible into the environmental effects , the environmental consequences of the use of cluster bombs and depleted uranium for example .
The establishment of a tribunal , sorely needed for processing the criminal past , is only possible with the help of the United Nations .
But let us also be clear : the European Union itself can only function at full power whether we are talking of humanitarian aid or of reconstruction within a framework that has been legitimised by the United Nations and as an equal partner of the US and not as a subcontractor .
My fear is that Europe , without that UN mandate , will nonetheless , half-heartedly and probably even grudgingly , assist with the reconstruction of Iraq .
The EU from a sense of duty , some Member States because they have no wish for a second conflict with the United States and because they want their share .
That is not the Common Foreign Policy that my group has in mind .
The road to a European Union common foreign policy runs via New York , via the United Nations .
Only with a UN mandate will the EU be able to put its - not insignificant - capabilities to use in building up Iraq and returning the government to the Iraqi people .
That is also in the interest of the United States and the United Kingdom .
I should therefore like to call on the British , the Spanish , but also the Polish governments and our colleagues in the government parties in those countries to break with the logic of war according to which the winner takes all .
The winner does not take all ; it must not want to , nor must it be able to .
Look at what is happening in Iraq at the moment .
It is a chaos in which one military governor succeeds another because the Americans and the British do not really know exactly what to do .
Iraq has no need of triumphalist victors who do not know what to do .
The war has been won by the few , but the peace can only be won by the many .
Mr President , I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to the Greek Presidency and Commissioner Nielson for the very fine statements that they made here this morning , and to my Parliamentary colleagues for the very enlightening statements they have made as well .
The US Government has avowed its intention to hand over the sovereignty of Iraq to a representative Iraqi Government at a very early date .
Two meetings of Iraqi political leaders have now taken place .
The most recent , in Baghdad on 25 April , ended with an agreement to work to put together a transitional administration by 3 June 2003 .
This administration will then work to promulgate a new constitution for the people of Iraq and deal with other long-term government issues .
I very much welcome the fact that a draft resolution has been tabled at the United Nations on the subject of how to deal with the post-conflict situation in Iraq .
I believe that there are a number of guiding yardsticks which must be adhered to in the context of addressing the future role of the United Nations in Iraq .
The United Nations must play a central role in the reconstruction of Iraq .
This must begin from a clear understanding that it is not the purpose of any United Nations involvement to legitimise the recent military conflict .
The United Nations must be an equal partner , and not have a subordinate position limited to acquiescing to decisions made by the coalition in Iraq .
It would be very unfair to the civilian population of Iraq to allow questions of principle to prevent effective United Nations engagement with immediate needs .
We should recall the comments of the Secretary-General of the United Nations when he said that we must find : ' unity of purpose in the post-war phase in Iraq ' .
The overriding aim must be to set aside past divisions and focus on what must and can be done to help the Iraqi people at this time .
From the perspective of the European Union we must set out exactly the likely future role for the European Union in Iraq .
There was some general agreement at the last meeting of EU foreign ministers , held in Rhodes on 3 May , that the EU must play a stronger role in the post-conflict situation in Iraq .
The European Commission has already dispatched a needs-assessment mission to Iraq .
There is also agreement that the Chargés d 'Affaires could return to Iraq from the Member States of the Union .
There has been no agreement to date on whether or not the European Union should appoint a special representative for Iraq .
This latter issue is one very important matter which must be given urgent political consideration .
The European Union should engage in the reconstruction of Iraq and in a situation where the United Nations is at the centre of this effort .
EU resources would then be made available to fund key reconstruction activities , such as the rebuilding of basic social infrastructure , including health , education , water and sanitation services .
It is only right and proper that sanctions against Iraq be lifted .
They serve no purpose whatsoever at this juncture , as they were originally designed to target a regime which now no longer exists .
UNMOVIC and the International Atomic Energy Agency should return to Iraq at the earliest opportunity and complete their mission .
The use of Iraq 's oil revenues must also play a key part in the actual reconstruction of Iraq , but any use of such monies must be undertaken in the best interests of the Iraqi people , who must play a role in any such decisions as fully and as early as possible .
A central role for the United Nations would confer real legitimacy on whatever interim arrangements are put in place in Iraq .
It would also contribute to lessening political tensions in the Middle East region and to reducing the political instability that is so sadly but evidently there at this particular time .
Mr President , the lesson of the Iraq war is not that we should copy the United States and devise our own foreign policy , involving our own superstate army and military-industrial complex .
If we had had qualified majority voting on the Iraq issue , neither the British nor the French policy would have obtained majority support .
The solution is not to create a superstate , but for us to stick together in Europe in order to strengthen the UN .
If the UN decides that a dictator is to be disarmed , it must also have the power to implement the decision .
The UN should have its own rapid reaction force , and the EU 's rapid reaction force should be made available to the UN .
The right of veto in the UN Security Council must be limited so that the UN can also take action , even if a small minority is opposed to its doing so .
Otherwise , superpowers will act independently and so create justifications for anyone being able to act off their own bat using military assaults and terror tactics .
War criminals should be tracked down and brought before the International Criminal Court .
Pressure should be exerted on all countries to accept the International Criminal Court and the UN Pact .
The lesson is that we must uphold the international rule of law if we do not wish to end up as victims of the laws of the jungle and of the strongest and ourselves become targets for new generations of terrorists .
Only through the rule of law can terrorism and dictatorship be brought effectively to an end .
Mr President , 172 troops - 34 British and 138 American - gave their lives for the cause of Iraq 's freedom during the war .
Today certainly , my colleagues and I salute what they and all the coalition forces did to ensure that Iraq could be free .
Throughout the debates that we have had on the Iraq crisis , I have made it clear that for us war was always a last resort .
If only the nations of the world had united in a determined way , then Saddam , in my view , could have been dealt with without the need for war .
Now that the conflict is over , the emphasis is rightly on the stabilisation of Iraq , on the building of civil society , on creating the conditions for a democratic state that can live in peace with its neighbours and also on restoring the Iraqi economy in the interests of the Iraqi people .
Of course there are great hurdles to overcome .
That is not in dispute .
However we should be in no doubt that only the removal of Saddam Hussein has made any of these things possible .
The second great task that can now be taken forward is progress towards a durable settlement between Israel and the Palestinians .
The road map to peace sponsored by the Quartet offers a solid basis for a resolution of this most difficult of issues in the Middle East : the parties in the wider region , the blueprint for a lasting peace , a secure Israel whose right to exist is recognised by the Arab world , and a Palestinian state living side by side with Israel in harmony and peace .
There is much work to be done on both of these projects , but the opportunity is there now for a real and lasting peace to be forged in this vitally important region of the world .
As for the wider world , the crisis has created real questions about the United Nations and its ability to implement its own declared intentions .
NATO has suffered internal divisions of a kind never before experienced .
The European Union has demonstrated that it is incapable of speaking with a single voice , whilst some Member States have shown more interest in creating a counterweight to the United States , than in building a genuine transatlantic partnership based on common values .
It is time for some straight talking .
The actions of the gang of four at the Brussels summit last month clearly show the strategic error they are making in trying to divide the transatlantic alliance .
Whatever soft words they say , this summit was a calculated attempt to foment division between Europe and the USA , and if we have learned anything from the events of recent months it is surely that Europe and America must stand together to deal with threats to our collective security .
New structures and new military headquarters in competition with the United States would fracture an alliance that has served us well in Europe .
I am glad that the majority of European nations understand this and have had the courage to say so .
Finally , if Europe is serious about defence and security , it needs to provide the financial resources .
New and divisive structures are not needed .
What we need is increased capability .
I hope that Europe has learned a lesson from this crisis .
NATO and the transatlantic alliance must remain the bedrock of European defence .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is only a few weeks since the USA unilaterally decided to attack Iraq .
Acting without a UN mandate , the United States began a war of aggression in a flagrant breach of international law .
To be precise , it was not the USA alone that initiated the war : a whole string of allies , some of whom acted openly , but others secretly , also joined together in the ' coalition of the willing ' , or perhaps we should say ' coalition of the compliant ' .
In addition to the self-appointed occupying powers - the United States , United Kingdom and Poland - the ranks of the coalition of the willing also included such major military powers as Palau , the Marshall Islands , Micronesia and the Kingdom of Tonga .
The aim of this war of aggression was , acting in accordance with the relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions , to remove weapons of mass destruction from Iraq .
There is no legal basis in international law for the attacking forces ' additional objective of overthrowing the regime of the dictator Saddam Hussein , nor is there any such provision in the Charter of the United Nations .
Nor do I believe that it should be the role of the international community to remove dictators throughout the world by means of warfare .
It also leaves a rather unpleasant aftertaste to consider that Britain 's Foreign Secretary Jack Straw was willing to send umpteen thousand British soldiers into Iraq to hunt down one dictator , while the same Jack Straw , when he was Britain 's Home Secretary , decided to release another dictator , Augusto Pinochet , and thereby thus allow him to escape from the clutches of British justice .
The USA 's unilateral war against Iraq achieved its objective of removing Saddam Hussein 's regime .
However , the war also resulted in appalling collateral damage : the first immediate victim was the United Nations Organisation and international law , the second was the unity of the European Union and the Common Foreign and Security Policy , and the third was NATO , which also received its share of ideological cluster bombs .
The new doctrine of preventive war , launched by the chief ideologist , Richard Perle , the Lord of Darkness , has also shaken the foundations of NATO .
Among the questions that remain to be answered , Mr President and Mr President-in-Office of the Council , are when this war will end and when the end of the war will be declared .
So , firstly , what is the European Union doing to ensure that end to the war is declared ?
Secondly , where are the weapons of mass destruction on account of which the war was declared ?
If the Americans are not prepared to tell us what the position on weapons of mass destruction is , then we in Europe should at least tackle them and demand a statement .
( Applause )
Mr President , I visited Iraq 12 days ago .
I spent 8 days in the south , reviewing the public health situation in my capacity as the World Health Organisation 's Special Envoy . I listened to the people .
I met with 50 tribal leaders , upwards of 20 000 Marsh Arabs , and I reviewed and inspected extensively hospitals and primary health clinics in Basra , Al-Amara and other smaller towns and villages .
I re-opened the World Health Organisation Office and I set up a clinic now dealing with 15 000 medical consultations a month .
The people are relishing their freedom .
Their joyfulness is tempered only by the continuation of the bitter legacy of Saddam .
Their lives were malignly regulated down to the smallest detail .
Saddam modelled his total control on Stalin , whom he emulated .
The ordinary Iraqi family 's purchase , even of one bar of soap , was politically directed and controlled .
When sentenced to ear amputation , the prisoner had to seek out and pay the surgeon to perform the mutilation .
The more money the prisoner was able to offer , the more ear the surgeon permitted to remain intact .
A trade in human flesh , a cruel bargain with Saddam Hussein - for Saddam owned the Iraqi people 's every movement from tear-sodden cradle to early and unquiet grave .
These systems are still intact and throttling the Iraqi people .
It is early days .
The coalition forces are doing fine work , particularly in the south and in delivering public health to the people of Iraq .
The United Nations - especially the World Health Organisation - is now fully engaged and is using its specialist skills to excellent effect .
However , the UN can only do so much in such a complex and difficult political situation .
Patience is needed , as is the continuing security provided by the coalition forces , to give the Iraqi people the time and space they need to unravel the evil web Saddam wove so skilfully around them .
The task now is to help the people to enjoy their freedom and to entrench it constitutionally and politically for future generations .
Mr President , we cannot shirk our responsibilities .
The war against Iraq , based on the falsehood that weapons of mass destruction were present in the country , US militarisation and the principle of pre-emptive , indefinite war , has endangered the whole human race , forcing us to live in fear of terrorist crimes and the suffering they cause .
We cannot fail to mention - it is our duty - that the USA 's imperalist policy is destroying not just life , land , history and culture but the entire system of world relations , the United Nations Pact and international law .
We cannot just turn the page and pretend that nothing has happened .
We must build and rebuild our relations with the USA , with the countries of the world , with due respect for human and civil rights , pursuing justice and rejecting double standards , as in the case of the Israeli occupation of Palestine .
Saddam Hussein has vanished into thin air , and , I , together with the Iraqis , can only rejoice , but the situation is unstable and the occupying forces must be replaced by an Iraqi government which includes women and is coordinated by the United Nations .
The European Union must do its part , promoting reconstruction and economic aid , the reestablishment of democracy and the access for Iraq to its own resources .
France , Germany , Belgium , the Pope and the crowds of pacifists have given the European Union and Europe credibility in that part of the world .
Let us therefore continue to pursue a path leading , as I said , to respect for rights and not oppression and occupation .
Mr President , we all knew that there was going to be a humanitarian disaster and that it was going to affect women and children especially , who make up the majority of the Iraqi population .
We MEPs who were in Baghdad and Basra witnessed this in particular .
The inspectors there told us - as did Mr Blix in the United Nations - that there were no weapons of mass destruction .
I do not know what we are surprised about .
But we were not aware of the immense irresponsibility of the occupiers .
Chaos and the law of the jungle reign in Iraq and the citizens lack protection .
And I would draw attention to the fact that the majority of the future occupiers are members of the European Union : the United Kingdom , Poland , Italy , the Spanish State , while the European Union is absent .
In this regard , Mr President , it seems to me ludicrous that Mr Poettering is still saying that we cannot create a European Union in opposition to the United States .
Quite the contrary : the United States - the extreme right governing there - is working against the European Union as a body with a presence in the world .
We are witnessing an unacceptable situation which this Parliament must condemn on behalf of the citizens of Europe who demonstrated against it .
Mr President , we must call for the full restoration of United Nations law and we must point out once again that the ' oil for food ' programme and the inspections are the sole responsibility of the United Nations .
Otherwise , the established law will be broken , even with resolutions which the occupiers originally approved .
In any event , I would like to say in particular today that I reject the position of the Spanish Prime Minister , Mr Aznar , who has become a servant of the extreme right currently governing the United States .
He wants to turn the Spanish State into a new Puerto Rico .
Particularly in view of the fact that this goes against the views of the majority of the Spanish people .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , all possible humanitarian assistance must be provided , of course ; but above all , if this assistance is to be effective , the political presence of the European Union and the United Nations is needed .
Mr President , on behalf of the citizens of Iraq , we thank God that Saddam 's reign of terror has been brought to an end .
It is to be hoped that we will not have too long to wait for the fallen absolute ruler of Mesopotamia and his two sons to be arrested , if they are still alive .
Precisely because of this Iraqi opposition circles are finally expecting clarification about the country 's arsenal of weapons of mass destruction .
With these same newcomers to the Iraqi political stage we are seriously concerned about the continuing lack of public safety in the capital Baghdad .
Saddam 's hand in this - his amnesty for almost 100 000 criminals just before the start of the military intervention by the Americans and the British - does not discharge the Americans in particular of their responsibility to provide for law and order in the administrative centre of the country .
In this they can also count on the expertise and assistance of Iraq 's burgeoning democratic forces .
The huge task of reconstructing Iraq makes a substantial humanitarian contribution from the European Union equally welcome .
The food stocks of Iraqi families are totally exhausted .
A willingness to make sacrifices on our part will strengthen the transatlantic partnership .
It will at the same time cultivate goodwill amongst the Iraqi civilian population .
Washington 's diplomatic efforts to contain religious radicalism in the region likewise deserve European backing .
In this way Iraq 's territorial integrity under democratic administration can also be safeguarded externally .
Mr President , in the wake of the dreadful attack in Riyadh and the triumphant return of Ayatollah Al Akim to Iraq , it is important to realise that the way in which the UK-US coalition has dealt with the issue of Iraq has considerably clouded perspectives .
Following 11 September , a relentless war was launched against Islamic terrorism by a coalition that consisted of almost the entire international community .
Close cooperation , in particular between the United States and the countries of Europe , where the 11 September attack had been planned , began to produce results , with significant blows to the Al Qaeda network .
The United States replaced this clear and virtually uncontested strategic approach with a much more hazardous project by borrowing the old domino theory , popular in the communist world in the 1970s , and applying it to the export of the democratic model to the Arab-Muslim arena based on a new Iraq democratised by the US .
As far as democracy is concerned , what we are currently seeing with the anarchy that has followed the dictatorship is that there are more and more calls for the establishment of Sharia law in Iraq .
If there were to be prolonged occupation , together with an ongoing general situation of insecurity , we would be facing a two-fold risk .
Firstly , the ongoing military occupation of a country where the Shiite holy sites are located would give considerable fresh impetus to Islamic terrorism and , at a local level , the restoration of order would inevitably have to involve the network of Shiite mosques .
Prolonging the current situation is therefore especially dangerous .
It could compromise the vital resumption of a firm , global strategy to combat the multinationals of Islamic terrorism .
The triple suicide bombing in Riyadh demonstrates that it is just as prevalent as always in spite of the military action in Iraq .
In order to gather the international community together again around the urgent need to combat a form of terrorism that threatens us all , our immediate aim must not be to decide who to punish and who to reward , it is to prevent the situation in Iraq from deteriorating and ensuring that the military occupation is replaced as soon as possible with new Iraqi authorities who draw their legitimacy from the recognition accorded to them by the international community .
Mr President , in my contribution , I will rise above the coarse insults directed at Prime Minster Aznar by a Member of this House .
As regards the current situation in Iraq , I think we need to distinguish between what can and cannot wait .
Re-establishing food supplies for people who have suffered under a long and cruel dictatorship and 12 years of embargo , Mr President , certainly cannot wait .
Concerning the provision of humanitarian aid , the European Commission and many Member States deserve to be thanked for their efforts .
Notwithstanding the efforts of the international community in general , and the European Union in particular , I feel it is important to put things into perspective .
I will therefore take the liberty of quoting some figures regarding this aid .
The United States is the principal donor of humanitarian aid to Iraq .
Its contribution totals EUR 964 million .
Great Britain is in second place with EUR 336 million and Japan is in third place with EUR 192 million .
The figure for ECHO is EUR 100 million .
Then there are the figures for other countries .
Spain has donated EUR 60 million for humanitarian purposes , Australia , EUR 55 million , Canada and Germany EUR 50 million .
I am sorry that Mr Wurtz is not present in the House as his country is contributing EUR 10 million in humanitarian aid , according to the figures of 13 May 2003 .
Mr President , there is clearly a need to re-establish supplies of drinking water and electricity in Iraq , along with health services .
It is also clear that given the situation on the ground , the second priority has to be the formation of an interim Iraqi authority .
Such an authority must be formed in a democratic manner and Iraqis must play a key role in the process .
In my opinion , the authority also needs to be federal in nature .
There is one great issue currently hanging in the balance .
This is , or should be , the establishment of a multi-ethnic , multi-religious state , based on the principles of inclusion , representation and responsibility .
This issue has come to the fore because the media has played up the religious reawakening in Iran .
The latest debates at the United Nations show that past disagreements have been overcome and that there is now space for everyone to adopt constructive attitudes .
Mr President , I believe this is the line the European Union should take .
We have to help promote stability in the region .
We must act and we must use our ability to engage in dialogues with the countries of the region to the full .
Lebanon now has an Association Agreement with the European Union .
Syria is part of the Euro-Mediterranean Association .
We are currently engaged in a critical dialogue with Iran and we should also pursue the objectives of the so-called road-map .
The United States , Mr President , has proposed an ambitious free trade agreement with the countries of the region .
The European Union must use its ability to engage in dialogue to the full .
We must work to ensure that the region is stable , peaceful , prosperous and democratic .
Minister , the next informal meeting due to be held in Crete on 26 and 27 May should serve as a unique opportunity to develop the role the European Union must play in this difficult situation .
Mr President , I have to say that I am surprised at how little has been said in this debate about the fact that a people has been liberated , that freedom reigns where terror once did and that Shia clerics are now able to return to Iraq in an atmosphere of religious toleration where once they were murdered .
In the last few days we have seen a reminder of the nature of Saddam 's regime with the discovery of yet another mass grave .
Too much of the debate has been about apportioning blame for what has happened in the past and too little of it has been about looking forward .
Ensuring that Iraq is run by Iraqis for Iraqis should be an absolute priority .
The wishes and needs of the Iraqi people should be paramount .
It is for that reason that I welcome the draft UN Resolution , which addresses the immediate needs of the Iraqi people .
It lifts sanctions : how many people in this Chamber have been calling for that over the last few years ?
It envisages a political process to put the country back into the hands of the Iraqis with the involvement of a UN special coordinator .
It sets up a process to wind up the ' Oil for Food ' programme while ensuring that oil can only be sold for the benefit of the Iraqi people and it creates a new fund for the reconstruction and humanitarian needs of Iraq which involves the IMF and the World Bank .
There are of course many problems to be dealt with .
We cannot run reconstruction from the top down as if it were a military campaign .
We cannot impose systems and procedures dreamed up in Washington and expect them to work .
We have to have a bottom-up approach which involves the Iraqi people first and foremost .
In order for that to happen , the establishment of security , effective policing and the rule of law should be given absolute priority .
My concern is that American troops , unlike British troops , are not equipped for policing action and our priority therefore should be to get police into northern Iraq .
We have already seen security established largely in southern Iraq .
My final concern is that there has been no proper discussion on debt reconstruction in Iraq , nor even on who the debt belongs to .
Until we resolve these issues there will be no long-term solution for Iraq .
Mr President , the chairman of our group has already covered what I wanted to say .
I would point out : first , disgust and condemnation for what happened yesterday in Saudi Arabia - yes , but let us not forget that Commissioner Patten closed his speech when the war started by saying that the situation and developments in Iraq would exacerbate the problem of terrorism - and now we are reaping the fruit of the deeds of the United States and Great Britain , and of this tacit stance on the part of the European Union .
Secondly , I feel sorry for the European Parliament .
We are living through one of the darkest days of the European Parliament .
What shall we say to our citizens during the European elections in a year 's time ?
What did we do doing the war ?
We did not pass a single decision , a single resolution .
What did we do after the war ?
When we have cholera , when we have dozens dead , when we have the looting of Baghdad museum , when we have the looting of nuclear facilities , we do not pass a decision , we do not pass a resolution , because those who back the war do not want the European Parliament to pass a resolution and stand before European public opinion .
Thirdly , a call to the president-in-office : not allied forces , Mr President-in-Office , not allied forces !
They are occupying forces .
That is what we should call them , because the European Union should not back faits accomplis .
As many people have already said , the justification for the invasion and occupation of Iraq was about the existence of weapons of mass destruction but , as we all know , it was more about regime change .
As Mr Sakellariou said , there is no justification in international law for the invasion and occupation of a country to change the regime in that country .
It sets a very dangerous precedent .
However , in relation to weapons of mass destruction , none have been found .
That is clear .
This was the justification , despite what some people were saying all along about the situation .
It is essential that the weapons inspectors return to Iraq , for Hans Blix to be allowed back in .
Let them verify whether or not weapons of mass destruction were there .
As we all know , that is highly unlikely .
It also means that the US , the UK and the others who supported them are pursuing a shoot-to-kill policy - i.e. we believe or suspect the Iraqis have weapons of mass destruction , therefore we go in , we shoot and kill the people and then afterwards we find out there was no justification for this action .
This is a war crime in my eyes .
I do not believe that there was any justification for what happened in Iraq .
It is essential that the weapons inspectors be allowed back in .
In relation to the proposal mentioned by several speakers , this UK- , US- and Spanish-backed proposal for a UN resolution would put the administration of Iraq , including decisions on its oil reserves , into the hands of the invaders and occupying forces .
This is blatant , modern-day colonialism and we should not allow it .
In relation to Iraq itself , Iraq was one of the countries in the region with the most advanced education system , with education for all - male and female alike .
Now that education system has been completely decimated .
Some people today have mentioned women 's rights within Iraq .
One of the ways to ensure that women are liberated , have rights and know their rights , is through a proper education system .
What will happen in relation to the education system in Iraq and how will it be reinstated ?
So , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen representing the Member States , the opponents of the war were right .
The destabilisation , the aggression and the invasion of Iraq caused by the US-UK union - the only union which is at this minute still standing - no more sought to topple the Baath socialist regime than to destroy phantom weapons of mass destruction .
Very simply , the aim was the wholesale destruction of Iraq in order to realise the ideological and industrial designs of the small gang of theorists with a portfolio who reign in Washington .
They really could not care less about peace in the Middle East or the Iraqi people , who they are deliberately - and I mean deliberately - plunging into anarchy , with its terrible trail of unspeakable violence and suffering .
They play with people as one plays with marbles , and that is the way of empires , particularly this US empire .
Europe has allowed its creation out of cowardice , by eradicating its only roots , its nations , in particular France , which is the only country to implement an independent global policy , and not because Europe is old but simply because , deprived of national vigour , it is politically dead .
It will therefore only be further hypocrisy to speak today in this ludicrous forum of rebuilding Iraq , when what is really on the agenda is destroying Iraq until not a stone remains standing , except , of course , for the derricks .
The question is not how to rebuild , but to what extent we will destroy Iraq , humiliate the Arab people and heighten their anger to play into the hands of the ideologists who want at all costs to provoke a general war between civilisations , which will be a war against civilisations , beginning with what is left of our own .
Mr President , the situation in Iraq now presents us with the extremely difficult task of determining how the transition process will be legitimised and guided after the end of the war towards the free , democratic system founded on political , religious and ethnic diversity that we all wish to see .
The motion for a resolution submitted by the United States to the UN on Friday appears to reduce the Security Council 's involvement to a minor role , regulates the use of the oil reserves rigorously according to a preconceived order and , lastly , fails to set a term to the duration of the US and UK administration , which means it will probably remain in place for quite some time .
Lastly , it is said that the interim administration will be managed by the occupying powers , together with the Iraqi people and a UN coordinator .
The formula is generic and seems to confine the role of the UN chiefly to the coordination of humanitarian aid or not much more .
Europe is sending a specific request for much greater involvement in the immediate term .
Since the European Union is the closest entity in geopolitical terms , it would be truly absurd for it not to be involved in a process which is so important for the future of the region .
Moreover , we cannot endorse the US strategy to create a link with the talks with Iran , intended to avert the danger of the large Shiite population having a destabilising effect .
This ethno-religious situation must be evaluated with extreme care , but Europe cannot now stand by and do nothing in the face of the terrifying scenes heralded by the Al Qaeda 's resumption of its strategy of terror .
The stabilisation of Iraq , with measures to ensure religious peace between the different ethic elements , is clearly necessary in a region such as the Gulf where the insidious web of Islamic terrorism is so desperately strong and has penetrated so very deep .
This attack , which is reminiscent of the attack in Chechnya , makes the challenge posed to the West by the international web of Islamic fanaticism a matter of great relevance once again .
Therefore , over and above its differences with the United States over Iraq , Europe must shoulder all its responsibilities and combat organised terrorism , which , as has now been extensively proven , is finding a home even in the Member States of the European Union , in many mosques and Islamic centres , often funded by Saudi Arabia .
Mr President , I am not a particular friend of the Bush government , but I would take this opportunity to congratulate and thank the Americans and the coalition for the military action in Iraq .
It was swift and effective and succeeded in its purpose of removing of an evil regime .
The terrible consequences for the whole of the Middle East foreseen by some in this plenary did not arise .
Having thanked the Americans , it is time to tell them that we do not expect them to stay in Iraq for one hour longer than is necessary .
I am confident that they share this view , and it is my hope that the United Nations will play the dominant role in post-war Iraq .
The European Union too has a role to play in Iraq in the months to come - the role of supporting democratic development in order to stabilise the whole region .
We can draw on the experiences of the Union 's efforts in Afghanistan and I look forward to seeing a united Europe behind this new , big challenge in Iraq , starting with the lifting of sanctions .
Mr President , in my one minute , I should like briefly to emphasise the following : it is a disgrace that there will be no resolution today , obviously because the majority does not want the unprovoked illegal attack by the United States and Great Britain to be condemned .
That was also clear from most of the speeches today .
Neither the Commissioner nor the Presidency , while condemning the terrorist attack in Riad , had so much as a word , even of disapproval , for the predatory , terrorist , criminal attack by the United States and Great Britain .
It is a disgrace !
On the contrary , even today they essentially wanted to legalise the crime by unashamedly acknowledging the responsibility of the occupying forces for keeping order and for reconstruction , obviously hoping that the European Union will be given a slice of the pie .
It is a disgrace !
Neither one nor the other stood up against the position of the United States on a preventive strike , leaving the way clear for the crime to be repeated .
Besides , they all , including the European Union , agreed in Prague on the preventive strike .
Once again , it is a disgrace , Mr President .
It is up to us to roundly condemn the crime . To call for the immediate withdrawal of the occupying forces from Iraq and for the invaders to pay the cost of restoring the damage they caused .
For the invaders and their Iraqi associates to be convicted as war criminals . The UN must decide even at this late stage on strict sanctions against the invaders and must supervise payment of the compensation .
And finally , for the Iraqi people to be left free to take its fate in its own hands without conquerors .
Consequently , the Iraqi people must organise and develop their national resistance .
Only the defeat of the conquerors will bring peace and order .
We owe them our solidarity .
Mr President , I regret the fact that this debate is not to be followed by a resolution , as it is vital for Parliament to send a political signal to the general public regarding this serious international crisis triggered off by the United States ' warmongering diplomacy .
That has demonstrated to a ridiculous extent what virtually the entire international community condemned as the real driving force behind this unilateral aggression , as my colleagues in the Verts / ALE Group had already pointed out .
These measures , however , cannot be reduced to mere verbal condemnation . In the fact of this global hegemonic power , the credibility , and even the future , of the UN has received a dangerous blow and we cannot remain indifferent to this .
It has had a knock-on effect on the political goals of our Community project too , on its attempt to unite the voices of Europe in both a spirit of consensus and international legitimacy .
Twenty-four million souls are abandoned to their sorry fate , without even a guarantee that their daily needs will be met .
This is indeed a very , very serious hour and a European initiative is urgently required .
We cannot content ourselves with becoming a reconstruction agency , although that task is absolutely necessary and urgent .
The jeopardising of a potential historic turning point in the international situation has now become more than just a slick , journalistic phrase .
The threat is very real and seems to be being overlooked in this Chamber .
It is therefore up to this enlarged Parliament , including the observers from the new Member countries , to realise that the European Union must propose a more mature , more long-term alternative in light of the United States ' opportunistic and mercenary calculations .
It is up to us to consider , for instance , the legalist voices , such as France , Germany and Belgium , and establish a common , united position .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , the UN must be restored to its place at the centre of the international negotiating mechanism .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , today I want to talk about the lessons the Union must learn from its impotence throughout this entire Iraqi crisis , something that you yourselves have quite rightly lamented .
On 10 April , by a majority of three-quarters , Parliament adopted a resolution on the new European security and defence architecture , desirable at the end of this war .
This very broad consensus does not come as a surprise as even the latest Eurobarometer polls indicate that 71 % of EU citizens are currently in favour of the development of a common policy in this area .
Moreover , this request is also coming from outside the Union , from the many parties who wish the European Union to play its part in managing the affairs of a world whose future must no longer rest solely on the shoulders of the President of the United States of America .
It must be said that this long-awaited Europe does not yet exist , and it will not exist until the institutional reforms which are vital for its operation have been implemented .
That is the inspiration behind Parliament 's proposals , although we are well aware of the limits to their scope .
We are quite aware that it will ultimately be up to the Convention to recommend whether they be adopted .
If three quarters of the Members of Parliament were prepared to take up such a clear and , in certain cases , courageous stance on this issue in a roll-call vote last month , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is because , thanks to the Iraqi crisis , they understood that it was essential to give their unreserved support to our colleagues currently working in the working groups on defence , chaired by Commissioner Barnier , and on foreign policy , chaired by Mr Dehaene .

Having learned the lessons of the Iraqi crisis and appalled by the cacophony that prevailed within the Union during the crisis , all those in favour of building a common house agree that tomorrow 's Europe of 25 members will take its rightful place in the international arena , which it has been unable to retain as a Europe of Fifteen .
The main goal must be to enable Europe to speak with a single voice at last .
If the Convention succeeds in this , it will be because it has been able to learn from the recent divisions , which I , like you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , am convinced are more illusory than real .
Mr President , there are no bounds to my joy at the toppling of Saddam Hussein and of his regime , but that does not mean that I do not believe as strongly as ever that this war was wrong .
It was in contravention of international law and there was an alternative ; I am surprised that so few Members remember that in May 2002 we agreed on an alternative course .
It seems that many of us have a very short memory .
However , let me peer into the future : the conscience of the world , and that includes the conscience and the views of the Polish Pope , has been assuaged by promises that the United Nations would be involved after the war and that the international community would come into its own then .
The draft Security Council resolution is a farce and the British minister Clare Short has acted consistently by resigning .
Now let me look a little further into the future , and consider the Middle East peace process .
In this case too we were told that the Iraq war would make it possible to set the peace process in train , but that nothing had yet been decided .
So how do things look now ?
On the Palestinian side an important step has , thank goodness , been taken in response to pressure from the US and principally from Europe , with the appointment for the first time of a prime minister , Abu Mazen .
We wish to give him our full support so that he can do what he has promised and what in my view he would really like to do - to fight violence and terrorism .
But the reaction on the Israeli side , or to be precise on the part of Mr Sharon 's Israeli government , is not exactly positive .
If Mr Sharon refuses to welcome Mr Solana , then that is something the entire European Union should be protesting against .
Just as Mr Sharon cannot claim , thank goodness , to speak for the whole of Israel , nor can Abu Mazen - unfortunately - claim at present to represent the whole of Palestine .
Arafat is also a force in Palestine that we need to win over to this peace process , and that is why discussions with him are also both necessary and justified .
I have to say , however , that I have heard relatively little from those people who claimed before the war that we would be on the ' peace front ' after the war , working to achieve peace .
I have in mind in particular Spain 's Prime Minister Aznar .
I am pleased to say that Mr Papandreou , on the other hand , is very active .
I also hear a lot from Mr Solana , and I hope that everyone in this House and in Europe will now at least attempt to achieve progress in the peace process in Israel and Palestine , and to implement the road map , even if it leaves a lot to be desired .
For there can no longer be any excuse nor the least justification for this war , if we cannot even get the peace process going .
Mr President , we are glad the dictatorship in Iraq has come to an end .
It should be borne in mind however that the war was not fought simply to end the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein .
The United States tolerates other dictatorships around the world .
Wars are not fought about those .
We Spaniards lived for over 20 years under a dictatorship directly supported by the United States .
The stated aim of the war was the elimination of weapons of mass destruction .
No such weapons have been found , however .
I would like to point out that a conference was held in the Azores prior to the war in Iraq . It was attended by the United States , the United Kingdom and the Prime Minister of Spain .
The last group photograph before the attack on Iraq was taken there .
Now the war is over , however , control of Iraq has not been divided between those who attended the Azores conference .
It has been divided instead between the United States , the United Kingdom and Poland .
Spain has been sidelined .
Its involvement does not seem to be consistent with its government 's support for the war .
Much more than the Archaeological Museum has been destroyed in Iraq .
There is a great deal of reconstruction work to be done .
Let us hope too that the United Nations will once again become the guarantor of world order .
It is perhaps not generally known that the small country I come from is among those countries that have given the United States an unconditional endorsement . In this quite surrealistic debate , I should like , moreover , to draw attention to a most outstanding contribution by my fellow countryman and fellow MEP , Mr Andreasen from the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , who is closely associated with the Danish Prime Minister .
Normally , he speaks in Danish , which is a good idea . As a symbolic act , he gave his speech in English , however , and that of course brilliantly reflects his close relationship with the Danish Prime Minister , who belongs to the same political party as himself and is a close colleague of his .
The Danish Prime Minister spent five days in Washington , and the press - the Danish world press , with which my fellow MEPs are probably unfamiliar - described how , during the concluding session , as the Prime Minister paid tribute to President Bush for his honourable conduct , the strains of Mendelsohn 's Wedding March from the famous play were suddenly heard . I should like , moreover , to emphasise - for my fellow MEPs may well not be aware of this - that Mr Andreasen , who gave the Prime Minister his unconditional endorsement , is certainly no slouch when it comes to irony .
The rhetoric on which the Danish Government 's endorsement of the United States is based is so absurd that only a major ironist could expose it , as my fellow MEP did so brilliantly , it being understood that what is so surreal about this debate is that the EU has no common foreign policy and that this Parliament would in any case have no influence over such a policy .
Mr President , the highly predictable military victory of the US and UK forces in Iraq has generated among some people a sort of ad hoc opportunism : let us forget all about past quarrels and let us build a democratic Iraq under the expert leadership of the US .
This vision , although legally tenable , is unlikely to get European foreign policy off to a good start again .
We will not pick up the pieces and re-establish European unity as a future project by drawing a veil over the causes of the unilateral military operation and the manner in which it was planned and decided .
We must first expose the falsehood , which I would call the falsehood of the century , the claim that Iraq possesses weapons of mass destruction that could threaten global security .
Not a single prohibited weapon has been found .
It becomes clearer every day that the people of the world as well as the United Nations have been fooled by those who have wanted for a long time to find a pretext for war at all costs .
We must also condemn a second falsehood , which claims that the United Nations has failed and that , as a result , the reconstruction of Iraq and its oil - which some call the spoils of war - should be a matter for the victors .
The United Nations has not failed .
It has been brutally swept aside by those who did not succeed in achieving the qualified majority required by the Security Council .
Although international law has been violated , there is now a chance to reestablish it . As far as the European Union is concerned , this means reestablishing the United Nations ' responsibility for crisis management in full .
I therefore call on the Council and the Commission to reject the United States ' requests and to remain firm in their desire to entrust the UN , and the UN alone , with a central role in post-war Iraq .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , however strange it may sound , I do not feel there is any point in taking advantage of and squandering the 3 minutes at my disposal to make you suffer by repeating everything that has been said to saturation point in this Chamber on the tragedy in Iraq over the last few months .
That is why I shall also confine myself to one question which , in my opinion , needs to be asked as a matter of priority now by the European Parliament , the elected representative body of the peoples of Europe , to whom we have to answer for our judgments and decisions and who are interested and ultimately entitled to have at least one answer as regards the pretexts which the leadership of the war coalition used primarily in order to justify its actions and persuade or deceive international and , in particular , European public opinion .
What , in other words , was the specific outcome of the attack on Iraq and the triumphant military victory over the regime of Saddam Hussein , as regards the location and neutralisation of the banned Iraqi weapons of mass destruction , the establishment of a democratic and representative Iraqi government and the elimination of international terrorism and , in particular Al Qaeda ?
Mr President , the success of the US operation in Iraq and the speed with which the objective of liberating the country from the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein was achieved , with a relatively low toll of victims , are confirmation of what many had thought , namely that the war was going to be the least difficult part of this operation .
The attack in Riyadh - which is already giving some people , not least in this House , a perverse , ill-concealed sense of satisfaction because they now feel justified in saying ' We knew there was no point in attacking Iraq ' - is proof that the real war against terrorism is only just starting .
Now starts the phase of reconstructing the country , which has been destroyed and laid waste , and of mending the alliances compromised by the war .
With the help of the 10 countries which we have just welcomed into our midst , the European Union must show that is capable of genuine unity .
Of course , it is exciting to see that , after this war which some people still persist in describing as unnecessary , pamphlets , books and newspapers are being sold on the streets of Baghdad which would have led to a prison sentence and torture under Saddam Hussein - or , elsewhere , under Communism .
We will soon be listening to the President of Poland , Mr Kwasniewski , speaking in this House .
He and I belong to different political wings , but he has shown himself to be a courageous leader , giving his country 's support for the intervention in Iraq , and this has earned him the criticism of those Heads of State and Government which made the wrong political decision and now find it hard to admit their error .
In his meeting with Mr Chirac and Mr Schröder last week , President Kwasniewski asked for Poland not to be forced to choose between Europe and the United States : it is possible to be the friend of both .
We in Parliament must endeavour to be the friends of both as well .
Mr President , it is a matter of regret that Parliament has found it impossible to construct a resolution for today 's debate .
It is obvious from the debate here that we could in fact have constructed a resolution on a wide range of issues on which we agree .
We would , of course , have had to leave aside a lot of the self-justification that we all tend to engage in on all sides .
I oppose the war and I continue to oppose its outcome and the direction which Iraq is taking at the present time .
However , we must seek to reconstruct confidence in a law-based world order .
We cannot do that by seeking to justify ourselves in terms of our attitudes to the war .
We have to do it by , in the first place , seeking to construct a unity in the European Union .
We have to find a middle ground between those who see a need for a unipolar world and those who see the need for a multipolar world .
There is no way out of this .
The European Union has to address this issue .
It could give a lead in trying to do this and I hope that when they meet next week the leaders of our groups will seek to put in place some mechanism to enable Parliament to address this matter .
We cannot seriously ask the people to support us in the European elections next year and at the same time pretend we do not have a role and that we have nothing to say about the direction the world is going in .
This is of the utmost importance .
We are talking about war and peace .
Life is still cheap in the Middle East and we will continue to count the cost of the recent war for a very long time .
We need to get to grips with our different world views .
We need to get to grips with the United States and persuade them that a law-based world order is far better than a Pax Americana .
In their interests and in our interests it is essential that we do this as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , I first wish to join with the other Members in condemning the terrible terrorist atrocity in Riyadh and offering sympathy to the bereaved and injured .
Now that the war in Iraq has ended , the emphasis shifts to rebuilding and reconstruction .
As well as the physical and political reconstruction of Iraq , we also have to rebuild relationships within the EU itself and our credibility in the field of common foreign and security policy , we have to repair the damage that has been inflicted on the UN and , last but not least , we have to rebuild the transatlantic relationship .
The attitude of the US in the post-war situation will provide the key as to whether or not we can achieve any or all of these .
I value the transatlantic relationship .
It is in the interest of both the EU and the United States that the present rift in our relationship be healed .
However , it has to be said that it must be a genuine partnership of equals and not simply one in which the EU role is that of a junior partner and in which we are automatically expected to support US foreign policy without question and , if we disagree with aspects of it , are accused of being disloyal and anti-American .
What has been totally unacceptable is the reported anti-French hysteria , in particular that attributed to the Washington Government establishment .
There needs to be a change in the attitude of the current US Administration if the transatlantic relationship is indeed to be restored .
Giving the United Nations the lead role in post-war Iraq , as EU leaders have requested , would be the clearest demonstration on the part of the United States that it values the transatlantic relationship and it genuinely wants to rebuild it .
It should not be forgotten that the United Nations fulfilled a similar role in East Timor in 1999 .
This experience should now be put to good use in the interests of the people of Iraq .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , before the war , during the war , and today , after the war in Iraq , Parliament has faithfully analysed the situation and expressed its views .
Unfortunately , these views have differed , but that is the way things are : the European Union is divided .
Today 's debate therefore allows us all to reaffirm our principles .
Mine have not changed . I wholly condemn Saddam Hussein 's regime , but I fear that the way in which the United States brought it down has created a situation which is , if not equally horrific , at least as unmanageable .
I do not endorse wars that are decided upon unilaterally . I believe the role of international organisations must be reaffirmed , particularly the role of the UN , not only in approving the use of force but also in supervising reconstruction .
Reaffirming principles is a good start but it is not enough .
Rebuilding after destroying is a duty , including for those who in no way participated in the destruction .
Yet this is still not enough .
We must also do everything in our power to understand why and how Europeans as well as Europeans and Americans have become so divided .
We must do everything in our power to rebuild our union , not just around a table but in our minds too .
This means that we must work flat out to agree on a vision of the world or , at least , to achieve converging visions on major problems such as transatlantic relations , the role and reforms of international organisations , the role of the law and of force , and so on .
These are difficult subjects and are sometimes even taboo subjects .
These efforts to achieve mutual understanding and clarification of ideas by seeking consensus whenever possible , however , are utterly essential for us after the blow we have been dealt .
It is absolutely vital to rebuild Iraq and to save human lives .
Nonetheless , we must also rebuild , or rather build , a common vision of the world and our responsibilities in the world .
The Greek Presidency has endeavoured to begin this work , but we have a long , long way to go .
Mr President , we have to recognise that the relationship between the European Union and the United States is at an all-time low .
I believe that over the coming months we have a role to play in this Parliament , along with the Council and the Commission , to rebuild that relationship .
When we recognise the great need there will be to rebuild Iraq , we must also recognise the tremendous need to rebuild the relationship between the European Union and the United States .
We have to face up to the truth .
The truth is that we have grown apart .
Each of us has focused on different priorities and , in many ways , we have ceased to understand each other 's concerns .
After the attacks on the Twin Towers on that terrible day in 2001 , the United States concentrated on terrorism : where the next attack was coming from , homeland security .
In Europe we went on to bring in the euro and concentrate on enlargement .
To some extent we have lost track of what we have been trying to do .
We have both retreated to hurling insults at each other across the Atlantic .
Now is the time for each of us , on both sides of the pond , to take a step back and allow things to calm down .
We must begin to rebuild that relationship .
We have far too great a common bond .
We share common values . We must not allow recent events to continue , or ferment or destroy us .
Yes , it will take time and no doubt it will be difficult .
There will always be disagreements between us and the United States . Let us hope that those disagreements , in the future , will only be in the WTO , over steel or on trade .
Those are natural disagreements , which we can have .
But let us begin a renewed , an improved , deeper relationship and one that will not crumble as the last one did .
Mr President , I too should like to express my deepest disappointment at the fact that we proved unable to agree on a joint resolution of the European Parliament , despite the fact that today 's debate shows that there is common ground , that there are the materials to build a common European identity .
An identity that can offer politics , logic and culture against the violence and the social and cultural barbarity being promoted by the new military doctrine of the United States .
The European Union has a duty and an obligation to study in depth the new international situation being created by American expansionism and the untrustworthiness of the neo-conservative American leadership .
We have a duty to demand answers to questions which still remain open :

First , about the blatant violation of international law with an aggressive war ; secondly , about the attempt to deceive public opinion about alleged weapons of mass destruction , which turned out to be the lie of the century ; thirdly , about the barbaric looting of cultural treasures , and I hope that no museum will dare receive the stolen goods ; fourthly , about the annihilation of hundreds of civilians , about the destruction of infrastructures , about the bombing of television stations and the murder of journalists and , last but not least , about the war unleashed by the United States against the United Nations .


Certainly , the collapse of the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein cannot be used to whitewash the Americans and their allies .
Finally , I should like to stress that the worthy women of Iraq can make a decisive contribution to the ending of the chaos in post-war Iraq , to the reconstruction of the country and to the future democratic governance .
The presidency and the Commission must demand the immediate application of unanimous UN resolution 1325 calling for increased participation and representation of women in all decision-making centres at all levels .
And finally , we hope that on 21 June the European Union will exert its influence so that decisions are taken that will implement the road map , so that a fair solution can at last be found to the question of the Middle East and a climate of trust can be restored with the Arab world .
Mr President , a few very brief final comments on the debate in Parliament this morning .
We have to deal with three issues that are closely bound up with each other .
The main issue , I think , is what we are doing in Iraq immediately , what we are doing in Iraq in relation to the problems that have arisen , with the misery , with the people , with the need to restore normalcy , to combat the phenomena tormenting the people over there .
I think that , at this stage of the debate , this is much more important than debating internal divisions and a series of other issues which are of course important , but which are not as pressing or urgent as the situation in Iraq .
I think that the European Union , to judge by appearances , has answers to this .
It has both practical answers - humanitarian aid , support for cultural issues , support and pressure to find a peace process in the Middle East - and political answers to a series of issues which I shall not repeat , because it is important that the European Union has come out , has supported these principles , has made the efforts it has made during all these months for a different position to be heard on a series of such issues .
The second point , of course , is what happens with the international system , with the role of the UN , where this war in Iraq has got us in terms of weapons of mass destruction .
There are important gaps here which need answers .
In fact , the European Union does , I think , have a position here and you here , today , raised a series of issues and it is important that they be raised and answered .
The third point , the major issue to come out of this entire crisis is the need for a common foreign policy , a common policy on security and defence issues .
I think that , within all these procedures , a new momentum has started up in the European Union , from which we need to learn lessons and see what we can do .
I should like , however , to close by commenting that many who speak of the need for a common foreign policy or common security or defence policy consider that what must of necessity emerge from these procedures are decisions or positions which correspond absolutely to their creed and their positions .
This is precisely the problem we have in developing a common foreign policy .
This policy will prosper , will become a reality only once we realise that we need to broker compromises between us , understand the positions developed by all of us and find those elements that can unite us , that can act as a common denominator , and not those elements on which we have differences .
It was this approach , moreover , that allowed us , I believe , over the last two or three months , to take certain steps in this direction , steps which were welcomed both by public opinion and by you here , by the European Parliament .
Mr President , my first remark in response to this discussion is that I am very pleased to note , and I agree with the way Mr De Rossa put it , that there is broad agreement in Parliament on most of the important elements of the situation .
This discussion in Parliament has shown that the European Parliament is a source of constructive ideas in the EU and a lot of inspiration can be drawn from what has been said this morning .
A lot of inspiration is needed .
My second remark is specifically to Mr Titley , who raised the issue of Iraq 's debt .
This is a core element in clearing the ground so that we can move forward .
Success depends on focussing on the issue of handling and clarifying Iraq 's debt .
To do this an honest broker is needed . It is not conceivable that the occupying power would ever be seen as that .
This is one very good illustration , relating to a very practical and crucial point , of the need to have the UN playing exactly that role of honest broker .
We need to ask all creditors to come forward to present their case .
We can use the IMF and the World Bank as the treasurer of this operation , and use the UN as the honest broker .
Anything else will not work , but instead create suspicion .
To Mr Andreasen , who expressed a strong hope that the UN will have a real role , I would say , please spend the minutes it takes to read the draft resolution now on the table at the Security Council .
Having done so , please talk to your Prime Minister . This is what must be done to bring that hope into what looks a little like political talk .
On the big , broader issue of the role of the Commission and reconstruction , it is not enough for Member States to say that they want the Commission to do something in this area .
If we do not organise the basic political conditions properly , it will be difficult for the Commission to play a meaningful , effective role .
The reality here is that we are still in a phase where the basic , real , political issues must be addressed first .
Finally , many Members have correctly pointed out that the big problem is the ability to agree a position in Europe .
I agree that a qualified majority vote is better than disqualified unanimity .
People will say that is not a guarantee that Europe will have one single standpoint .
No , but Europe will have a standpoint and that is the one which will have authority .
There might be disagreement after a vote , yes , but Europe will have a standpoint .
The dynamics of everyone in the Union knowing that a standpoint can emerge after a discussion is a very pedagogical instrument , which will discipline politics in regard to how things are being discussed .
There is a world of difference between qualified majority and disqualified unanimity .
Mr President , I asked Commissioner Nielson a question to which I would like a reply .
I asked him to explain his statement that the Americans are well on the way to becoming members of OPEC .
I should like to hear what he has to say about this .
I hope that you can give him the opportunity to give me a reply .
I am not going to restart the debate .
The Commissioner can reply if he wishes .
Mr President , it would look strange if I did not reply .
This was my way of condensing the analysis , linguistically speaking , in order to express the concern that if the resolution before the Security Council does not give the United Nations a real role , and if it is adopted , then the occupying powers will de facto be the ones to decide on the oil in Iraq .
That is self-evident , and is not adding anything of substance to this discussion .
The ending of all sanctions would also normalise Iraq 's situation as a large oil producing and exporting country .
It was a member of OPEC .
In putting it the way I did , I was trying to clarify the discussion .
I think , to some extent , I have drawn attention to the reality of who would be in power if the United Nations is not given an authoritative role .
. ( PT ) The illegal , unjust and illegitimate war against Iraq waged by the UK and US armies , with thousands of highly destructive bombs including cluster bombs being dropped , with the deaths of thousands of people , the destruction of huge residential areas , markets , hospitals , schools and other public places , followed by the sacking and pillaging of the historical and cultural heritage of the Iraqi people and of humanity as a whole , demands that the Bush Administration and its allies be called to account for their actions .
We cannot accept any attempt to whitewash the crimes that have been committed , in an attempt , after the event , to justify the aggression and occupation .
We regret the fact that the EU has not issued a clear and resounding condemnation of this aggression against Iraq and we insist on the immediate withdrawal of the occupying forces .
The sovereignty of the Iraqi people and the territorial integrity of its country must be respected .
Solidarity with the Iraqi people , with the Palestinian people and with all peoples engaged in a struggle means that we must step up the fight for peace , for disarmament , to abolish nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction , for military bases in foreign territory to be dismantled , for NATO to be dissolved , against militarism , for the UN Charter to be respected and for peoples ' sovereignty and their right to decide their own destiny to be safeguarded .
Mr President , I have just found out that some observers are taking part in votes by raising their hands . Would you please make it clear once again , for the avoidance of doubt , that it is of course only full Members of this House who may take part in votes .
We are very keen that the observers play as full a role as possible in the work of Parliament , but they are not entitled to vote .
That is quite clear .
Thank you for pointing that out .
Report ( A5-0140 / 2003 ) by Neena Gill , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2004 ( 2003 / 2016 ( BUD ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
( The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. and resumed at 12.30 p.m. )

Mr President , on the voting slip which we have in front of us it says that Amendment No 85 is identical to Amendment No 99 .
I should like to point out that this is not actually the case .
The two amendments are significantly different , especially in relation to the Nuclear Conventions of Paris and Vienna .
In Amendment No 85 , the paragraph which is under the IMO provisions is not under the nuclear provisions .
In Amendment No 99 , it is .
I know this is slightly confusing , but it is a confusing directive !
They are not the same and therefore should not be voted as identical amendments .
To me they are similar so we can vote on them together , if possible .
. ( PT ) I support this report , which finally creates the legal instrument that has been for too long awaited by the cooperative sector .
I share the concern that creating the Statute for the European Cooperative Society should respect employees ' acquired rights and the protection of these rights , both when an SCE is set up and in the structural changes of an already-existing SCE .
Furthermore , the SCE must ensure that workers are informed and consulted and are permanently represented and involved in the management of the SCE .
Consequently , decisions must take account of the opinions of employee representatives .
Lastly , I wish to highlight :
a ) the legislative role given to Member States in the regulation on the Statute for employee representatives on the SCE and the importance of the principle that employee representatives should benefit from the same level of protection as employee representatives at national level ;
b ) the initiatives in the field of Corporate Social Responsibility , which must be promoted by employee representatives when they participate in the management of SCEs ;
c ) gender balance . We must ensure that the methods used to nominate , appoint or elect employee representatives promote gender balance .
. ( PT ) With the proposal for a directive addressed in this report , the Commission is seeking to supplement the Statute for a European Cooperative Society with regard to the involvement of employees .
In addition to the legal and institutional issues involved in this entire process , we need fundamentally to adapt its content on reconciling employee participation and rights in European Cooperative Societies .
The rapporteur broadly accepts the Commission 's proposals and confines himself to tabling a limited number of new elements , specifically concerning : gender balance , Corporate Social Responsibility and the level of protection afforded to employee representatives , which must be the same as that afforded to employee representatives at national level .
There is also a proposal to remove the clause that would allow Member States not to implement the system of employee participation in the event that a European Cooperative Society is established by the merger of two cooperatives , which would clearly call employee rights into question . It is therefore appropriate to remove this clause .
. I have voted for the De Rossa report on cooperatives and its implications for working people because it is an excellent contribution to the development of cooperatives in the European Union .
My colleague , Mr De Rossa , has produced a report which will assist in the proliferation of the cooperative model which when experienced by working people is seen as having key advantages .
In the UK cooperative sector , which is now growing and has gone through a process of modernisation , this report will be welcomed .
. ( PT ) I am voting against the report because I feel that the issue directly related to the involvement of employees in European Cooperative Societies ( SCE ) exceeds the scope of Article 137 .
In changing this legal base , the rapporteur has attempted to promote new powers for Parliament which do not appear to comply with the letter and the spirit of the Treaties .


In my opinion , just like Paragraph 1 ( e ) of the same article , which runs counter to the recommendation of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Paragraph 3 of that article does not constitute a sufficient and necessary legal basis for the desired employee participation in the life of these cooperative societies . The use of Article 308 is , therefore , fully justified .
Similarly , I believe that allowing arrangements for the involvement of employees to be renegotiated in the case of substantial structural changes following the creation of an SCE could be at odds with the aforementioned article , which makes me fear for the solidity and viability of these bodies .
.
( PT ) Although I acknowledge the merit of the Delegation of the Conciliation Committee and the fine work of Mr Callanan , I still believe that we have not achieved a sufficiently ambitious outcome with regard to noise pollution , to atmospheric pollution and to promoting the quality of water for human consumption .
I therefore disagree with the derogation granted to steam-powered craft , with applying the 3dB allowance to all engines types and with the limit values set for exhaust emissions in specific inland waters .
. ( PT ) I am voting against this report because I believe that the European Cooperative Society ( SCE ) exceeds the scope of legislative harmonisation and constitutes a new supranational legal form .
I do not agree with the view that the high number of exemptions made for national legislation would not damage the innovative nature of the SCE .
In fact , at a strictly interpretative level , I consider the view that a legal framework must be impervious to specific local characteristics in order to warrant the term reductive . I would instead suggest that this factor can only enrich the organisation and enable it truly to adapt to specific cases and situations .
The argument of ' completing the internal market ' , which is presented as a justification for using Article 95 is not clearly delimited , since it applies to almost all legislation .
There is a clear political attempt by the rapporteur and the committees delivering an opinion to promote the allocation of more and greater powers to Parliament , and they all allege that this claim is merely based on doctrines accepted in law .
I am genuinely sorry that this approach has been used as a weapon and as a justification for yet another institutional conflict .
Prudence dictates that instead of demanding further power , we should make good use of what we have .
Mr President , I just want to explain why I voted in favour of Amendment No 1 to the Gill report .
I think at a time when so many of our citizens are facing such uncertainty about pensions and other work-related benefits , it would be quite wrong of Members of this House to vote themselves extra privileges and would send out all the wrong signals .
I am very pleased that on this side of the House at least the majority of colleagues voted against the proposal to extend health benefits to retired Members .
. All Members of the House benefit from free medical insurance .
It is a sad example of a failure of solidarity between generations that an alliance principally composed of Socialists and Greens has voted against even an investigation into extending the system to retired Members .
I voted for the Manders report on environmental liability because the amendments adopted ultimately responded quite well to the objections I had raised during yesterday 's debate .
A very significant majority of Members ( 312 in favour , 179 against ) held the same view .
The main amendments that convinced me to vote in favour are : 1 ) Amendments Nos 85 and 99 , which call on the Commission , in particular , to draw up proposals for the application of the directive to environmental damage caused by nuclear pollution and maritime transport ; 2 ) Amendments Nos 86 and 103 , which do away with the exemption from liability linked to the prior issue of an administrative authorisation or the insufficiency of scientific and technical knowledge ; 3 ) Amendment No 107 , which calls on operators to use appropriate forms of financial security to cover their responsibilities .
Amendment No 54 was also adopted , which is not perfect but I can accept it .
It calls for additional legislation regarding liability for damage caused by GMOs , notably damage that could affect non-GMO products .
Of course , I call for the moratorium on GMO authorisations to remain in place until this legislation has been adopted .
.
( FR ) The Manders report claims to be based on the polluter pays principle : businesses that cause environmental damage must bear the costs of the damage they have caused .
As some of the amendments were a step in the right direction , we voted in favour of this report .
However , one major problem remains : putting it into practice .
It is not enough for Parliament to adopt these recommendations for them to be enforced , nor is it enough for it to appoint a competent authority for operators to shoulder their responsibilities .
This is particularly true where the operator is a multinational group that has the resources to evade them and the competent authority usually gives in to its demands , as we saw in France with TotalFinaElf ( Erika oil slick , explosion at the AZF factory ) .
The rapporteur 's emphases regarding the polluter being responsible up to a certain limit would be funny if the behaviour of these large groups , which are concerned first and foremost with their profit margins , did not have tragic consequences for the population .
Similarly , it is not enough for financial guarantees to be established .
The IOPCF , which is supposed to cover oil tanker risk , has just announced that it will only reimburse 15 % of the Prestige damage as it has no money .
To appease the anger of the victims , the French Government did not consider looking to the charter company but will make the taxpayers pay instead .
In other words , faced with the harsh reality of a profit-oriented society , this report will make absolutely no difference at all .
.
( PT ) It is our view that policies for protecting the environment and natural resources are crucial to sustainable development . Priority must be attached to policies and measures aimed at prevention , for example , developing forms of research and support for access to the best technology available , paying particular attention to the problems and specific characteristics of small and medium-sized companies .
There is , however , an increasing need to enforce liability for remedying environmental damage .
I would highlight the recent example of the Prestige .
For this reason it is important , in the context of a broader set of measures and actions , to ensure that heavy industry - and this is the main culprit - accepts liability for preserving the environment and natural resources , through correct , fair and effective methods ; that we combat impunity and avoid public finances ending up bearing the costs and having to remedy the environmental damage caused by negligence or commercial strategies - almost always private - which seek only to obtain the greatest possible profit .
This EP resolution improves the Commission proposal ( based on the 1983 Green Paper ) on environmental liability in terms of preventing and remedying environmental damage , by casting doubt on the positions advocated by heavy industry ( see the opinion delivered by UNICE ) which typified the proposal presented by the Commission .
. Public authorities , especially local authorities , currently face significant burdens arising from environmental damage , from a wide range of sources , both major and minor .
This directive gives an opportunity to better identify and assign responsibility and should follow the ' polluter pays ' principle .
I opposed committee Amendment No 37 , which is contrary to that principle and which would place unacceptable burdens on local authorities and also be potentially disastrous for local economies .
Particularly in the UK , governments have been guilty of seeking to leave local authorities to pick up the cost of EU legislation - such as disposal of refrigeration equipment - and blaming ' Brussels ' .
The costs of implementing this directive must not be inflicted unfairly upon hard-pressed local authority budgets , either through approving a faulty directive or as a result of ultimately flawed implementation by government .
.
( EL ) The directive on a system of environmental liability based on the trite ' polluter pays ' principle , which has proven to be efficient for the restoration of environmental damage by those responsible but also detrimental , in that it has weakened actual prevention and is ultimately proving to be the most cynical excuse for new tax burdens on ' polluted citizens ' in that the polluters - big industrial business - not only are not paying for the restoration of the huge disasters they cause ( Erika , Prestige , Sevezo etc . ) but also , in addition , they are being strengthened by incentives and tax relief .
Environmental damage is being reduced to manifest hypocrisy , in that the ' financial guarantees ' on the part of the operator are being shifted to the state and to the workers either by increasing operating costs or by passing them on in product prices .
With the exemptions and its limited scope , it is being reduced to a ' fig leaf ' for monopoly interests , in that it does not include overall protection of biodiversity , oil pollution , nuclear damage , non-ionising radiation , GMOs etc. and provocatively exempts from liability charges those who cause huge ecological damage through unprovoked and barbaric military interventions .
The limited definitions of damage , liability and other basic concepts , which are shot through with exemptions and peculiar ' presumptions of non liability ' make us particularly cautious and critical with respect to this ' environmental liability ' .
.
( NL ) Not only do businesses produce goods and services , they also produce pollution and accidents .
The costs of repairing the damage to the environment fall on the injured parties or the government .
The benefits of the economic activity that has led to the damage , on the other hand , fall to the business .
To combat this injustice the ' polluter pays ' principle was developed long ago , but businesses continue to exert pressure to undermine it as far as possible .
We can see this in the right-wing amendments submitted , which seriously limit liability .
After 21 years of preparation nothing seems to have come of the original intentions .
The directive is applicable to just 13 % of the EU 's territory , the regions indicated in the Birds Directive and Natura 2000 .
Marine pollution and damage due to nuclear energy do not count and even if people were acting on the basis of a licence or the state of the art at the time , there is no liability .
Oil disasters at sea and contamination of natural crops by genetically modified crops do not lead to liability .
Advances in environmental protection at national level are made impossible if Article 95 for a uniform market is placed ahead of environmental protection in Article 175 .
Only the left-wing amendments , taken as a whole , can make this proposal in any way acceptable .
. On behalf of the EPLP I would like to indicate our support for the general principle of ' the polluter restores ' .
This is a fundamental shift in the direction of environmental policy in the EU .
No longer should the public bear the burden of clean-up costs when often the polluter has walked away .
The EPLP does not , however , support the inclusion of GMOs in this directive as , firstly , we believe it is the wrong directive and , secondly , there is existing legislation on this topic and this could give rise to confusion among potential operators as to which legislation is applicable .
. ( PT ) This Commission proposal intended to ensure the adoption of an overall Community system for preventing and remedying environmental damage including water pollution , damage done to biodiversity and soil contamination , which constitute a serious risk to human health , is extremely important .
After several years of debate and many environmental disasters , we have reached a crucial point for effectively preventing and remedying environmental damage , in a genuine ' parting of the waves ' .
I have supported the Commission 's approach of largely leaving the specific institutional and procedural measures for achieving the intended results to the discretion of the Member States , in line with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality .
I consider the Commission proposal 's approach too vague , however , on issues such as : the scope of its definition of biodiversity ( restricted to the Nature 2000 network ) , the system of compulsory financial guarantee / insurance ( for operators listed in Annex I of the Proposal ) , adopting a system of exemptions , removing objective liability for introducing ' mitigating factors ' and excluding damage resulting from certain activities .
I therefore expressed my disagreement on certain aspects , but I believe I must contribute to the adoption of this Directive , which moves , overall , in the right direction and constitutes an undeniably important milestone .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , a Bilderberg meeting will open in Versailles tomorrow .
The reason I raise this issue is that a number of Commissioners - Monti , Liikanen , Solbes Mira , Verheugen , Vitorino and Bolkestein - have all in the past attended Bilderberg meetings .
Indeed , Commissioner Prodi was actually a steering committee member in the eighties at the same time as Wim Duisenberg was the treasurer of Bilderberg .
Another reason I have raised this issue is that I have submitted a priority written question through Parliament but whenever I raise the issue of Bilderberg I am sent from pillar to post .
I should have had a reply on 25 April but still have not received one .
The Bilderberg meeting is starting at the weekend .
When I have tried to put an oral question in this Parliament or in the last one , the Commissioners have basically been afraid to answer .
What I really want to know is whether the Commissioners attend these meetings in their own private capacity or whether they are representing the Commission .
If they are representing the Commission , we need to know what happens at these Bilderberg meetings because at the end of the day this is a secret organisation which is deciding global policy without any input from the public .
It is about time the doors of Bilderberg were opened and the public really knew what goes on , because most of the major players in the world today are all playing a part in Bilderberg .
The President of this Parliament , Mr Cox , actually attended one of these meetings in Sweden a couple of years ago .
The people need to know what happens at the Bilderberg meetings , and if I ask a question in good time the Commission should answer that question .
There is no justification for the Commission not to answer it .
Mrs McKenna , I have noted your comments , which I shall also pass on to the European Commission so that , as you are referring to Commissioners , you can receive the relevant reply from it .
The next item is the statement by the Council on the EU-USA extradition agreement and the International Criminal Court .
The Minister of Justice of Greece , Mr Petsalnikos , has the floor on behalf of the Council .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for the information you have provided , but unfortunately I do not think you have responded to the oral question tabled by my group .
It remains outstanding .
Clearly the agreement before us is especially relevant for both the European Union and the United States .
The United States has decided to foster closer cooperation , especially in relation to the fight against organised crime .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as rapporteur I therefore feel we must welcome this type of initiative .
I am especially pleased that for the first time the European Union is going to sign an agreement on cooperation on judicial and criminal matters .
This should serve as a model in arriving at similar agreements with other third countries .
I would however like to provide some additional details on three issues .
Will this agreement make the fight against organised crime more effective ?
As I understand it , it will .
This level of cooperation will clearly help the fight against money laundering , trafficking in human beings , drug trafficking and terrorism .
Will this agreement reinforce the European Judicial Area ?
I think it will inasmuch as it will oblige Member States and candidate countries to speed up the ratification of the European texts that form the basis of this agreement .
These texts include the protocol on money laundering and the decision on the detention and surrender procedure and on joint investigation teams .
The third question is whether these texts represent added value over and above the bilateral agreements currently in force .
I have to say that the answer to this question is also affirmative .
As regards existing agreements , the new agreement will streamline cooperation and provide for increased guarantees to be given in the interests of those accused .
Nevertheless , I feel I must draw the attention of the Presidency of the Council to the doubts expressed by Parliament , as reflected in the question that led to this statement .
Firstly , we want to be sure that the same guarantees offered by the European arrest warrant would apply in the case of the United States issuing a request for extradition .
The second issue concerns the doubts over whether a Member State has the capacity to decide if a person should be sent to the United States or referred to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court .
Although there is an explanatory note on this in the text of the agreement on the International Criminal Court , as you mentioned , we believe it would have been much clearer if this reference had been inserted into the text of the agreement .
This would have eliminated the uncertainty on the subject and made it quite clear that a Member State may take that decision .
The third issue relates to procedure .
I would like to highlight a positive and also a negative aspect of this subject .
Firstly , we would like to thank the Greek Presidency for publishing the text of this international agreement before it had even been signed .
This allowed Parliament to consider its contents .
An important precedent has been set .
Nonetheless , this cannot be deemed adequate in terms of democratic control .
I will move on to outline the negative aspect .
To date , the European Parliament has never been consulted on any similar international agreements , even when they concerned fundamental aspects of foreign policy and cooperation on judicial matters .
In our opinion this is unacceptable .
Furthermore , unfortunately agreements of this type do not have to be ratified either by national parliaments or by this House .
When neither the European Parliament nor national parliaments are involved , how can we say that the European Union 's actions in this regard are in line with the democratic principles on which it is based under Article 6 of the EU Treaty ?
This is why it is appropriate for the European Parliament to be consulted and not merely informed , as you have said .
We feel this is a central and highly relevant issue .
I communicated this to the Presidency of the Council in a letter sent in December last year .
I could not understand why I did not receive a reply .
I also made the current President-in-Office of the Council aware of the strength of feeling when the latter appeared before meetings of the committee I chair .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the liberties and fundamental interests of the citizen 's of Europe are at stake .
We are dealing with judicial and criminal cooperation , a subject on which the Treaty provides for a closer level of cooperation than that provided for by the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
I would therefore like you to reconsider your position should no consultation be allowed for .
I also call upon you to convey Parliament 's opinion on this matter to the Council .
I have communicated this opinion to you in the strongest terms .
If our message is not brought before the Council , Parliament would have to consider the possibility of taking its case to the Court of Justice .
Lastly , I would like to thank the Presidency once again for the positive attitude it has shown in relation to such a sensitive dossier , as demonstrated by your presence in the House .
Mr President , 18 months ago when I had the honour to serve as chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , this House adopted a resolution on judicial cooperation between the Union and the USA .
That resolution set out four key requirements for any extradition agreement : full respect for the European Convention on Human Rights ; no extradition of persons likely to face military tribunals ; no extradition if the accused risks facing the death penalty ; and that any measures affecting data protection should be proportionate , effective and time-limited .
The terrorist outrages in Saudi Arabia on Monday night once again remind us that terrorism still poses a deadly serious threat .
We need a robust and effective response .
However , the Liberal Democrats in this House insist that anti-terrorism measures must always respect fundamental rights and be subject to proper democratic oversight and control .
Striking the right balance is essential to success in fighting those who seek to undermine the fabric of democratic societies .
The current draft agreements between the EU and the US on extradition and legal cooperation must not escape the parliamentary scrutiny provided for in our Treaties .
They concern ' fundamental choices ' within the meaning of Article 21 .
They fall not only under Article 38 but also under Article 24 , and it is scandalous that the Council does not consult this House in advance on all the Article 24 agreements .
In France , the Conseil d 'Etat has refused the Assemblée Nationale the right to approve such agreements : so unless the Council consults us , what parliamentary scrutiny exists in the European Union ?
These agreements on extradition and legal co-operation are very ambitious .
The United States declines to sign the UN conventions on cybercrime , on crime prevention and on the International Criminal Court .
In the Union , Member States have not yet ratified our decision on money laundering or the framework directive on terrorism .
Yet these proposals cover the whole Palermo agenda .
They should at the very least provide for the establishment of bodies to oversee their operation and provide feedback .
I can only regret that this agreement makes no reference to the International Criminal Court .
I would urge the Council to rectify this .
The Council must seek to reconcile the potential conflict between a request from the ICC to surrender a person to the court and the obligation stemming from this extradition agreement .
The slide away from democracy can start with the best of intentions .
The European Union must guard against it .
Do not let the Council 's haste facilitate it .
I can fully endorse the criticism made by the previous speakers .
I would just draw attention to the fact that , under Articles 38 and 24 of the Treaty , Parliament has no right whatsoever to be heard .
It is an extraordinary provision , which means that the Council can enter into these agreements off its own bat .
In April of last year , the Council wrote to the British human rights organisation , State Watch , which had requested information about these agreements , and said that the negotiations that were under way had to be kept secret , since the Council 's interest in secrecy counted for more than its interest in democratic scrutiny .
It is easy to see why the Council has kept these negotiations secret for more than a year , for , if they lead to an agreement , very important parts of the legal certainty by which most of our legal systems are characterised would be successfully abolished at the stroke of a pen .
Broadly speaking , the state of our law would be reduced to something reminiscent of what it was in the Middle Ages , both by the extradition agreement , which goes very much farther than what was urged , covering , as it does , very many more types of crime than terrorism - it is enough to have been sentenced to one year 's imprisonment under the penal legislation of the country by or from which extradition is requested - and by the second part of the agreement , namely that relating to what is termed mutual legal aid .
Ask the prisoners in Guantanamo Bay .
These agreements are being entered into with the United States in the name of legal certainty at the same time as everything is being done to infringe legal certainty .
Ask the 3 000 prisoners - overwhelmingly foreigners - suspected of terrorism and consigned to American jails without having access to any information .
Ask the eleven million active FBI informers who , if this agreement is ever implemented , will be given permission to operate within the territories of the EU countries .
That would , as has been said , be a decisive retrograde step . As I said before , this Parliament has no influence at all , either legally or constitutionally , but the debate may be of use in raising the storm that will be necessary for checking these attempts to undermine legal certainty .
President-in-Office of the Council , today , for the first time , we are debating an extradition agreement between the European Union and the United States on which no parliament in the European Union , not even the European Parliament , has been consulted .
I would therefore like to thank you very much for being here with us today , but I am also quite aware of the fact that we have virtually no room for manoeuvre at all , given that , as you yourself have said , everything may well have been decided by 5 June .
Once again , negotiations on matters which are absolutely crucial for the citizens ' freedoms and rights are being carried out , or rather have been carried out , with a complete lack of transparency , and we have only been able to see behind the veil where faits accomplis are concerned .
The Council persists in refusing any kind of formal consultation of the European Parliament .
At times like these , when there are many who believe that democracy and rights can be exported by means of unlawful wars , I find this particularly disturbing .
We consider it to be a clear violation of the Treaty , and we are assessing the feasibility of appealing to the Court on the grounds of violation of the prerogatives of the European Parliament .
I genuinely hope that the majority of Parliament will be of the opinion that it is possible to lodge an appeal of this kind .
We have many grounds for scepticism and concern regarding this agreement , including the failure to give priority to the European arrest warrant in the event of simultaneous requests and the ambiguity which persists even on matters on which there is as little disagreement in this House as data protection or the death penalty .
We wonder , moreover , why it is that we are in such a hurry to conclude this agreement when we know that a number of European citizens are being held prisoner wholly unlawfully at Guantánamo , as has already been mentioned by other Members , and that nothing is known of them .
If the Union and Parliament want to live up to their reputation as at least verbal champions of rights , we must get moving and send a delegation without delay to ascertain the conditions in which those citizens are being held before we sign an agreement with the United States .
It will be interesting , and possibly even amusing , to see whether the United States allows us to do that .
Today , however , we would like to receive answers on the possible - or rather , probable - contradictions between this agreement and the Statute of the International Criminal Court , on which , I regret to say , you did not focus , President-in-Office .
We would like a clear response to the following questions .
Is it true that the United States , actively supported by the United Kingdom , is opposed to any reference to the Criminal Court in the agreement ?
What will happen in the event of conflict between the Rome Statute , in particular the obligation to cooperate with the Criminal Court , and the EU-US extradition agreement ?
Lastly , given the unambiguous position of the European Parliament , not least , which is opposed to the bilateral agreements guaranteeing the impunity of US citizens , could you please tell us whether any of the present or future Members of the European Union have been asked to sign these agreements ?
Do you know of the existence of any agreements of this kind ?
Mr President , in my opinion the Council has made a conscientious attempt to reach a balanced result where these accords are concerned .
On the one hand it is important that we support our NATO friends where possible in the fight against terrorism .
It is also in our own interest that together we fight against organised crime .
If this becomes easier as a result of the extradition and legal cooperation agreement , then that is a major gain .
At the same time I can see that the legal systems of the United States and the European Union are not the same .
It is logical therefore that the United States cannot be treated on a par with an EU Member State .
The United States is a democratic unit in which human rights are guaranteed , but their interpretation is not always the same as that of the EU Member States .
The issue of the death penalty now appears to have been settled to general satisfaction by the Council 's compromise .
There is still the question of competing extradition requests by way for example of a European arrest warrant from the International Criminal Court .
I understand that the Council has discussed this and also recognised it as a problem , but can this be adequately resolved by leaving it to the Member States ?
There is also the question of whether the requirements of the European data protection directive can be adequately met .
In view of these sensitivities the Council has rightly decided to put these proposals to the national parliaments for ratification .
Mr Donner , the Dutch Minister of Justice , declared that the proposals remained within the limits of current Dutch treaties with the United States .
His calm reaction was a relief after the overwrought reaction of various fellow parliamentarians at home and abroad .
There are some who are making the United States into a bogeyman .
No wonder they are not leaping at the chance to become involved with the International Criminal Court .
I understand that the Council has reached a compromise here too .
Member States can conclude a non-extradition treaty with the United States with representatives dispatched by the government in Washington .
This provides an opening for further negotiations .
I am assuming that the Council will be keeping us informed about this .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am not going to repeat the excellent points made concerning the untenable situation as regards what is known as the third pillar .
In reality , there is the possibility that this situation could affect many areas and send out an undemocratic image of the European Union , especially to the candidate countries .
At the Parthenon , we celebrated the advent of the democratic Europe , yet , at the first part-session which our observers - the few that are here - are attending , we must in all conscience kick up a fuss , because you are not consulting us on key issues such as the one in question .
I do not want to go into details on this subject , particularly as I have very little time .
I wanted to say to you , Mr President , that you have said very little about the Criminal Court .
I also wanted to say to the House that it is , in any case , important to take account of the extradition provided for by the Rome Statute .
The handing-over of those who are accused is not extradition in the legal sense of the term .
The fact that this is not discussed is not , therefore , a problem in itself .
Naturally , Europe must remember its undertaking to maintain and preserve the integrity of the Statute as well as the contents of the declaration of 30 September 2002 .
This declaration recommends to all candidate countries and all Member States that they should not sign any bilateral agreements that would go against the principle that is the basis for the Court , which I am glad to say has existed since 11 March and will , I hope , be able to start operating very soon .
Mr President , this agreement is very important , not just because it will be useful in the fight against international crime but also because this is the first time the Union as such has negotiated an international agreement on this matter , which binds the Member States and takes precedence over any bilateral agreements they have concluded .
The rules and criteria adopted will therefore serve as useful benchmarks for similar agreements with many other third countries , and that is another reason why they must be considered carefully .
The Union is bound by the provisions of the Treaties and the acts signed by its institutions .
In matters of respect for fundamental rights , it is bound by Article 6 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union and by the Charter on Fundamental Rights , which lay down more stringent guarantees than those provided for in third countries and , in particular , in the United States - I too am thinking of the European citizens still imprisoned at Guantánamo - and it is therefore these provisions of the Treaty , not respect for individual rights in general , which must be referred to in the EU-US agreement .
The reservation not to cooperate if the accused is liable to face the death penalty is expressed in relation to extradition but not - as it should be - where judicial cooperation is concerned .
This is a requirement that binds not just the Member States but the Union as such too , which does not have the power to conclude agreements which provide for derogations from this principle .
I therefore consider Article 9 of the agreement on judicial cooperation to be inadequate .
Then it is absurd that the Council should conclude agreements with third countries which it has not yet implemented within the Union because the Member States have failed to ratify the agreements or because of failure to implement framework decisions which have already been adopted .
It is also absurd that , as provided for by Article 10 of the agreement , a request for extradition from a third country might take precedence over a request from a Member State to hand a person over made by virtue of a European arrest warrant .
We must therefore remedy these shortcomings , and the agreement will then be a model for European Union cooperation with third countries to combat international crime , with due regard for the fundamental rights which the Union acknowledges all human beings to have .
Mr President , I should like to associate myself with what Mr Watson and other fellow Members here have already said .
In itself this is an extraordinarily important agreement and it is therefore all the more a crying shame that the consultation of the various people 's representations is not properly organised .
In my own country , for example , the agreements had to be read in a room because the agreement was a secret one .
We have now had them handed out and I wonder whether this method of discussion is the right one ?
I share the view of the Chairman of our Committee that we may possibly have to go to the Court of Justice if a different procedure is not followed .
In any event I have some specific questions . Is it right that the American Government should refuse to accept the International Criminal Court ?
Can you say explicitly what role the Council is planning to assign to the International Criminal Court ?
Have the candidate countries been consulted ?
This proposal does after all affect them too .
Is not the lower limit of one year , on the basis of which people can be extradited , far too low ?
In short , Mr President , I doubt very much that this will be handled properly and I should therefore be very glad to see that we can discuss this subject more and better than is currently the case .
Mr President , a year ago Mr John Bolton , the Deputy US Secretary of State , said that the sole purpose of the International Criminal Court was to constrain American military power .
Well , if we have to choose between might and right , we obviously have to defend the international legal order .
The coming weeks will test the EU 's support for the ICC , as the US is intensifying its efforts to obtain bilateral immunity agreements from third countries .
We must support those countries which are coming under pressure .
We must also monitor the situation and find out who is going to agree and who is going to resist .
We do not have this information .
Furthermore , we would still like to know what steps the Council is taking to guarantee that Iraqi prisoners will not be arbitrarily tried by US military courts , but judged by independent international tribunals , preferably under the auspices of the United Nations .
Mr President , do the various European Member States have sufficient trust in each other 's legal systems ?
That was the essence of the discussion on the European arrest warrant .
If the Council is to have its way such trust will have to be placed blindly in a third country outside the borders of the European Union , namely the United States .
In my view this is , for the present , a bridge too far .
First , a critical and public debate on this matter is required .
After all , we are dealing here with fundamental human rights , personal freedom of movement and the preservation of personal safety and property .
It is surely unacceptable simply to try to force citizens and their elected representatives to swallow important amendments to those rights whether they like it or not .
First as regards the extradition treaty .
The norm for extradition between the US and the EU Member States is to be that an offence should carry a minimum sentence of 1 year 's imprisonment .
For some Member States that already have a bilateral extradition treaty with the US this is nothing new .
But conspiracy , participation and an attempt to commit an offence will also require compulsory extradition and that is definitely far-reaching .
But for Member States without a bilateral extradition treaty and for Member States that operate a so-called positive list there will be a sweeping change .
My question to the representative of the Council is therefore whether we can be given a list of the various consequences of the implementation of the treaty for individual Member States .
As is generally known , the rights of suspects are not generally adequately protected in the United States .
The European Union must guarantee the civil rights of its residents , in this case those of suspects and convicted persons .
I doubt whether the Union will be able still to do so when this treaty is implemented .
It should be possible , at the very least , to demand that the treaty refer to the ECHR and that EU Member States should not be permitted to depart from it in implementing this treaty .
That is why the escape clause on the problem of the death penalty is totally inadequate .
It is not sufficient that EU countries should be able to refuse extradition , if there is a threat that the death penalty will be imposed , no , they should be bound to refuse .
Better still , Member States must include a provision in the treaty giving them the option of trying cases themselves if extradition to the US is refused .
In that case EU citizens would at least be assured of an adequate legal process with guarantees secured within Europe for the trial .
The treaty on judicial cooperation in the criminal field raises the question of the judicial and political responsibility for the consequences : the detection teams .
Is Miami Vice about to arrive in Europe ?
Experience has taught us that the US has far less rigid views than our own on the boundaries of acceptable behaviour .
Who is to sound the alarm if in the future we are confronted with American agents who introduce a system of logging off ?
Other Members of this House have already pointed out that data protection is not adequate .
In conclusion , I should like to warmly support what was said by the chairman of our committee , namely that he finds it unacceptable that the Council should yet again refuse to consult Parliament .
We simply cannot accept this any longer and to be quite honest , I fail to understand how the Greek Presidency dares to continue the process by repeatedly making fools of this House .
I find this nothing short of scandalous .
Mr President , in the fight against international crime and terrorism , there is already cooperation between the Member States of the European Union and the United States as regards information and this has produced significant results .
It must be developed at judicial level in order to improve efficiency , but also in order to comply with our fundamental principles and the protection of freedoms .
Indeed , the more effort we put into stepping up international cooperation in the fight against terrorism and other forms of crime , the more care we will have to take not to lose the democratic guarantees and legal principles on which our action is based along the way .
Like Mr Watson , I would also mention Parliament 's resolution of 13 December 2001 , and , in particular , the principles it set out concerning the negotiations on judicial cooperation with the United States .
Firstly , complete respect for the European Convention on Human Rights and minimum procedural guarantees of a fair trial , as confirmed by the European Court of Human Rights .
Article 6 of the Treaty establishing the European Union must be mentioned explicitly in the agreement and there should also be a reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which was proclaimed by the Council , by the Member States , and will , I hope , be given constitutional value .
Secondly , extradition to the United States must be refused for people who may be tried before military tribunals .
Thirdly , extradition must not be allowed if the defendant is liable to be sentenced to the death penalty .
Mr Alavanos is right : it is not simply a matter of stating that it ' may be denied ' ; it must not be possible if there is a risk of execution .
Fourthly , we must ensure that the provisions on data protection are proportionate and effective and only last for a limited period of time .
As regards the connection with the European arrest warrant and the International Criminal Court , I believe that , where there is a choice , the Member States must be free to choose between requests for extradition by the United States and requests to hand people over under the European arrest warrant or from the International Criminal Court , but I would like you to inform us of the positions in the Council .
Is it true that the United States rejects all references to the ICC and a number of Member States support this position ?
The United States has asked for a reextradition clause to be included in the agreement that would prevent an EU Member State sending a US citizen to the International Criminal Court or another international tribunal without its express agreement .
Is this request also supported by Member States ?
Lastly , does the Council acknowledge that such a reextradition clause would be contrary to its commitments regarding precisely the International Criminal Court and the Rome Statute ?
Thank you , Minister .
The debate is closed .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission made a detailed statement to this House about the New Neighbours Initiative back on 11 March , and to be honest not very much has happened since then that I can report to you .
The Member States have begun dealing with this subject in the Council , and Mr Yiannitsis has just reported on that in some detail .
We have discussed this subject with the future Member States , and there has been the very laudable initiative of the Greek Presidency , in connection with the signing of the enlargement treaty in Athens , to discuss this subject with those partner states that will be affected by this New Neighbours Initiative in the course of a European Conference .
I am delighted to tell you that responses to this were thoroughly positive , so we can assume that this initiative can rely on a sufficient level of political support across the board .
The starting point for our proposals on a new neighbourhood policy is of course enlargement , but now is not the time to discuss the membership prospects of our new neighbours .
What we need for the coming decade is above all a differentiated strategy for intensive good-neighbourly relations that is not linked with any statement about the question of accession .
It is our intention to export the stability , security and prosperity that we have created and hope to build upon in the enlarged European Union .
President Prodi has already described this objective as a ' ring of friends ' surrounding us , a ring extending from Russia to Morocco .
This will allow us to share with our partners much of what makes the European Union what it is , not least the common market and its rules , our Community programmes and political dialogue , but not our internal institutions .
The Commission has already explained that the countries of the western Balkans and also Romania , Bulgaria and Turkey are not included in this ring , and why that is .
These countries already have prospects for future membership , and in the case of Romania and Bulgaria this already involves a specific time frame .
It goes without saying that the intensity and pace at which relations between the EU and individual countries develop will depend on the capabilities and ambitions of the individual partner states .
But in this case too , as for enlargement , the principle of differentiation will play an important part .
We therefore want to work out an action plan with each individual country based on experience and our present treaty commitments .
These action plans will set out our common road map , and will contain objectives , timetables , modalities and monitoring mechanisms binding both sides in the same way .
It will emerge from this process whether or not we need new treaty instruments .
However , it is in any case intended that work should proceed under the existing partnership and cooperation agreements , and should not be delayed by the prospect of further agreements in the future .
Where do we stand at present with this project ?
Well , for the time being , in conjunction with the candidate countries and the partner states , we are making our contribution to the discussions and conclusions planned in the Council .
We have held our first exploratory talks with Ukraine and Moldova , so as to pave the way for the necessary cooperation .
For the EU-Ukraine Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , both sides have jointly produced a detailed analysis of what has been achieved and have jointly determined what further steps are required .
Internally , within the Commission that is , we are now in the process of working out the basic planks of the action plans .
Each national plan must relate to a comprehensive and coherent framework covering all areas .
It must be possible to measure how this has been implemented in practice against predetermined criteria , so that the progress reports envisaged can be drawn up .
So you will see that we want to make use of an instrument that has already very much proved its worth during the enlargement process .
We are developing the basis of a new financial instrument and although we have already outlined the general purposes of this instrument , we still need to define it more precisely and to establish the planning principles and the overall financial envelope .
We intend to bring forward a special communication on this subject in the autumn .
We should then be in a position to start on the practical work , as soon as we have been given the necessary political green light . As you have heard , the Presidency is working on that and the Presidency 's approach has the Commission 's full support .
Parliament 's contribution to the further debate will not only be significant but will also carry weight .
The representatives of the people in our partner states must play their part in contributing to further progress .
We can take it that the parliaments of the partner states will attach great importance to the views of the European Parliament , and I would also be grateful if the Members of the European Parliament would use their contacts to enter into an intensive dialogue and exchange of experience with parliamentarians in the partner states .
That is why I am very pleased that the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy has already appointed a rapporteur and had its first discussion on this .
I wish Mrs Napoletano every success with her task , and I would like to assure her that she can totally rely on the full support and cooperation of the Commission in her work .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to inform the House that Mrs Louise Fréchette , the first deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations , is with us .
Mrs Fréchette was in the European Parliament today for bilateral meetings with a number of honourable Members and will be meeting President Pat Cox this afternoon .
We welcome her , we congratulate her on her deep dedication to the performance of her duties and we trust that her stay at the European Parliament will be very , very fruitful .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , apart from the generally accepted historical reasons for the enlargement of the European Union , another factor which has played an important part in our decision in favour of this initiative is that since the fall of the Iron Curtain there have been differences between the West and former Eastern Bloc countries in terms of prosperity , democracy and law and order which cannot be allowed to continue . We therefore have good reasons for working to ensure that prosperity and democracy also have a chance in those countries where that was impossible under Soviet dictatorship .
With enlargement , we are pushing the boundary of prosperity and democracy further eastwards , so that the question once again arises , this time in the case of our new neighbours , of how we can live alongside them , and the Commission is to be congratulated on the way it has racked its brains to find solutions .
I support all the activities described by the Commissioner down to the last detail - with one exception , where I am opposed .
That is your suggestion , Mr Verheugen , that you can manage all this without making a statement about possible decisions on accession .
On that particular point I think you are wrong .
I think it is essential , while we are in the process of enlargement - a process that will keep us busy for a long time in fact - that we should spell out who is to be a neighbour in the future and who is to be a future Member State of the European Union .
It is now absolutely imperative for us to address the issue of the borders of the European Union - and I do not just mean its geographical borders .
The Treaty itself obliges us to address this issue , because , as the Commission communication correctly mentions , European states may apply for membership of the European Union .
However , we need to consider how far the political union that we consider desirable can be extended , what the limits to integration are , what the shape of our future structures will be , and what the nature of the European Union must be .
That is not something we can or should try to resolve conclusively today , but it is very much under discussion in the Convention .
We do not need to resolve the conflict about whether the European Union is a federal state or some other kind of animal .
In such cases we lawyers tend to talk about something being sui generis . However , we do need to make a decision about who in future will be neighbours and who will be Member States , because on the one hand we owe the citizens of the European Union some clarity on this issue , as they want to know how far the European project now extends , but on the other hand we also owe clarity to our neighbours , whose hopes we should not raise if they cannot be fulfilled .
That is one of the problems that we have with Turkey , which is an important partner and ally .
The question of how to deal with Turkey has been left unresolved for too long .
The objective of ' political union ' also has its limits .
The process of enlargement has now essentially reached a stage where there may still be some scope for ' rounding off ' , but any further accession that would jeopardise the Union 's capacity for integration and totally undermine the balance between these 25 states has to be ruled out . Enlargement has reached a stage where to shape a common view by reconciling varying positions and conflicting standpoints would take so much energy that there would be no scope for effective external action .
That is indeed one of the lessons of the Iraq war , where divergent viewpoints within the European Union condemned us to inaction .
Who can seriously believe that the accession of countries ranging from the Mediterranean area through Turkey to Russia could possibly make the Union stronger and more effective ?
That is why we need to resolve the question of the borders of the European Union now , and only then can we try to act as good neighbours .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to start by telling the Commission how timely and appropriate the communication on the Wider Europe and on relations with its new neighbours to the east and south is , not least in that it makes it possible to structure the debate to exclude improvisation or extemporisation , which have the effect of raising easily-raised or vain hopes in a situation which is extremely complex and in a state of constant flux .
Indeed , there could not be a worse moment to raise false hopes regarding new dimensions of enlargement than that when we have to successfully carry the integration of ten countries through to a conclusion and to assess the effectiveness of the reforms decided on by the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference .
This , however , does not mean that the Union must become inward-looking .
Thus , the Commission is right to produce a wider integration strategy involving countries and geographical areas located to the east and south of the enlarged Union at the very time when the accession treaties for the ten new Member States are being signed .
It is , however , right , as the Commission communication states , to avoid making a misleading parallel between neighbour countries and countries which will never become part of the European Union , and , at the same time , to avoid accession to the European institutions being the only instrument which can be proposed for a closer cooperation policy addressing common problems and interests .
In other words , we need to ensure that the strategy and enlargement are relatively independent of each other .
For precisely this reason , in the initial debate which took place in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , the need emerged to provide a single framework for a broad strategy which is also practical enough to propose policies for today , not for an unspecified time in the future which we are unable to foresee at this present moment but for which we can and must pave the way .
In this regard , the initial ideas which have emerged during the debate are along these lines . To complete the geopolitical framework , considering the countries of the Caucasus too .
To look , including in the context of the Mediterranean , beyond the countries of the current partnership .
Not to exclude from this strategy , Commissioner , countries which are already about to join the Union , not in order to cause confusion but because these countries too will need to be able to interact with the areas on their borders .
If borders are considered to be more than just physical borders , it is extremely important that , between now and when they join the Union , the Balkans , for example , are able to interact in a Mediterranean context .
This does not mean that we are to iron out or fail to preserve the differences between the instruments , from the preaccession agreements to the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership : quite the opposite , we must strengthen them through the proposal the Commission puts forward on the cross-border dimension .
The strength of this strategy lies precisely in the fact that common objectives are established for a geographical area which , because of its history , culture and adjacency to the Union , can be described as a pan-European and Mediterranean region - the arc stretching from Russia to Morocco - as President Prodi maintains .
What can the countries of such a diverse area have in common ?
I want to say to the Commission and the Council that we insist on one thing : politics , first and foremost .
We want to share , first and foremost , values , democracy , the rule of law and freedom and to develop new as well as existing instruments and policies in this framework .
I therefore believe that Parliament can - and will - contribute to this framework , for we are delighted with the spirit of openness already displayed in the speeches of the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commission .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , clearly the accession of ten new countries to the European Union is set to change the relationship we have with our neighbours .
I would like to highlight a fundamental aspect of the Union 's cooperation with our neighbours , that of cross-border cooperation .
Cross-border cooperation has played a key role in European integration .
It should also play a key role in our relations with our new neighbours following enlargement .
It is to be hoped that the new European Constitution will give cross-border cooperation the place it deserves .
Our new neighbours can be divided into three different groups .
There are the countries of Eastern Europe and the countries of the Mediterranean basin .
The Balkan States must be borne in mind too , although further accessions may take place in the future in that area .
Cross-border cooperation may not be sufficient to facilitate perfect collaboration with neighbouring countries .
We can and must however take advantage of its benefits .
It allows us to get to know neighbouring countries , and to understand and trust them .
If we know , understand and trust each other , we can work together and improve our relationship .
We will be able to export well-being and stability , to quote the Commissioner .
These two elements are crucial to the future of both the European Union and of our neighbours .
I would also like to draw your attention to the particular case of Kaliningrad , in Northern Europe .
This area will become an island surrounded by Member States of the European Union .
We therefore need to establish a special system of cooperation with Kaliningrad .
As Mr Yegorov , the current governor of the area has said on many occasions , there needs to be a system of cross-border cooperation with both Lithuania and Poland .
In my opinion , relations with neighbouring countries from the Mediterranean to northern Russia pose a significant challenge to the European Union .
Mr President , the historic enlargement of the Union and , perhaps to an even greater extent , the new situation created by the occupation of Iraq and the imperialist pretensions of the United States , mean that we need to think about the role the European Union wishes to play in the future and , in particular , its role with regard to its future neighbours .
This is urgent .
The logic of force is persisting after the war .
By helping itself to the resources and monopolising all of the levers of power , the Bush administration is continuing to both impose the fait accompli against the interests of the Iraqi people and disregard the UN and thus respect for international law .
To line up another view of the world against this veritable doctrine , the European Union now needs political courage , initiative and dialogue .
In my view , forging new relations with our future neighbours could be a first decisive step , particularly as regards the Arab Muslim world .
The virtually constant condemnation and humiliation it is suffering , combined with the economic and social gap , can only serve to fuel religious fundamentalism and the use of terrorism by increasingly dangerous groups , as a result of which the extreme right here hopes to prosper .
To combat all of these perils effectively , I feel that priority should be given to objectives and means other than those set out in the Commission communication .
There is no doubt that , in theory , as regards the idea of new momentum , for example , there is the goal of closer relations .
However , there will be no common area without common construction .
We are far from that , listening to Romano Prodi talk about political rapprochement and gradual integration into the European Union 's economic and social structures .
Would the word ' neighbours ' then be replaced with the word ' partnership ' ?
Does the composition of the enlarged meeting of 40 European countries , held in Athens on 17 April , which you have discussed , prefigure a type of multi-speed integration , with second-zone countries , the so-called Wider Europe , and others in a third zone , the southern Mediterranean countries ?
Above all , however , mere alignment with the market approach that governs the current process of European integration does little to meet our needs or achieve any effectiveness in this area .
A genuine cooperation policy cannot equate to the sacrosanct transposition of the Community acquis , because that is what we are talking about , especially when no equivalent is mentioned as regards aid .
The initiative of launching specific action programmes may be interesting given the rigidity , for example , of the overall Barcelona process .
Nevertheless , while the negotiations conducted with the candidate countries have left a bitter taste in the mouth and resulted in a great deal of frustration , as we are quite aware , the Commission has not proposed any review of the matter . What is worse , a bonus is offered for the best reform students .
As regards the conflicts , and I am ending now , the Commission has spent very little time on this aspect although a common area can only be built on the principle of international law and on a much more active role for the Union .
Finally , the fact that the entire Commission document focuses almost exclusively on the security aspect of relations ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , one of the principal results of enlargement is the fact that countries which , until yesterday , seemed geographically far away have been integrated into the Union , and , therefore , that the peoples of these countries have been integrated , bringing the number of inhabitants of the new enlarged Union up to 450 million .
The geographical , political and cultural upheavals experienced by the European continent and the Mediterranean Basin during the twentieth century have certainly not helped in the recent past to bring Europe closer to Russia , the new independent states and the countries of the southern Mediterranean , which are now our neighbours .
They have suffered very diverse , tragic situations , and that is why it is still important today to find common ground and points of active cooperation between us .
One of the primary objectives of the new reunified Europe , with its 25 Member States , will have to be the achievement of a preferential relationship with these neighbouring countries of both Eastern Europe , Russia and Asia , such as Kazakhstan , and those which make up the Middle East region and lie on the Mediterranean Basin .
The political Europe born of the work of the Convention and the new institutional treaty which the IGC will submit to the people of the Union will have a duty not just to strengthen economic alliances , which will facilitate the improvement of communications structures too , in order to encourage mutually beneficial trade between citizens and companies , but also and above all to promote all those political , social , cultural and scientific initiatives which will increase the citizens ' involvement in the development of democratic , secular governments with due regard for all the national , cultural and religious traditions which , in any case , uphold man 's dignity and safeguard his physical integrity .
If , however , this dialogue is to proceed with equal intensity where all the Union 's neighbouring countries are concerned , we believe that political measures in the immediate term to facilitate peace in the Middle East and restore economic stability to the Mediterranean Basin are a priority .
Indeed , in our opinion , full recognition of the state of Israel and its citizens ' right to a life free of terrorism and full recognition of the Palestinian people 's right to an autonomous , independent state which is committed to combating all forms of terrorism and to monitoring whether the funds appropriated by the European Union are genuinely used to help the Palestinian people , to educate young people , to develop production activities and to build houses and infrastructure , are a primary objective .
Another primary objective is preventing a mass exodus from the poorest countries , which would lead to uncontrolled migration , both impoverishing the countries from which the migrants are emigrating and throwing into disorder the structures of the countries of reception , which cannot deal with mass irregular immigration , particularly when , mixed in with the migrants seeking better conditions , there are numerous members of criminal or terrorist organisations dealing in drugs , arms and , worst of all , human beings .
There is therefore a clear need for a political and economic Union undertaking to encourage ongoing , harmonious development in these countries , so that people find in their native countries not just the means of subsistence but the means of social and cultural progress too .
Only in this way can it be ensured that the people emigrating will be doing so on the basis of a reasoned decision and in accordance with the rules , not out of desperation or illegally .
Mr President , we must , moreover , all remember the need to call upon all the European institutions to mount , by means of appropriate agreements with the governments of neighbouring states , an intense , relentless fight against child abuse , the exploitation , especially sexual exploitation , of women and children , and all practices which violate the physical integrity of the individual .
Mr President , the proximity policy for the enlarged Europe , which has just been discussed by the Council and the Commission , would appear to be very interesting as it forms part of a new , more flexible approach , the approach of general cooperation that is graduated and differentiated , adapted to the situation of each neighbour country .
At this stage , however , four questions come to mind .
Firstly , the content of the neighbourhood agreements has at times been defined by the expression ' everything except the institutions ' , which may be mistakenly interpreted as meaning ' everything except decision-making power ' .
This ambiguity must be clarified .
Secondly , once again with regard to the content , there has also been talk of giving priority to extending the single market 's four freedoms of movement .
Is it not very rash to make this commitment in advance ?
It is all too clear that other objectives are much more pressing , for instance security .
Thirdly , the new proximity policy seems to have to be limited to non-candidate neighbouring countries .
Turkey is not included in this list , but it is difficult to know why that is the case as its accession has not yet been officially approved .
Fourthly , in this proximity policy , the European Union is not starting from scratch .
It is not starting from square one as the current Members already have relations with their neighbours , particularly those with which they share borders .
How is the European policy going to work in relation to the existing national policies ?
Should the Member countries which are the immediate neighbours of these countries not be given a decisive role or a special right of consultation as regards the new European policy ?
Mr President , it just so happens that there is , today , an article on the future of Europe in the international press .
It paints a very dramatic picture , mapped out by a French institute , of the dangers threatening Europe .
Populations are falling , economic growth is stagnating , and the institute takes the view that the situation will be long-term .
The innovative strength of the European Union lags far behind that of the United States .
Doom and gloom .
The remedy that the French institute prescribes is to open our eyes , see the bigger picture and look further than the Commission does at this moment .
That was what it boiled down to .
Whether this is the remedy , I do not know .
In any case we must always keep the United States at the back of our minds , since that country is an important neighbour of ours .
As far as the course of events in Europe and in our neighbour states on this continent are concerned , however , I am bound to say that I had a sense of déjà vu when I read the Commission 's statement .
The Commission is familiar with the whole field of expansion , and with the attendant process .
Reading the document one has the strong feeling that we are embarking on a new round of expansions .
It is made very clear that this is not the case .
The only prospect being offered to the surrounding countries is participation in the internal market , not participation in the Union and its decision-making process .
But we find that matters relating to environmental policy , public order , security , fighting crime , quality of government administration , the rule of law , are all open to consideration for a joint approach - in short , virtually the whole spectrum of topics also discussed on the admission of the candidate countries .
The development of neighbouring countries , the statement continues , in all these sectors can then be discussed annually in progress reports .
It looks remarkably like the expansion process .
In addition there is talk of benchmarks - there are a number of internationally recognised benchmarks , by which the neighbouring countries will be measured , and these are consequently mentioned in concrete terms .
I just wonder whether we are dealing here with a ' Department of Public Works ' effect .
The Department of Public Works is a very efficient agency in the Netherlands that is continually creating polders and dikes .
Once they have completed the construction of a new polder , they suddenly find that a dike is much too low and they immediately have to set to work on it .
This may be something of a tongue-in-cheek comment , but I could well imagine that that effect might play a part .
Those involved in hands-on work see further ahead than the rest of us .
The theme of a Wider Europe therefore , if I have understood correctly , in fact concerns the affiliation of neighbouring countries to the European Union but without their participation in its decision-making .
This will in fact turn them into virtual satellites , also removing them , for instance , from existing cooperative agreements in which they are involved ; Russia from the GOS , and perhaps also the North African countries from their own federation of Arab states .
It also presupposes that our current Member States fully meet the benchmarks and criteria mentioned in the statement .
Naturally I warmly welcome the latter news .
That every new candidate must be carefully judged by the same standard , is a conviction we all share .
How are we to deal in that respect , however , with countries to which we definitely cannot or do not wish to offer the prospect of membership ?
Will they accept such assessment and such an annual investigation ?
It seems to me that a Wider Europe might be a space for countries whose traditions make it impossible to opt for the European democratic model .
I can imagine that there are such countries .
It is actually difficult to deny admission to countries that do opt for the model .
What moral basis is there for telling such countries , when they ask for a date , that they can not join ?
My feeling is that such issues will have to be discussed in great detail in the future .
Mr President , we live in a world where the better our neighbours and our other fellow human beings thrive , the better we also thrive .
That is why it is important to cultivate a policy that strengthens democracy and prosperity in the Union 's neighbouring regions .
When Finland joined the European Union the Union suddenly had Russia as its neighbour , sharing a border with that country which is almost 1 300 kilometres long .
That border still represents one of the world 's widest gulfs between standards of living .
Despite development , Russia still has much hard work to do in the creation of democratic social structures .
The strengthening of democracy and civil society also remains a fundamental aim of cooperation between the EU and Russia .
Enlargement means that , in addition to the border between Finland and Russia , the Union will be getting 10 new Interreg-TACIS borders .
It will no longer be possible to maintain the current system of cooperation , but the experience we have had up till now of cooperation should be put to careful use .
The new Member States will bring with them Belarus , Ukraine and Moldava as neighbours .
Each of them has significant political and economic problems .
If they get worse they could increase instability in Europe .
The situation is worst in Belarus , where the political situation has hindered EU cooperation with the country .
Hopefully preparations for the elections in 2004 will clear the way for what would at least be the first openings for cooperation .
The Commission communication quite rightly stresses the importance of cross-border and regional cooperation with our new neighbours .
A new financial instrument must be developed for cooperation .
It should , in my opinion , be based on the Interreg principles and be flexible enough to meet the needs of each border region .
The key principles are that it should be multiannual , that there should be power of decision in the regions , and that it should be organised as efficiently as possible with regard to its administration and making payments .
It is also important that expertise and cultural know-how in the new Member States of the EU should be swiftly harnessed in the planning and implementation of policy towards our neighbours .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to a region at the very edge of the continent , the Caucasus , which the Minister has already mentioned and which the rapporteur , Mrs Napoletano , has touched on .
It is a matter of interest to Europe , for the Caucasus has been part of Europe during many periods of history .
Armenia and Georgia are two of the oldest Christian countries .
In the Middle Ages , Armenia was considered to be a major European power .
At the end of the nineteenth century , nobody would have denied that Baku , the capital of Azerbaijan , was a powerful centre among the pioneers of the oil industry , even in European terms .
Today , moreover , Azerbaijan is the principal supplier of crude oil to the European Union .
After the First World War and before the collapse of the Soviet Union , the national governments of the three countries , despite their diversity , turned to European values .
The Conference of Versailles gave a number of European powers the task of assisting the birth of the new democracies .
The three Republics participated in the 1972-1975 Pan-European Helsinki Conference as part of the Soviet delegation , and all three are part of the Council of Europe .
They are therefore not foreign to Europe .
The EU-Southern Caucasus Parliamentary Cooperation Committee has visited these countries on a number of occasions , and the solution for finding a way out of the crisis put forward by the three governments lay , each time , in establishing closer relations with Europe as quickly as possible .
It is hoped that even the potentially extremely dangerous crises such as the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh can be resolved in a European context .
The United States and Russia are involved in the region for economic reasons .
The national governments , with different emphases , of course , therefore have to carry out balancing operations .
Nevertheless , they would prefer another protagonist such as the European Union to be more involved .
Our Cooperation Committee - for which I have appointed myself spokesman - was impressed by the intrinsic feeling displayed by the three countries - Armenia , Georgia and Azerbaijan - of historically being part of Europe .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that we are holding this debate in the European Parliament today , because the issue of Europe 's external borders is one that we really have to tackle .
The question we have to address politically speaking , and which we are currently examining in the Convention , is how far European integration can go .
What is the bond that links us together politically and encourages us to take joint political action ?
Geography is another issue that we need to discuss .
What are the geographical limits to a Europe that is willing to cooperate within this political union ?
And that leads on to this question : how are we to work with our neighbours beyond this closely cooperating Europe ?
I would accordingly like to thank the Commission and the Council for having addressed in their paper and in today 's debate something that Europe urgently needs : a wide-ranging public debate on this very issue , the geographical expansion of Europe , not of the continent of Europe , but of close political cooperation within the European Union .
We will also have to stop thinking in black and white terms , as if relations can only take two forms - non-membership or full membership .
It would be the worst possible mistake if that were the signal we were sending out .
Europe has at its disposal a broad panoply of individual forms of cooperation .
I myself come from a constituency that will continue to border on a non-Member State , namely Switzerland . In this case we have found a variety of solutions , including legal solutions based on agreements and cooperation arrangements through integration and specific European programmes .
This is a perfect example of how the interests of a particular country - Switzerland - and of the EU can be reconciled without simply saying , ' you either remain on the outside or you become a full member ' .
So we should focus once again on achieving this broad panoply of means of cooperating with our neighbours without constantly having discussions about ever more countries joining the European Union .
We also need to ask ourselves what the limits are to Europe 's capacity for integration .
If we are to discuss the question of political boundaries , of political responsibility , then we also need to consider who can tread this path alongside us .
A European Union that ultimately degenerates into an enormous free trade area is not the model I am committed to , and I think that my fellow Members feel the same way .
I also expect these debates to be held in public and not in the Council , essentially at the meetings of Heads of State and Government , which discussed Turkey 's accession in less than three minutes .
That is no way to deal with issues of this kind .
We need to listen to people here , and that must be the signal that goes out from Strasbourg today .
We must take the public with us , and if they are ready to go down this road with us , we should work together politically to make it happen .
Mr President , in one year , the European Union of the 25 , and later of the 27 , will have new neighbours , but it will also keep old neighbours .
A debate on the new environment is both useful and necessary .
From this point of view , the position of Commission President Prodi , that the European Union must look on all new neighbours as friends and associates is absolutely correct .
This position must become the position of all of us , peoples and governments alike of both the 25 and the 27 , and that is because , in certain cases , sometimes overt and sometimes concealed , opposition is being expressed on the basis of historical atavism or by reviving past antagonisms and / or enmities .
In all events , we do not need divisions , we do not need new iron curtains , we do not need new cold war fronts .
We must look on many of our new neighbours as potential candidates for integration into the European Union or , in any event , as associates and friends .
Any perspective must , however , express the free democratic will of each nation .
On the borders of Europe , following enlargement , interesting tasks are under way , tasks that are often of wider geopolitical and strategic interest , including for countries which are not located in this area , which means that they intervene in developments .
From the Ukraine , Belarus , Moldavia , Russia , the western Balkans , the Caucasus , the Middle East , the other side of the Mediterranean , peoples expect a great deal of the European Union , of us .
We must respond positively to these expectations .
Now as regards the boundaries of Europe , I should like to add to what Mr Volcic said about the Caucasus , that right back in antiquity , in the ancient Greek tragedy of Prometheus Bound , it says that this is where the gods tied up Prometheus in order to punish him for giving man fire , that is to say the first elements of modern civilisation .
Mr President , in my view , the main aim of the initiative for new neighbours in the Wider Europe is not to put those neighbours who are waiting for their turn to join the Union to come one day on hold , Commissioner Verheugen .
They are already aware of our requirements , which will continue to be based on the Copenhagen criteria , although they will no doubt be better clarified by the constitution proposals we are awaiting from the Convention .
I highlighted the importance of this during this morning 's debate , but I would like to relay to you the moving account of one of these countries , which , in its own words , is currently waiting in the kindergarten of the Council of Europe until it is one day allowed into the older children 's playground of the European Parliament .
This was in Mostar , where , as you know , the rivalry and fear between Catholic Croats and Muslim Bosnians are still far too intense , in spite of the efforts of the European Community .
In Mostar , the Croatian mayor of the town told me that the only thing that Catholic Croats and Muslim Bosnians have in common is the sentiment and the belief that they must be Europeans together .
So that is the situation of those who are waiting .
However , although I am paying all due attention to the reflections of our rapporteur , Mrs Napoletano , I am not the only person to ask if we can use this report to send a very strong signal to all those who have neither the desire nor the intention to seek their accession , and I am thinking in particular of our neighbours in the southern Mediterranean .
There are many in that region who fear that the efforts made with regard to Central and Eastern Europe may result in a slackening of the links with their own countries that are already too little institutionalised .
In the emotion following the 11 September attacks , we decided quite unanimously , for example , to give fresh impetus to the Barcelona process and , to this end , decided to create a Euro-Mediterranean Forum , which , I am sad to say , is not functioning today due to the war in Iraq .
Is it not time , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to reinvigorate this initiative without delay ?
Mr President , during the last plenary sitting , we voted in favour of one of the greatest ventures ever undertaken by the European Union - the accession of ten new Member States .
The challenges are not over yet , however .
Our horizons are widening , our borders are expanding and the arrival of new Member States will spur the Union on further to consolidate relations with its new neighbours , such that - as I see it - in the coming years , the Union 's ability to provide its citizens with security , stability and sustainable development will depend on its desire and ability to step up and develop cooperation and dialogue with the new neighbouring countries .
In this regard , the Wider Europe initiative draws our attention to the European Union 's new proximity policy , seeking to define a strategic framework for relations with the new neighbouring countries during the coming decade .
Poland is one of the countries which have now reached the eve of their de facto accession to the European Union , and I am the rapporteur for Poland .
As such , I particularly welcome the important role that this major border country will be able to play in developing neighbourly relations with countries such as Ukraine , Belarus and , above all , Russia , as President Kwasniewski said only today .
Lastly , I had to mention the southern Mediterranean , which is of particular interest to a country such as Italy , almost all of whose territory borders on the Mediterranean Sea and which is thus a natural bridge linking the European Union and the countries of the southern Mediterranean .
In conclusion , I hope that the Council and the Commission , together with the European Parliament , especially given the impending start of the Italian Presidency , will create better geopolitical conditions for carrying through the project for a renewed Europe , a Europe which is not just politically wider but which has grown in economic and social terms too , so that countries which are different but which have common interests make up a healthy whole , despite the differences in their history and individual experiences .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission communication .
I confess that I was initially somewhat surprised that this paper bracketed together countries like Libya and Belarus in a single communication .
These two countries , like the other countries on the southern shore of the Mediterranean or in eastern and south-eastern Europe , have precious little in common apart from their relative geographical proximity to the European Union .
That is why I am pleased that each country is to be dealt with individually .
The Presidency has made an announcement to that effect and the Commissioner talked about action plans .
As something has therefore been said about practically all our neighbours , for the sake of completeness a sentence could have been added about Norway and Switzerland , as an example , at least in the case of Norway , of just what can be done without signing up to actual membership .
I find wording such as the heading ' Different countries , common interests ' somewhat unfocussed .
Their agendas really are too different .
It has been said that there are countries that have membership prospects and others that do not .
If we want to , we can demand a lot more from neighbours who also belong to the Council of Europe : for example , in return for granting trade preferences , we can make demands in the area of human rights .
However , we should not make offers that we cannot honour .
We cannot offer all neighbouring states the four freedoms as the Commission does in Section 3 of its communication , and I quote : ' the prospect of a stake in the EU 's Internal Market and further integration and liberalisation to promote the free movement of persons , goods , services and capital ' .
Fortunately , the Commissioner did not repeat that quotation from the communication as such .
However , the communication almost gives the impression that we are offering an ' à la carte ' Europe .
I have to say that I cannot identify any political consensus for granting North Africa and Russia , for example , freedom of movement in any foreseeable political future .
I therefore call on the Commission to draw up pragmatic and realistic action plans that neither raise false hopes nor over-commit the EU .
Mr President , it is important to establish the EU 's relations with its new neighbours , following the enlargement through a zone of prosperity and a ring of friends with whom the EU enjoys close , peaceful and cooperative economic relations .
In return for concrete progress , Russia and countries of the Western NIS and the Southern Mediterranean should be offered the prospect of a stake in the EU 's internal market and participation in the so-called four freedoms - in effect , everything bar participation in the Institutions .
Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union allows any European state the opportunity of joining the Union , which is why accession has already been ruled out for the non-European Mediterranean partners .
Russia and Belarus do not wish to join the European Union , being content with the PCA Agreement , and the Maghreb is planning to be part of an African Union .
However , better engagement and cooperation with Belarus in areas of common interest is essential to encourage reform in that country .
In spite of Article 49 , there is still a serious danger that Moldova and Ukraine will see the process as insufficiently differentiated and as a way of distancing the EU from their just membership aspirations .
In addition , the suggestion that there should be additional freedom of movement of persons for all neighbouring countries would undermine the existing attempts to limit large-scale immigration into the EU .
The movement of skilled and educated people to nearby countries would also create a serious brain-drain that would damage the economies of countries such as Moldova and Ukraine .
However , the EU is looking at ways of facilitating the crossing of external borders for bona fide third country nationals ; after all , good fences make for good neighbours in my opinion .
Lastly , I propose that Phare and other successful pre-accession financial instruments , which have benefited acceding countries so much , be extended , along with the remit of the EIB to the Western NIS countries , which would replace the current limited Tacis Programme and approach , which carries no private sector economic investments .
Mr President , I would like to begin by saying that the initiative presented by the European Commission on 11 March last is the best response the European Union could give to some of the fears inspired by enlargement .
This proposal is based on an overall view of the place of the new Europe in its surroundings , but from an individual viewpoint for each country , without affecting the European aspirations of these countries .
That should be clear .
This area of new neighbours should be built on compliance with shared values , which we must continue to establish .
That way , the EU strategy with regard to the southern border , in terms of democratisation and human development , cannot be limited to the democratic clause .
The United States are currently implementing a global strategy on this subject with increased budgetary resources and the European Union cannot lose sight of the overwhelming need to foster democratisation along its closest cultural and strategic border .
This should take place gradually and realistically , but with strict requirements .
The European Union should provide what our Mediterranean partners are always asking for : an area of shared prosperity .
This , however , should also be an area of shared responsibility , above all with regard to the subject of immigration , which is of particular concern to this House .
In order to accomplish this , the Commission 's proposals on the free movement of persons should be studied carefully and debated in depth , and Parliament must be heard .
The global and regional strategy represented by this initiative for new neighbours must act as a spur for regional integration and strengthen cross-border cooperation between the southern and eastern Mediterranean countries , which is currently almost non-existent .
It must also break down , once and for all , the walls that make many borders between Mediterranean countries impenetrable .
The initiative we are discussing today must be credible and offer tangible results .
This will require sufficient budgetary resources and certain proposals will need to be reviewed , such as the Euro-Mediterranean Development Bank .
Lastly , we must also explore the possibility of a ' conference of neighbours ' involving the Heads of State and Government of these countries to address matters of common interest , including the Middle East , in the presence of the two parties and two members of the Quartet .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to make three brief comments , and to reiterate that no complete plan is as yet in existence ; the situation is rather that a plan is now being developed in conjunction with the Member States and the partner states based on the reflections the Commission has presented to you .
This plan will be differentiated and tailored to the needs of each country , so there is no danger , for example , that Libya will be offered freedom of movement .
Instead , the instruments available will be examined to see to which countries they are best suited , and how we can take advantage of existing potential for cooperation . Our intention is that at some point next year there will then be an overarching strategy for the future .
Secondly , this plan includes those countries that do not have any prospect of membership .
I think I made that clear , so I cannot understand why several Members of this House have suggested that preparations are being made for a covert further round of enlargement .
It is precisely because these countries have no prospect of membership that they are included in this programme .
All the other countries we have been discussing here do have membership prospects , that is to say , the Balkan states , Bulgaria , Romania and Turkey .
The countries in the European Economic Area and Switzerland in any case have a special treaty relationship with the European Union , which has already been pushed to its limits .
The only further step possible for these countries is full membership ; there are no other options open to them .
It is , though , for these countries themselves to decide if that is what they want .
That brings me to the last point that I would like to clarify .
It is a shame that Mr Ferber is no longer here to listen to what I have to say , although I asked him to stay to hear me out .
I really must defend the EU Heads of State and Government against the accusation that they dealt with Turkey 's application in just three minutes .
That was not the case in either Helsinki or Copenhagen .
In both cases hours of detailed discussion were devoted to this subject .
Perhaps Mr Ferber was referring to the fact that it only took three minutes in Copenhagen to decide which Cyprus protocol should be adopted , Protocol A or Protocol B , which confirmed that the two sides could not agree on a political solution in Copenhagen either .
But I would like to spell out that the subject of Turkey is always discussed with the greatest care in the Council and that a very great deal of time has been devoted to it .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
In any case , your response to Mr Ferber is a response to the whole House . It will appear in the Minutes .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on preparation for the EU-Russia summit .
Mr Yiannitsis , President-in-Office of the Council , has the floor .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the opportunity given to me today to refer to the relations between the European Union and Russia is exceptionally timely , given that the summit in St Petersburg , which will be held at the end of May , has given occasion both here and in Moscow for an integrated examination of the framework for cooperation between the two sides .
Preparations for this summit were also an occasion for a more global approach to the question of cooperation with Russia and essentially demonstrate the common wish to strengthen our relations on the basis of common objectives , on the basis of a mutual effort to resolve problems and create new prospects .
The basic parameter of our plan is the realisation that Russia is a strategic partner for the Union , its biggest and most important neighbour .
At the same time , enlargement will increase the points of contact , the common interests and the common challenges even more .
Despite the difficulties which it is encountering in its efforts to change to a market economy , Russia is still a country with huge potential .
The current international climate has also reminded us once again of the importance of our strategic relations with Russia .
Of course , this image does not make us also forget its major weaknesses .
As I just said , the Russian economy is still in a transitional stage .
Its economy accounts for just one tenth of the volume of this economy , that is , of the Union of the 15 ; it absorbs just 4 % of our exports , while the European Union absorbs 40 % of its exports .
Similarly the institutions of the market economy remain weak and the financial sector in particular is facing problems and its regulatory framework needs to be developed .
Finally , Russia has still not joined the World Trade Organisation .
Its political system presents a similar picture .
Despite significant progress in the field of stabilising democracy , there are still shortcomings in relation to human rights , especially in Chechnya , which I shall come back to , as well as problems of organised crime and corruption .
It is without doubt in the Union 's interest to help Russia develop a stable , democratic , prosperous society by strengthening its ties to Europe .
This is something we have achieved in other cases , using different types of tools , of course , than those which have to do with Russia .
And although the means we use are different , essentially the objectives , in other words the dissemination of the Union 's values to its surroundings , to its environment , both geographical and political , always constitute the basis of our policy .
With this thought in mind , we took initiatives , as soon as we assumed the Presidency , for an initial evaluation of the adequacy of our framework for cooperation with Russia .
As we know , relations with Russia are based , from the contractual point of view , on a partnership and cooperation agreement .
This was signed in 1994 under the previous Greek Presidency .
May I remind you that this is the type of agreement which the European Union has kept for all the countries of the former Soviet Union , with the exception of the Baltic States , which we recently welcomed as members of the ? U. Consequently , apart from a few differences , the same type of agreement ties us to Russia as ties us to the countries of central Asia .
This lack of proportion quickly became apparent , given that the partnership and cooperation agreement was unable to cover sufficient sectors , such as close cooperation on judicial matters and internal affairs , on foreign policy and defence matters , on the questions of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons , combating terrorism and other matters .
That was one of the main reasons why we adopted a common strategy with Russia in 1999 .
This cooperation was implemented in a series of ad hoc initiatives .
I can mention by way of example the energy dialogue , the initiative to create a common European Economic Area , the action plan for cooperation on questions of justice and internal affairs , which do not , however , have a contractual legal basis .
Appraisals of the adequacy of the EU-Russia cooperation framework , as regards covering a broad range of relations , vary .
Everyone acknowledges that the framework has , to a great extent , been overtaken by events and that this will become even more apparent in the future .
On the other hand , neither the ? U nor Russia appear to be ready to proceed with a radical reform of the framework , a reform that would also presuppose time-consuming procedures for new negotiation and ratification .
In the face of this situation , the Presidency proposed that the work of the summit should focus exclusively on the future of our relations with Russia , approaching the matter at two levels , naturally with the St Petersburg summit , as the datum plane for taking decisions .
The first level is to reform the cooperation structures with the objective of rationalisation and of securing tangible results on a regular basis and the second level is to examine the possibility of the summit 's giving the political order to start up the procedure for processing ideas and strengthening the cooperation framework in the sectors in which this is needed .
At the first level for reforming cooperation structures , the procedure has already borne fruit with specific proposals to the Russian side .
We hope that Russia will respond positively and that this will be reflected in the summit 's decisions .
As far as the second level is concerned , there are some reservations between the partners about the extent to which it is advisable for us to start up the procedure for reforming our relations with Russia , at a time when the existing framework has not yet been fully applied .
We believe that , in order for us to engage Russia in a procedure of gradual harmonisation with European standards , a balanced policy of incentives and preconditions is needed , which can also include in the incentives the prospect of the long-term upgrading of the cooperation framework in sectors in which we all know this is needed and in which everything shows that this will happen sooner or later , especially on second and third pillar issues .
We also believe that the St Petersburg summit , the first following enlargement and with the participation of all the new Member States , is the appropriate forum for taking this step .
Beyond the medium- and long-term prospects of our relations with Russia , we have also focused on achieving tangible results on a series of outstanding issues .
A major issue that has dragged on in relations between the two sides , the signature of the Multilateral Nuclear Environment and Programme for Russia , has already been set for the 21 May in Stockholm .
Secondly , the problems with the application of the solution for the movement of people between Kaliningrad and the rest of Russia have been overcome .
Thirdly , negotiations have started on the conclusion of an EU-Russia readmission agreement and we hope they will be completed quickly .
Fourthly , we are optimistic that the mechanism for resolving differences within the framework of the partnership and cooperation agreement will have been set up by the time the summit takes place .
Our efforts to persuade Russia to invite the ten new members of the Union to St Petersburg are also having positive results .
Thus the summit is acquiring even greater symbolic importance and may contribute to a peaceful and secure Europe which confronts challenges with closer cooperation .
We also decided in our deliberations with Russia to link progress on matters of greater interest to Russia with corresponding progress on matters of greater interest to us , the ? U , so that we arrive at specific results .
Thus , we have focused our efforts on the environment , by which I mean Russia has to agree to ratify the Kyoto protocol , on nuclear safety , on issues of safety at sea and on issues of justice and home affairs , with the emphasis on progress with negotiations on the readmission agreement .
Finally , I would point out the common interest in combating the threat of narcotics from Afghanistan and central Asia .
I should like to say a few words about Chechnya , to which we attach particular importance .
First of all , I should like once again to express our disgust about the recent criminal terrorist bombings which cost the lives of dozens of people .
There has been another such attack today .
On the other hand , I want to welcome the statements by President Putin following the attack , in which he promised to continue efforts to resolve the problem by political means .
We believe that political procedure and dialogue are the only way to achieve a lasting solution to the problem .
We continue to take every opportunity to underline the need for respect for human rights and the need to punish those involved in violations of human rights and in violations of international humanitarian law .
At the same time , we need to encourage Moscow to move towards the application of an integrated policy on Chechnya , the aim of which will be the establishment of peace , the consolidation of a climate of trust and the economic and social reconstruction of the area .
In order to achieve this , we must examine the possibility of drawing up specific programmes that will aim to promote democracy , the rule of law , institutions and social recovery .
As far as the results of the March referendum are concerned , we note with satisfaction that , despite the particularly difficult situation , the ballot was held without any violent episodes being reported .
We must point out that , despite any irregularities and organisational weaknesses there may have been , the vote in favour of the constitution would appear at first glance to be positive and may be seen as a first step by Moscow towards a political settlement in Chechnya .
Finally , the presidency considers that the OSCE can provide valuable help to efforts by the Russian authorities in the area .
We heartily support the efforts by Holland which , in its capacity as chairmanship-in-office of the OSCE , is holding discussions with the Russian Government in connection with the modus operandi of a new OSCE mission in Chechnya .
We welcome the results of the discussions so far , which appear to be paving the way for the presence of Holland there and we hope that the Organization will thus be able to start operating and make a positive contribution to efforts for peace and democracy in the area .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming EU-Russia Summit in St Petersburg provides a welcome opportunity to briefly take stock of our relations and to analyse the problems that we have to solve together .
Both sides are in full agreement that we have wide-ranging relations on a long-term basis , and that these relations need to be based on common values and should be further developed in the direction of a strategic partnership .
For our part , we attach particular importance to cooperation in what we regard as areas of risk that we can only overcome together , such as environmental protection , nuclear safety and justice and home affairs issues .
Our relations with Russia will also , but not to the exclusion of all else , be shaped by the enlargement of the European Union , as the debate that we have just had shows .
The neighbourhood policy that we discussed here this afternoon plays an important role in our relations with Russia , but there are also other significant factors , such as the security of the European Union 's energy supply , the joint war on terror , and the need for cooperation to solve major regional and global problems .
On Russia 's side , there is particular interest in cooperation on security policy , as evidenced by Russian participation in the police mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina or the proposal for a joint European centre for crisis management .
We have recently made very good progress in some areas , particularly on Kaliningrad . I am pleased to say that the transit issues that the European Parliament dealt with in considerable detail have now been resolved .
The instruments that we proposed in conjunction with Russia at the time have now been introduced and can be implemented as from July .
A special Tacis programme for Kaliningrad has also been agreed so as to help ensure that instead of the socio-economic gap between Kaliningrad and neighbouring countries widening - which has already been mentioned this afternoon - it will be narrowed .
As the President-in-Office of the Council has already said , good progress has been made in negotiations on a readmission agreement .
I would also like to mention that the energy dialogue with Russia has led to concrete results .
Examples of this are agreement on projects of common interest and the energy technology centre in Moscow .
We hope that we will be able to present a joint plan for the common economic area by the end of this year .
Good progress is being made in the negotiations on Russia 's membership of the WTO .
Next week we will be signing the multilateral nuclear environmental programme with Russia and other donor countries in Stockholm .
This certainly represents a breakthrough in dealing with contaminated nuclear sites in north-west Russia .
We are hoping for a ban on single-hull vessels transporting heavy fuel oils in the Baltic Sea .
Unfortunately , ratification of the Kyoto Protocol has not yet been achieved in Russia .
This subject will therefore have to be given high priority in the forthcoming talks at political level .
We should not ignore the fact that there are many areas where , although we agree on the fundamental objectives , we nevertheless have different ideas about how to achieve those objectives .
Neither side wants to see new ' moats ' or ' curtains ' in Europe .
In particular , the Commission hopes that the neighbourhood policy proposals it brought forward in March will prevent new ' moats ' developing on the European Union 's eastern borders , which could lead to a two-class Europe .
The enlarged Union will have to further intensify and deepen cooperation with its neighbours , but our security needs dictate that the new Member States should also fully and effectively implement the Schengen rules when they join Schengen .
There are considerable reservations within the European Union about the Russians ' desire for a detailed timetable for complete visa freedom .
It is of course conceivable as a long-term objective , and it is something the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement committees could deal with .
Nevertheless , we should as of now be taking advantage of the full scope of the Schengen framework to make minor border traffic as simple as possible and to promote cross-border economic development .
This will of course also require the refinement of technical assistance instruments .
I am grateful that the President-in-Office commented on Chechnya .
I simply wish to confirm that on behalf of the Commission .
Chechnya is also still very much on our agenda and our list of priorities remains the same : a peaceful political solution , respect for human rights and humanitarian aid .
We concur with the Russians that our cooperation structures should be shaped more efficiently .
Nevertheless , we cannot agree to their wish for extensive use of the 15 + 1 formula , or in future a 25 + 1 formula .
This brings us very close indeed to the central issue of the EU 's identity .
We do , however , believe that there is considerable scope for improving the way the institutions work under the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , especially as regards the Cooperation Council .
Lastly , we would like to emphasise that we may have different views about the process of adapting to EU enlargement .
Russia is currently working on the assumption that extending the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement to the new EU Member States provides an opportunity to renegotiate trade policy and other issues .
We do not see it that way .
In contrast , we hope that the basically positive view of EU enlargement in Russia will help to maintain the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement as the basis of our relations , including the new Member States .
The Commission will not enter into any negotiations about the consequences of enlargement .
This wide range of subjects and the need to give all the Heads of State present in St Petersburg an opportunity to put forward their viewpoints makes thorough preparation of the St Petersburg Summit all the more necessary .

The EU is being represented here , in the time-honoured fashion , by the Presidency , the Commission and the Council Secretariat , and Mr Yiannitsis has already reported in detail on the objectives the Council is pursuing in this context , and there is total agreement on all this .
Mr President , four minutes is a generous allowance , especially after both the President of the Council and the Commissioner have answered quite a number of questions raised in the resolution , and I should like to express my thanks .
Russia of course remains an exceptionally important topic for us , not so much because our border has become so much longer , since the accession of Finland , which brought the larger part of that border with it .
In fact , the border has been extended only around Kaliningrad and the Baltic states .
I should like therefore to begin with the latter .
The last time this was discussed I asked whether the Council , following on from the treatment of the Kaliningrad question on transit visas for Russian citizens , could urge Russia to ensure that the border agreements between Russia and the three Baltic states are all ratified .
This question is still hanging over the market somewhat .
In the previous debate the Commissioner gave an unambiguous indication of complete agreement , since Russians going to St Petersburg will travel not via Lithuania and Belarus but via Lithuania , Latvia and Estonia .
That is why it is vitally important that this gives us a means of exerting pressure on the Russians to get rid of this silly little discrepancy .
I hope that the President of the Council will give that point a moment 's thought .
The President of the Council also talked of the agreements and of course he also had in mind the complaints that have been made about their implementation .
He promises us streamlining , meaning that there must also probably be a better focus on Russian complaints too , that greater efficiency , more guaranteed finance - naturally an important point in any case - more support with project management , etc. will be forthcoming and that a new northern-dimension environmental programme could probably serve as a model .
I was gratified to hear that progress in being made in that respect , since on our last visit to Murmansk we found that the cleaning up of those nuclear submarines is proceeding at an extremely slow rate .
It is in our mutual interest that this process should be accelerated .
In this context it would be interesting if you could tell us to what extent TACIS can be associated with cross-border projects .
Cross-border projects are always difficult in any case , but it seems that using TACIS actually makes things a little more difficult still .
I was pleased to see that the common European economic area also came up for discussion at the summit .
I should like to ask whether that is one of the typical effects of our idea of a wider Europe .
Does this wider Europe in fact relate to these kinds of bilateral agreements , like this common economic area with Russia ?
In that context have we considered other matters that might be raised in the framework of a wider Europe , for example the democratic development of Russia ?
Can we exert any influence ?
If so , in what way ?
The fact is that , as yet , the Russian Federation cannot be called an entirely normal democracy .
Many say that Russia should be integrated into the security structures of Europe .
I have a question on this point .
It is naturally splendid that Russia should be integrated into trans-Atlantic security structures .
That strikes me as an excellent first step .
But what would be the effect if Russia , which after all is a former superpower with a great military capability , were to start playing a major role in European security and defence policy ?
It seems to me that our relationship would become slightly unbalanced .
I should especially like to hear the Council 's assessment of this .
The resolution also calls on the Commission to set up a strategic partnership .
That means of course that there must be convergence in EU policy .
Strategic partnership , by bringing the whole EU into line , actually has more meaning for us than it does for Russia .
That has been apparent in the past .
Now , with the crisis in Iraq and the crisis in the EU regarding Iraq , what are the actual prospects of the convergence of this policy in a strategic partnership with Russia ?
I should like to wish the Commissioner much courage in publishing reports on this matter .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there really must now be a new phase in our relations with Russia .
It is now a historic time - in Russia , in the Union , and in the world too - and we must act .
We have only partly implemented this master document , the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
Bureaucracy has obstructed reform , and inertia , the Kaliningrad question , environmental problems and the mass media have generally drained it of its strength .
Terrorist attacks , whose victims ' relatives I want to express my deep condolences to - and my sympathies also go to the victims themselves - show that there is opposition to any political solution in Chechnya , although my understanding is that the Russian Government has gone down that path by actually organising elections .
The human rights situation in Russia still needs a lot of work .
It may be that if we are to deal with the Chechnya issue , which is souring relations between us , we need to provide a working group to plod on with the task in cooperation with Russia .
Reforms in Russia have thus been slow to come about .
Meanwhile , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe are gaining strength more rapidly and sustainably , being led in their progress by the European Union .
Russia may lose its markets in the region , and Union enlargement , if the worst comes to the worst , may isolate Russia .
For that reason I want to emphasise the need for a new approach : we need a new strategic partnership with Russia .
The Iraq war has shown that Russia is part of a European area of cooperation .
It is the most recent example of that .
The spearhead of this partnership could be Russia 's modernisation and its civil society movement .
Cooperation on energy , an area where still only a little has been achieved , could give a boost to its economy .
An example of this might be the Northern Dimension , which , with the right financing , would strengthen this partnership .
Russia must put the Investments Protection Agreement in order .
The country must be made a member of the WTO as soon as possible , and given a certain role to play in European security cooperation .
The fact is , the faster Russia ' westernises ' , the faster human rights will improve there .
Russia is constructing no fewer than three oil ports in a remote part of the Gulf of Finland , which is known for its reefs and which forms one end of the Baltic Sea , the world 's most ecologically burdened sea .
In winter the solid ice cover there is 70 centimetres thick and the pack ice is anything up to 20 metres high .
This last winter dozens of ships were cast adrift by ice , there being no help available from an ice breaker - ships on their way to Russia .
Vessels not strong enough to withstand the pressure of ice and in such an appalling condition as those are an environmental time bomb , just like the Prestige was .
I want to ask the Council what action Greece , as the country to hold the Presidency , has taken to ensure that only double-hull , ice-strengthened tankers , which can get there safely , should travel to these three new oil ports in Russia .
There is one thing about Russia that has often gone unremarked . That is the importance of its culture , about which still too little is known in Europe .
Now that the machinery we work with , the information society , is crying out for content , Russian content production could diversify and enrich content production in Europe , which is engaged in global competition .
Russia has turned westwards , but I think it has also turned to the north , which is apparent from Russian activity in the northern and northwestern regions .
This means that a new opportunity has now been created for the European Union and Russia to swiftly improve their mutual cooperation , along with the chance for them both to benefit from it .
Mr President , it is the opinion of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party that the resolution agreed among the groups will provide a good basis for the work of the EU-Russia Summit .
The position taken here is forward-looking and constructive , although it also has criticisms to make .
The resolution will also be of use with regard to the Parliamentary Cooperation Committee meeting between the European Parliament and the Russian Duma to be held in Moscow next week .
For my own part I would like to stress that we must try to narrow the economic and social differences that exist on all the Union 's external borders .
With the border between the EU and Russia becoming much longer than before , we must make dramatic improvements to cross-border cooperation .
We must particularly encourage the Member States and their regions located on the EU 's external borders to create direct links over the border to Russia .
Such systematic programmes of cooperation between neighbouring regions have been in place on the border between Finland and Russia for a good ten years now .
There now has to be the same kind of action both between Estonia and Russia and Latvia and Russia . Lithuania and Poland , meanwhile , must take special responsibility for the development of the Kaliningrad region .
The Union has to be prepared to finance this cooperation between neighbouring regions .
For cooperation in the border regions we need a new system of funding .
The current TACIS and Interreg systems are not strong enough and they cannot be adequately coordinated .
We have to create a new system of funding that can be used on the Union 's other external borders too .
The PHARE scheme , before it became part of the accession process , might serve as a model for this new system .
Mr President , it is obviously not a matter of dispute in this House that we want a really in-depth partnership with Russia , and the EU , or the candidate countries , and Russia did indeed , in the past make a great deal of progress - and face manifest problems - in this regard .
Reference has already been made to the issues connected with the Kaliningrad region , which I believe have still not yet been satisfactorily resolved , not to mention the failure of the Russian Government or the European Union to make purposeful , comprehensive or even strategic use of the opportunities that might result from this problem .
' Strategic ' is , in my mind , the key word in terms of what I am talking about .
I believe that we should be evaluating the European Union 's joint strategy from June 1999 - to which Mr Oostlander has already referred - in a much more critical light .
To date , I believe , it has been neither joint nor - in the literal sense of the word - a strategy , nor is the far more modest framework for relations between the European Union and Russia that we actually have being adequately realised .
I would like , in the first place , to highlight our responsibility and the chances we have of a strategic partnership in the area of security policy .
I believe it to be of great significance that the European Union and Russia are , by means of the strategic development of their relations , contributing to multilateralism , helping to strengthen international law , to advance international cooperation , the UN , international agreements and disarmament .
I can also see the present need for the UN to have a role in the reconstruction of Iraq .
Secondly , there is a need for our economic relations with Russia to develop further in terms of substance and of quality .
I regard the energy alliance as very important indeed , but as not going far enough .
It should , I think , be quite consciously about the development of economic ties that would to some degree be mutual and on an equal footing .
I believe that to make economic sense , and that it could make a very close relationship between the European Union and Russia irreversible .
I believe it to be also utterly unacceptable that Russia 's exports to the EU are arranged similarly to what one would expect from a developing country that is rich in raw materials .
I know it will be very difficult to change that .
This makes political efforts by both sides particularly important .
Thirdly , any strategic partnership demands that both parties be consistent in their commitment to democracy and the implementation of human and minority rights .
One has to accept that this will be evaluated in different ways .
What is not acceptable is that human rights and their role should be regarded purely in terms of economic cycles , as I believe they are by many EU governments , especially as regards the issue of Chechnya .
I see that as also a sign that there is no strategy .
Let me conclude by saying that I hope that we , the European public , and also those of us who sit in this House , will , in our dealings with the Commission , the Council , and the Russian Government , have the courage to speak rather more resolutely about the strategic and institutional objective of a strategic relationship between the European Union and Russia , so that the door may be kept open .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our relations with Russia give me the impression that the values on which the European Union is founded , and which also apply to relations with Russia , are increasingly being sold down the river .
While deals are being done about the shared use of Russia 's enormous energy sources and cooperation in the field of armaments is being negotiated , fundamental democratic rights and respect for human rights no longer have any part to play , even though full respect for human and minority rights are the basis for all forms of partnership , cooperation , and economic relationship - something that the first paragraph of the Agreement makes abundantly clear .
What this means is that the restrictions on the freedom of the press , the hounding of journalists , the massive political pressure on the justice system , conditions in prisons and , not least , the human rights violations in the war on the Chechen people must have a central place in the summit talks and must not be allowed to appear only as the dessert course at the final banquet .
Concessions in economic relations and help with military research must be made conditional on significant improvements in the human rights situation in Russia , and on the country 's respect for fundamental rights .
That , at any rate , was what was agreed here in this House between the Commission , the Council and Parliament when the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement was approved .
My expectation of the Commission and the Council is that they keep their promise , which will mean that the discussion must give priority to peaceful resolution of the conflict in Chechnya , and that there must be real insistence on dialogue at long last .
It is clear that we all - my own group included - condemn the crimes that are being committed there by both sides , the bomb attacks as much as the crimes committed by the troops of the Russian Interior Ministry .
We condemn the attempt to find solutions by means of violent acts against the civilian population .
That is not acceptable .
Peaceful dialogue is the only option , but it must be made possible by concessions on the part of the Russian Government and , most of all , by the crimes committed under the aegis of the State against the civilian population being punished .
This leads me to ask you to reverse the priorities at this summit and not give centre stage to economic relations in the way you have done today .
Mr President , two bloody terrorist attacks in Chechnya and Saudi Arabia at the beginning of this week underline the necessity of an international campaign against international terrorism .
It is precisely this political urgency that demands an effective approach .
In that sense clear doubts are being raised about the Russian anti-terrorist operation in Chechnya .
Not least by Russian politicians and Russian citizens themselves .
On the main cause a recent academic analysis is clarity itself : ' The main obstacle to a true normalisation and pacification of Chechnya is the atrocities committed by Russian forces and special units . '
Sadly , the Chechen terror gangs attract many young Chechens who are otherwise afraid that they will be picked up , abused , tortured and maybe even shot by Russian troops who are completely out of control .
The draft resolution before us says nothing about this worrying situation in the Northern Caucasus .
This House wishes , in view of the penultimate paragraph , to await the report on the visit of its delegation to Chechnya in mid-June .
Hopefully the Council and Commission will raise the question of tackling the thoroughly deplorable Chechen terrorism - let there be no misunderstanding on that point - at the forthcoming summit with the Russian Federation .
And not only because of wider geographical repercussions ?
That brings me to another important point concerning regional security and stability .
Paragraph 4 of the draft resolution welcomes the active participation of both the EU and Russia in the Middle East peace process .
However , that process is not served in any way by the military and nuclear ambitions of the Islamic Republic of Iran .
The US is afraid that these Iranian ambitions are being given practical sustenance by the present nuclear cooperation between Russia and Iran .
At the beginning of this month therefore there was an American request to Russia to reconsider this specific cooperation .
Do Council and Commission share these concerns of our Atlantic ally and do they also intend to raise this question at the forthcoming Summit with the Kremlin ?
I sincerely hope that they will make a common trans-Atlantic front against Russia and Iran !
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , in my view , the text on which we are going to vote tomorrow on the relations between the European Union and Russia is frankly repugnant .
Mr Oostlander talked to us about his concerns regarding democratisation , or the lack of democratisation , in Russia , but he did not say a word in his four-minute speech about Chechnya .
Mr Paasilinna , who together with Mr Oostlander is one of the main initiators of this resolution , did not mention it either .
The resolution even goes so far as to praise the Russian military forces for their peacekeeping efforts .
Russian peacekeeping forces , in Chechnya or elsewhere - like a few years ago in Afghanistan - let everyone judge for themselves .
For once , at least the Council spoke a little about Chechnya , but I feel that the Council is deluding itself and I would even go so far as to say that it is lying to itself .
However , by the same token , it is lying to us and telling us stories because the issue is not that which the President-in-Office of the Council outlined .
The political solution proposed by Mr Putin is not a political solution . It encourages two forms of terrorism : the terror imposed on a daily basis by the Russian forces in Chechnya and the actions of gangs of terrorists secretly assisted by these same Russian military forces , who now occupy the entire territory and no longer give the political solution advocated by the Council a chance .
We have tried everything , Europe did everything it could to isolate Mr Maskadov , who was nonetheless elected by the people of Chechnya during elections legitimised by the OSCE .
The European Union has done everything it can to ensure that the ministers of Mr Maskadov 's Government cannot move throughout Europe and can no longer meet the political authorities in the various EU countries .
It has done everything in its power to destroy any possibility of real negotiations between the Chechens and the Russian authorities .
Today , we have a kind of Quisling controlling Grozny and the surrounding area , who obeys Moscow .
From time to time , he rebels and draws up a report , which you mentioned , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in which he speaks about the daily policy of terror implemented by the Russian authorities in Chechnya .
That is the reality today .
Without President Maskadov , peace will not be possible and no political solution will be possible in Chechnya .
Without a clear message to President Putin to launch negotiations , there will be no solution in Chechnya .
Moreover , Mr Putin stated about 10 months ago in the Financial Times that the problem facing Russia was not that of the final status of Chechnya but one of security .
Mr Maskadov 's Foreign Minister has proposed provisional administration of Chechnya by the United Nations , precisely to reassure the Russian authorities and to establish , within five or ten years , a Chechnyan administration that would provide a guarantee against the threats to Russian security .

You do not talk about this ; you do not want to see it happen ; you do not want to see the Chechnyan Foreign Minister , who can no longer move throughout Europe and to whom you refuse a visa , just as you refuse visas to the other members of Mr Maskadov 's government .
That is the opposite of what should be done and yet it is what you continue to do .
That is what makes it impossible to break the circle of terror , which , every day , as Mr Belder and Mrs Schroedter said , pushes young Chechens to despair , young people who have seen their parents , brothers and cousins killed in Grozny or in other towns in Chechnya , kidnapped and raped by the Russian forces .
By acting this way , you are pushing them into the arms of the extremists who finance some of the madmen operating elsewhere in the world .
It is essential to change this attitude as soon as possible .
If not , instead of champagne , you will be agreeing to drink blood at the next St Petersburg summit .
Mr President , neither at the international or global level - as shown by the Iraq crisis - nor at the European level , can we avoid dealing with Russia , and this is only right .
We need Russia as a partner , and I believe deeper cooperation with it to be both desirable and worth striving after , for the Russians should understand the enlargement of the European Union not as a hostile act , but as an opportunity .
As has been frequently said , borders shift and change , and one of the consequences of enlargement is that we will be sharing borders with Russia .
The resolution , under the Danish Presidency , of the problem with the Russian enclave of Kaliningrad - the former Königsberg - is very much to be welcomed .
Now there is also to be a new summit on 31 May , an EU-Russia summit on the occasion of the 300th anniversary of the founding of St Petersburg .
There has since 1999 been a common strategy , whose cornerstones are meant to be democracy , the rule of law , further integration into a European economic and social area and general enhancement of security and stability in Europe , along with reforms in the energy sector and the shared struggle against organised crime .
Russia does not aspire to membership of the European Union , which would go against its conception of itself as a major power .
The European Union should seek genuine cooperation with Russia , which would , not least , involve the European Investment Bank being allowed more opportunities for activity in Russia , an idea put forward by , among others , Mr Schüssel , the Austrian Chancellor , who propounded it in a letter to President Prodi of the Commission .
If Russia were to ratify the agreement with the European Investment Bank , which agreement is oriented towards the Northern dimension , the Russians would at once have billions of euros at their disposal , which would make it possible for a fair amount of nuclear waste to be disposed of .
As far as Chechnya is concerned , it is clear that we must demand that human rights be respected , just as much as we must condemn terrorism , which again claimed civilian victims only a few days ago .
Diplomacy , however , is what is called for here , in order to break the spiral of violence and responses to violence .
Mr President , allow me a few supplementary observations on issues which have been touched on during the debate because , for the rest , both my first intervention and the Commission intervention gave a great many replies to a series of issues .
We are , of course , interested in having , as with every other country , a successful summit .
The precise objective of the meetings being held is to promote the objectives which we too have in accordance with the ambitions , values and principles that we want to promote .
We know that these procedures are often time-consuming and laborious .
I know of no procedure which quickly results in changes , in solutions to problems which have dragged on .
I should like to refer to Kaliningrad .
The solution for Kaliningrad is progressing to timetable and I think that it is progressing satisfactorily .
The ratification by the duma of the border agreement with Lithuania will have taken place by 30 June , according to the commitments entered into .
And we expect the same for the readmission agreement between Russia and Lithuania .
Similarly , I should like to say that provision has been made for a special TACIS programme on Kaliningrad and our precise objective is for the summit to give the order to draw up a strategy jointly with Russia , so that there is integrated development of this Russian area .
As far as the Northern Dimension is concerned , we are currently preparing the new action plan and the Commission is preparing a first draft which we shall subsequently process within the framework of the Council .
We consider that the Northern Dimension must continue to be an important development tool in our relations with Russia .
The signature of the MN ? PR agreement will release funds for protection against nuclear dangers in north-west Russia , funds which have been amassed precisely within the framework of the Northern Dimension .
I should like to point out that huge changes have been made as regards Russia over the last thirteen years .
Traditional stereotypes have been overturned , new premises have been created , Russia 's relations with the European Union , with ? ? ? ? , with the United States , have changed radically and this is creating new situations , of which each Member State and the European Union as a whole are weighing the importance and deciding to see how to proceed and what momentum to give .
Within these frameworks , one needs to take account of the reports on foreign policy , security and defence issues , but I should like to point out that one needs to be very , very careful here .
These are not issues that can proceed quickly .
They need a long-term perspective and strategy and a method that does not create confrontations and contradictory situations on basic strategic choices by the European Union and Europe as a whole .
We therefore welcome the possibilities opening up and are proceeding with the methods and the degrees of freedom that we judge are opening up on each occasion and allowing us closer forms of cooperation .
Could the President-in-Office of the Council say something more about the ratification of the border agreements between Latvia , Estonia and Russia ?
I specifically asked for that .
Mr Oostlander , I am able to inform you that , while the agreement between Russia and Lithuania is in the process of being concluded , the duma has given a firm undertaking that the border agreement with Lithuania will be ratified by the end of this month .
As for the others , I am not in a position to give you news of such a positive outcome , but we are working on them .
In practice , though , this will not in the least be a problem , as there is no dispute about the borderlines .
The only real problem was in connection with Kaliningrad , and that has been resolved .
Pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) I have received six motions for resolutions to wind up the debate
Question No 1 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0215 / 03 ) :
Subject : Implementation of Council Directive 1999 / 70 / EC by Greece
Council Directive 1999 / 70 / EC
Article 2 , Paragraph 1 of Council Directive 1999 / 70 / ? C concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work concluded by the European Trade Union Confederation , the Union of Industrial and Employers ' Confederations of Europe and the European Centre of Enterprises with Public Participation obliges the Member States to comply with the directive in question by 10 July 2001 .
Under Article 2 , Paragraph 2 , the Member States may have one more year , if necessary , over and above the deadline for the application of the directive in question , in order to take account of special difficulties or implementation under a collective agreement .
Bearing this in mind , the Council would ask the honourable Member to put the question to the Commission , because the Commission is competent for ascertaining progress with regard to the application of Community law by the Member States .
I am sorry , but by reason of my capacity as the Council 's representative , I cannot mention more details , of which there are many and which would have enlightened the honourable Member .
Mr President , I have listened carefully to the President-in-Office 's reply .
Certainly the Commission has a responsibility for the application of Community legislation but the Council cannot also be without responsibility for the fact that a Member State is not applying an important directive .
And of course , in relation to the original question , today there is a presidential decree - a month ago - it has of course changed - but the presidential decree died in its infancy because the Civil Court of Appeal of Crete found in judgment 466 in 2002 that it contradicted the basic provisions of the Community directive .
I can do no more than repeat my question to the President-in-Office with this new information .
I have nothing to say other than to ask the honourable Member to put his question to the Commission .
Question No 2 by Josu Ortuondo Larrea ( H-0217 / 03 ) :
Subject : War against Iraq : Aerial refuelling of B-52 bombers over European cities
The Basque Country and the whole of north-eastern Spain have been taken by surprise at newspaper reports on the route followed by B-52 bombers between their base at Fairford ( England ) and Iraq .
It appears that they are being refuelled by KC-135 ' stratotankers ' in the skies above Bilbao , Pamplona , Zaragoza and Barcelona , before entering the Mediterranean .
Rather than refuelling over the Atlantic , they are cutting corners and flying close to towns and cities with hundreds of thousands of inhabitants , whose safety they are jeopardising .
The Spanish airforce is banned from carrying out such operations over population centres .
Does the Council not consider the overflying by these aircraft of densely populated towns and cities to be an infringement of public safety ?
When coupled with the aerial refuelling operations , is this not showing disregard for the rights of the local populations , which are taking second place to a cruel war that is opposed by public opinion in Europe and world-wide and is being waged without the consent of the UN Security Council ?
Should the EU not reproach Mr Aznar and his government for allowing these dangerous operations to be conducted and for supporting and participating in the illegal war against Iraq ?
The allegations contained in the newspaper reports to which the honourable Member refers in his question have not been notified to or discussed in the Council .
The matter comes under the jurisdiction of the Spanish state .

Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the Spanish citizens have not forgotten how Mr Fraga Iribarne , founder and honorary President of the People 's Party , and mentor of the current President , Mr Aznar , as a minister under the dictator Franco , deceived them by swimming in the sea at Mojácar and say that he also did so at Palomares , where four thermonuclear bombs had fallen as a result of a collision during an aerial refuelling operation between a B-52 bomber and a tanker plane .
In the meantime , the US cleared and fenced off 105 hectares of land contaminated with radioactivity in a large area which was closed to the Spanish people and referred to as Camp Wilson .
Today , the Spanish People 's Party Government has also begun to deny that several B-52 bombers were refuelled in the skies above Bilbao , Iruña / Pamplona and Barcelona on 21 March last , on their way to Iraq .
Confronted with evidence provided by air traffic controllers , the Spanish Government had no choice yesterday but to recognise in Parliament that that day , at the very least , it authorised the overflying and refuelling of eight bombers carrying 240 tonnes of bombs , and justified this by saying that this involved low-risk manoeuvres .
Does the Council believe it acceptable for these operations to be carried out overflying densely populated towns and cities and for the Government to claim there is no risk ?
Does the Council consider it democratic for a government cynically to have denied these events and deceived its citizens so blatantly ?
I think that the honourable Member merely referred in greater detail to a series of incidents of which the Council is ignorant and , as I said , the matter comes under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Spanish state .
It is not a matter for which the Council of the European Union is responsible .
You clearly heard the Council 's response .
In theory , the response does not give rise to further supplementary questions , but I am going to grant them .
Mr Nogueira has the floor for a supplementary question .
Mr President , the Spanish State has been notable for its support of the unilateral attack mounted by the United States and the United Kingdom against Iraq .
Now , together with Italy and Poland , it is going to act as an occupying power in the Iraqi State .
Does the Council believe that the Spanish State should consequently share international responsibility because of its warlike , illegal and unjust aggression ?
What kind of relationship will the European Union have in the action it undertakes in Iraq with the Member States occupying that country ?

I must remind Mr Nogueira that his question - Question No 3 - which would be next , has lapsed and it is very similar to his supplementary question because a debate took place just this morning based on a Commission and Council statement .
I am forced to remind you of this .
In any case , Mr Yiannitsis has the floor if he feels he should respond .
What the Spanish Government did in relation to the question of Iraq or any other related issues is not a matter on which I , as President-in-Office , can comment or refer to in the manner in which the honourable Member wishes .
The truth is that I would like it if Mr Ortuondo Larrea did not always bring up national concerns in this Parliament and if he could make contributions to European integration , which is why I believe we are all here .
Gentlemen , although I am going to give you the floor , I would ask that this be the end of the matter .
The President-in-Office of the Council has given a full , clear answer with regard to the subject of the question .
In any case , Mr Ortuondo has the floor if he feels that this concerns him .
With all due respect for the opinion of Mr Oreja Arburúa , I bring here any issues that affect European citizens .
The Basque and Catalan citizens who were at risk from the overflying B-52 bombers , and also the Andalusian citizens who were at risk from four bombs which fell on them , are European citizens and , therefore , responding that this is an internal affair is simply an attempt to avoid taking the bull by the horns , when it is a matter that affects European citizens .
Clearly your metaphors also come from Spain : the bull and its horns .
There are no points of order .
I believe we have exhausted the topic of the points raised by Mr Ortuondo .
Question No 3 lapses .
Question No 4 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0223 / 03 ) :
Subject : Reforming the Dayton Agreement
How does the Council Presidency view the notion of reforming the Dayton Agreement in such a way that Bosnia and Herzegovina would be converted from a community of three peoples and two entities into a federation of three peoples with equal rights ?
Equal rights between the peoples that make up Bosnia-Herzegovina are enshrined in the constitution , as set out in Annex 4 to the peace agreement , and have been confirmed by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina .
In an important decision in September 2000 , the court ruled that the express recognition of Bosnians , Croatians and Serbs in the constitution of Bosnia-Herzegovina , as peoples that make up the country , brooks just one interpretation : that they enjoy equality as groups .
It also states that the constitutional principle of collective equality between peoples that make up the country , which derives from the definition of Bosnians , Croatians and Serbs as the peoples that make up the country , prohibits any special privilege for any one of these peoples , any predominance of one side in government structures or any ethnic homogenisation as the result of divisions on a territorial basis .
The constitution of the Srpska Republic and of the Federation was amended further to this judgment , in order to remove the contested provisions .
A new law was also passed in order to safeguard the representation of the three peoples that make up the country at all levels of governance and throughout the public sector .
The European Union is continuing via the stability and association process to promote democratisation , the rule of law and economic reform as means of promoting the rights of the minorities and as a means of promoting equal opportunities for all citizens .
Mr President , let me start by pointing out that the expression ' to take the bull by the horns ' exists in German as well ; we may not , alas , have bullfights , but we still have the metaphor .
I am obliged to the President-in-Office of the Council for his very precise and very fine answer , and would like to put to him a supplementary question . If this development , namely the equal rights of these three ethnic groups being put on a firmer footing - which I very much desire - actually comes to pass , might another approach not be to make the structures rather less bureaucratic ?
Many Bosnians tell me that there are too many cantons , and that they are too small , something that is a result of an imbalance and leads to a large proportion of the gross national product and of international aid being swallowed up by excessive bureaucracy .
I should like to start by saying that the simile heard also exists in Greek .
It would appear in fact to exist in all the countries of the European Union , regardless of whether or not there are bulls , and to remind you , in all events , that bull fights were depicted on frescos in the old Minoan palaces which have existed for thousands of years , before modern Spain .
As for the rest , I should just like to take note of your comment .
I have nothing to say .
Restricting bureaucracy may be a problem .
Insofar as it is feasible , you may see it but , as you will understand , you cannot also intervene in a series of very internal affairs in these countries without this being seen as another form of intervention .
Question No 5 by Othmar Karas ( H-0229 / 03 ) :
Subject : European corporate tax reform policy
Small firms in particular suffer because of the existence of 15 ( soon to be 25 ) different tax systems , because of the bureaucracy resulting from the various VAT rules , and because of the vast administrative demands stemming from the different corporate tax regimes and innumerable dual-taxation agreements .
What justification can there be for the fact that large firms have a lower effective tax burden to bear than SMEs , which cannot engage in fiscal engineering ?
How does the Council view the European Parliament 's call for continuation of the successfully conducted project for reduced VAT on labour-intensive services in order to prevent illegal working and create a more favourable employment environment ?
How does the Council view the call for a firm to be required to include intra-EU sales revenue in only one turnover tax declaration , in the state in which its headquarters are located , and how does the Council view the pilot project on home state taxation in order to reduce SMEs ' administrative burden ?
What is the Council 's position on extending the principle of qualified- majority voting to those areas of taxation policy which directly influence the extent to which the European internal market can operate ?
? he administrative cost and the cost of compliance which small and medium-sized enterprises face has been the focus of particular attention during the work of the Council to coordinate the various tax systems .
Generally speaking , I would say that the Council has turned its attention on numerous occasions to initiatives and proposals as to how to limit the problems and difficulties which small and medium-sized enterprises have with their access to the market .
As regards the findings from the individual initiatives , the honourable Member will have to address his question to the Commission of the European Communities , whose job it is to monitor the measures in question .
As far as the procedure under which the Council takes decision in the taxation sector is concerned , it should be noted that the relevant rules are provided for in the Treaty and no one can ask the Council to change those rules .
In all events , the honourable Member will have observed the discussions held recently , which are also taking place within the framework of the Convention , on the possible extension of qualified majority voting , in which case there may be a different arrangement here too which will give more desirable and more positive results .
Even if you say , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that the Council cannot be expected to change its stance overnight , I do nonetheless believe that one can expect it to be willing to change a stance that causes problems of this sort .
Our twenty-five different tax systems result in distortions of competition in the internal market ; small and medium-sized businesses are put at a disadvantage , particularly when operating across borders ; and , of course , unanimous voting in the Council on tax matters creates problems when it comes to strengthening the internal market and the European economy .
So let me again ask you what initiative the Council would take in order to remove the disadvantages to small and medium-sized businesses resulting from differing tax systems and to support the internal market as a whole ?
What initiatives have been taken in the Convention by the Member States in order to do away with the requirement for unanimity on matters affecting the single market ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has asked the Commission to produce a study of the effects of Basle II .
Even though this study has not yet seen the light of day , we know that the effects of Basle II touch Europe - I refer in particular to the creditworthiness of small and medium-sized enterprises and the securities they are required to provide .
What I want to ask is : what will the Council do in order to get its hands on this study , and how will it deal with the problem of tax reform in such a way that small and medium-sized enterprises can meet the requirements of Basle II ?
We shall look and see why the European Commission is late .
There are numerous cases in which , for objective reasons , the European Commission may be late submitting a study .
It has also happened to us on other occasions during the course of the Greek Presidency .
Of course , on the basis of this study - and I do not think that one study will resolve all the problems - and any proposals that may be made , we shall see how we are going to respond .
Question No 6 by Seán Ó Neachtain ( H-0230 / 03 ) :
Subject : EU initiatives to save Amina Lawal from death by stoning
Will the Council state what initiatives it is pursuing to save the life of Amina Lawal , the Nigerian woman who is appealing her sentence of mandatory punishment of death by stoning and whose appeal was delayed until after the elections in April 2003 , and is the Council aware of other similar convictions in Nigeria and what action is it taking in these cases ?
The ? U closely monitored the case of Amina Lawal , who was sentenced last year to death by stoning , and we expressed our deep concern in a declaration on 21 ? ugust 2002 about the decision by the court of appeal rejecting Amina Lawal 's appeal .
Following this referral of the case , no similar convictions have been noted in the Council .
The ? U will continue to exert pressure within the framework of political dialogue and at various levels , especially through the head of missions in Abuja , stressing that Nigeria must ensure that the constitution remains the supreme law in its country .
Amina Lawal 's defence formulated the opinion that supportive action should be taken in a discreet and confidential manner due to the constitutional problems which arise from the application of Sharia law in certain states .
The ? U has taken this advice on board and is of the opinion that , as long as the case is not considered to be pending , it is better to follow a general approach , such as that I referred to earlier , and not to individualise the case .
Within these frameworks , the ? U has repeated its position on the death penalty and encouraged the Nigerian Government to continue to work for the abolition of the death penalty and for the prevention of any form of harsh , inhumane or humiliating treatment or punishment .
In particular , we are urging the Nigerian authorities to respect human rights and human dignity fully , especially as regards women .
On this issue , the ? U generally attaches great importance to the role of civil society and we are supporting the human rights organisations and other non-governmental bodies active in this sector .
Given that the electoral process has now been completed , the ? U will continue to focus on this issue - it is an important issue - and will take appropriate action depending on subsequent measures taken by the courts .
I wish to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I feel that his answer is satisfactory to an extent .
However , this is a most appalling case and should be followed more closely than his reply seemed to suggest , because there are other similar cases and similar convictions in Nigeria and elsewhere .
We must show that we are earnest in calling for the repeal of those most foul actions and that we are against the denial of the most basic human right - the right to life .
Therefore , I hope that the Council will take further action to ensure that this does not continue and also to seek out where other convictions of a similar nature have taken place .
I thank the President-in-Office again for his reply , but I would urge that this be followed more closely still with regard to the most basic human rights that I have mentioned .
I should like to point out that the Council is especially sensitive to more general issues which relate both to human rights and , in all events , to practices of this sort by certain countries in the global system as far as the general part is concerned .
As regards this specific case , all it is doing is following the recommendation made to it : not to do any harm but , on the contrary , to do whatever might be of help in this specific case and might be effective .
Mr President , Mr President in Office of the Council , I wonder if there is any EU country that has declared itself prepared to give Amina Lawal protection against the possibility of the court case not going the way we wish it to .
Has any country shown a readiness in the Council to make such a statement ?
If we are serious about wishing to protect her , we must press our countries to give her protection against this type of state persecution which is , de facto , exercised against many women .
I do not know the answer to your question at this moment in time .
We can examine it and give a written answer .
Question No 7 by Niall Andrews ( H-0232 / 03 ) :
Subject : Cotonou Agreement and Council priorities
In the light of the entry into force on 1 April 2003 of the Cotonou Agreement , will the Council outline what its priorities are for enhancing the political dimension , tackling debt , reducing poverty and dealing with the major health issues at a time of increasing global economic uncertainty ?
The Cotonou Agreement is based on three main pillars : political dialogue , financial and commercial cooperation and development aid .
This partnership focuses on the objective of reducing and , possibly , eliminating poverty and this is linked to the objectives of sustainable development and the gradual integration of the ACP countries into the global economy .
? CP- ? U cooperation is based on a series of fundamental principles , which include equality of partners and the adoption of development strategies .
In order to implement the objectives of the partnership , the Cotonou Agreement clearly stipulates that the ACP countries shall determine the development strategies for their economies and societies with full sovereignty .
Most provisions of the Agreement were implemented in transitional agreements well before the full entry into force of the Agreement in April 2003 .
Now that the Cotonou Agreement has entered into force , the funds under the ninth EDF are now fully available .
Programming of these resources , in other words the preparation of the strategic support for each country , which is based on the particular medium-term objectives and on the development strategies of the country , and the introduction of an indicative timetable for implementing the support strategy for each country have almost been completed .
The Commission announced its intention to use the reserves of the ninth EDF mainly to finance the Community contribution to international initiatives for the benefit of developing countries , such as debt reduction and health .
These proposals , which are currently being examined by the Council , will also allow for faster disbursement of EDF funds .
The application of these proposals will require joint decisions with the ACP countries .
The Council 's priorities for EC development policy are clearly noted in the Council and Commission declaration approved in November 2000 , which lays down six priority sectors on the basis of the added value of Community action and their contribution to reducing poverty .
These sectors are : the link between trade and development , regional integration and cooperation , support for macro-economic policies , the promotion of equal access to social services , transport , food security , sustainable rural development and , finally , the creation of an institutional infrastructure .
The Council supports the Commission 's efforts to mange the Community 's external aid more efficiently and to use EDF funds in accordance with the objectives and criteria of the Cotonou Agreement .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
It was a very comprehensive reply indeed , but one of the issues I have discovered , over almost thirty years of involvement in development , is the lack of emphasis on education .
The reason I put this question to the Council was to try and establish whether the Council and the European Union can put more emphasis on education , because in developing countries if you have the three basics - reading , writing and arithmetic - even at the simplest level , you can challenge the village elders and the leaders in your community .
When you are illiterate that is impossible .
The purpose of my putting this question was to shift the emphasis , because poverty cannot be tackled through a continuation of the same old formula .
I believe that ' education , education , education ' is the real answer to poverty .
That is where the emphasis should be .
I have noted the member 's comment .
I cannot but agree with him that education is crucial to success .
Moreover , in the age of information technology and knowledge , it is absolutely basic .
As far as the possibility of further intervention in the internal policies of these countries is concerned , I have noted his comment , which I shall also pass on to the European Commission , and we shall bear it in mind within the framework of the Council .
Question No 8 by Liam Hyland ( H-0234 / 03 ) :
Subject : WTO and agriculture deadline
In view of the fact that negotiators at the WTO were unable to agree agriculture negotiating modalities by the 31 March 2003 deadline , does the Council consider that satisfactory progress can be made in other areas in time for the 5th WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancún in Mexico next September , and that more acceptable agricultural proposals can be considered in the meantime in line with the negotiating mandate it gave to the Commission , and how does it regard the views expressed in the US by the Director of the Institute for International Economics , Mr Bergsten , who said , according to Reuters , that the WTO negotiations are more likely to stretch on until the middle of 2007 when the White House 's current trade negotiating authority expires ?

The Council acknowledges that the general situation as regards the Doha negotiations on development matters is far from satisfactory , mainly because the deadlines were not kept to as regards certain sectors , such as the details of access to pharmaceuticals and the details in the agricultural sector .
The impasse on pharmaceuticals was due to the refusal on the part of the United States to agree to the solution which was accepted by almost all the other countries .
As far as agriculture is concerned , the situation is more complicated and repeated efforts by the president of the WTO Committee on Agriculture , Mr Harbinson , were rejected by all sides for contradictory and mutually exclusive reasons .
The Council is , of course , willing to examine any new text submitted by Mr Harbinson or anybody else .
Despite these difficulties , however , it is fundamental at the present juncture to maintain the momentum of negotiations within the framework of the WTO and to make fundamental progress in the run up to the Cancún conference .
To start with , in today 's unstable international political climate , it is even more important to make essential progress with regard to trade issues .
In addition , the most recent multilateral meetings in Geneva demonstrated that there is enhanced awareness between the members of the WTO that the pre-preparatory procedure needs to proceed over coming months so as not to create an excessive workload for the Cancún conference .
Finally , the Council does not share the pessimistic views formulated by certain commentators as regards the Cancún conference .
The problems which need to be resolved before Cancún are numerous but it is not the first time that we have worked to tight deadlines in trade negotiations .
If all the important players make serious efforts and demonstrate real political will , it will be possible to make progress on all outstanding issues over coming months .
Consequently , positive links need to be pursued between issues in order to restore the momentum of the procedure , given that all sides know that there is no agreement until there is full agreement .
As far as agriculture is concerned , the Council confirmed its support at its meeting on 8 April 2003 for the Community proposal on the details in the agricultural sector and urged the Commission to continue its efforts so that an agreement can be reached on this basis because , in its opinion , this is the most realistic means of completing the negotiations in accordance with the timetable laid down in the Doha ministerial declaration .
I should like to refer to the concept of rational expectations and rational behaviour and to say that , obviously , any conclusions within the framework of the negotiations being carried out inside the European Union will not be adopted if there is any prospect that they cannot be safeguarded or they cannot be compatible with what is decided at world level .
Question No 9 by Brian Crowley ( H-0236 / 03 ) :
Subject : Closure of Calder Hall Magnox reactor in Sellafield
Given the welcome closure of the Calder Hall Magnox reactor at Sellafield at the end of March 2003 , will the Council now actively support calls for the closure of the five remaining Magnox plants in the UK which present an increasing safety concern as they get older ?
The question of nuclear safety generally concerns the Council , which fully supports achieving a high standard of nuclear safety throughout the European Union .
However , competence and responsibility for nuclear safety lie with the Member States in question ; consequently , the Council is not in a position to comment on safety and other aspects relating to specific reactors in specific Member States .
As the honourable Member will know , each reactor should normally only operate for as long as it complies with the requirements of high nuclear safety standards .
The current Community legislation on the safety of nuclear facilities is based mainly on Chapter 3 in Title ? ? of the Euratom Treaty .
Directive 96 / 29 / ? uratom laying down basic safety standards for the protection of the health of workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionising radiation sets out the basic obligations for radiation protection which must be honoured .
The Council also notes the Commission 's recent proposal for a directive laying down the basic obligations and general principles relating to the safety of nuclear facilities , which will be subject to careful examination .
As I mentioned , there is the Commission proposal which is being examined by the Council and , if the Council so concludes , there may be a basis for examining this sort of request .
In addition , I should like to point out that the problem is not a technical one .
The problem , over and above the national aspects , also has institutional dimensions , of course it also has political dimensions , but it also has institutional dimensions which you need to respect and not to violate , and that creates restrictions both on this issue and on other issues where there are institutional provisions for the limits within which the Council can intervene .
Question No 10 by Gerard Collins , which has been taken over by Mr Andrews ( H-0238 / 03 ) :
Subject : European Rural Model
The Greek Presidency has emphasised the importance of the European Rural Model and the foundations on which it is based , namely family farms and local communities , small towns and villages located throughout the EU 's rural areas .
Will the Council make a statement now on the progress made during the Greek Presidency on preserving and promoting this European Rural Model ?
The Greek Presidency , continuing the efforts of the previous presidency , has been trying since January to progress as best it can with an examination of the legislative proposals for reforming the common agricultural policy , including of course the proposal for a regulation on rural development .
According to the latest information given to me on developments in the relevant Council , I might add that I am optimistic about progress with this work .
The debate on reforms during these first six months should allow the Council , following the opinion also of the European Parliament , to reach an agreement on all the reform proposals in June .
Our presidency attaches great importance to safeguarding the multi-operational European Rural Model , which focuses more on attention to rural development and it could not be any other way , given that we have also tested the value of this model in our country .
During discussions which have already been held on all the proposals , these aspects of the proposals were generally well received and the importance which needs to be attached to these issues , and the rural development of peripheral areas in particular , was emphasised .
In addition , the Council and the Commission are aware of the fact that funding under the CAP must comply with the conclusions of the European Council in Berlin on financial ceilings and with the conclusions of the European Council in Brussels in October 2002 .
Consequently , measures in favour of rural development will depend on the funds available under the second pillar of the CAP and any funds obtained from reallocating resources which may be released at the level of the first pillar of the CAP as a result of the reform under way .
If Mr Andrews would like to reword his question , he also has the floor .
If he does not wish to reword it , Mr Ó Neachtain has the floor to put his question .
It was clear from my reply that I agree that this model has an important role in the operation of European agriculture ; we are in the process of examining how to proceed .
During this process , the competent ministers will obviously bring their experience and positions to bear and I hope that the final balance struck will safeguard precisely the positive elements of the model which prevails in the Union and which is important not only from an agricultural but also from a more general economic , social and , in the final analysis , political point of view .
I shall bear the comments expressed in mind .
Question No 11 by Mrs Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0240 / 03 ) will not receive a response as the subject it concerns has been included on the agenda for this part-session .
Question No 12 by Sarah Ludford , which has been taken over by Mrs Thors ( H-0241 / 03 ) :
Subject : Women in Afghanistan and Iraq
In Afghanistan , over a year after the fall of the Taliban , life for most women is hardly getting any better .
What action is the Council , in conjunction with the Commission , taking to improve the situation there for women , who in many cases are in practice still confined to their homes by widespread restrictions ?
As an aid donor , what pressure is the EU putting on the Afghan interim government to stop harassment and oppression of women , such as bans on walking , obligatory wearing of the burqa and bans on being driven by a man in a taxi ?
Will the Council ensure , to the best of its ability , that women in post-war Iraq get a fair deal in the process of physical and political reconstruction ?
The ? U is closely monitoring the situation as regards respect for the human rights of women in Afghanistan .
In its contacts with the Afghan Transitional Administration , the ? U constantly and incessantly stresses that the rights of Afghan women and the promotion of their full and equal participation in every aspect of public life are an important reference point for the evaluation of the performance of the Afghan Transitional Administration and for defining subsequent EU policy towards Afghanistan .
On 14 April the Council approved conclusions in which it underlined , among other things , the importance of including the mainstreaming of gender awareness into the policy of the Afghan Transitional Administration and in which it urged the establishment of a constitutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights , especially with regard to women and girls .
Similarly , the Council stressed that gender awareness must be one of the features of the government to be formed following free and fair elections by June 2004 .
The Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs , who met the EU ministers in April 2003 , subscribes to these conclusions .
Following the fall of the Taliban , there are nonetheless signs of improvement .
More and more girls are attending school and they are also studying at higher education institutes in the larger towns .
The ministries are recruiting women and , generally speaking , a lot of women have returned to their work outside the home .
One very positive step was the ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women on 5 March .
However , the Council indeed acknowledges that the situation of women is still unacceptable as regards the possibilities of education and work , as regards their legal protection or their full and equal participation in public life , despite the examples to which I referred .
Similarly , women are the main victims of insecurity , which threatens their life and their dignity .
The office of the EU special representative for Afghanistan , Mr Vendrell , has established good working relations with the Ministry for Women 's Affairs and the Afghan Independent Human Rights Committee and is supporting the creation of an infrastructure of women 's organisations through training and dialogue .
The EU special representative , together with the representatives of the Commission and the Member States , regularly evaluate the achievement of the objectives of the policy of the European Union , including in the field of women 's rights and shall , if they deem necessary , submit recommendations on further action to be taken on the part of the ? U. Finally , the Council will also pay special attention to the role of women in the reconstruction of Iraq .
I shall have taken note of these comments and , as with Afghanistan , the same applies to Iraq and , once the situation has returned to normal , we shall be in a position to take specific actions .
I said in my position that the situation of women in Afghanistan does indeed correspond to the problematic picture to which you too referred .
The Council is trying with all the means at its disposal to influence this situation .
As the author is not present , Question No 13 lapses .
Question No 14 by José Ribeiro e Castro ( H-0243 / 03 ) :
Subject : Cuba : policy review
The European Union has been developing a policy of constructive dialogue with Cuba .
This development was based on the assumption that the Communist regime in Cuba was prepared to open up to some degree and the hope that it might help bring about a move towards democracy and full respect for human rights .
The European Parliament held a debate on the extremely serious situation in Cuba on 10 April 2003 and adopted a resolution .
What specific political consequences does the Council draw from the abrupt change in the situation in Cuba ?
Will the Council continue with the policy which was on the point of being finalised , even though the Cuban regime has brutally overturned the assumptions on which it was based ?
What steps is the Council taking - and what further steps can it take - to secure the release of all political prisoners being detained by the Cuban regime ?
Does the Council share the view that , particularly following the award of the 2002 Sakharov prize and certainly throughout 2003 , all the European institutions have an even greater responsibility to act firmly and in a spirit of solidarity in support of all those people in Cuba who merely wish to be able to exercise their basic human freedom and who believe in democracy and human rights , including for the people of Cuba ?
In its regular evaluation of the EU 's common position on Cuba , the Council always underlines its approach of open and constructive dialogue with Cuba on all matters of common interest .
The Council has reiterated that the objectives of the policy of the European Union on Cuba remain the encouragement of a process of transition to a pluralist democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , sustainable economic recovery and a better standard of living for the population .
The ? U monitors the situation in Cuba on a regular basis .
As soon as it learned of the recent wave of arrests , the presidency , on behalf of the European Union , issued public statements and proceeded with intense demarches towards Havana .
In their bilateral contacts with the Cuban authorities , the Member States protested strongly about the arrests .
The Council has taken due account of the resolution passed by the European Union on 10 April , which reinforces the EU 's position against these measures .
At its meeting on 14 April , the Council of the European Union approved the following conclusions :
' The Council condemns the recent actions of the Cuban authorities , notably the executions , the large-scale arrests of dissidents , the unfair trials and the arbitrary and excessive sentences imposed .
It calls for the immediate release of all political prisoners .
These latest developments , which mark a further deterioration in the human rights situation in Cuba , will affect the EU 's relationship with Cuba and the prospects for increased cooperation .
The Council will keep the situation under close review . '
The ? U also supported a resolution on the human rights situation in Cuba which was passed within the framework of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights .
As a general comment , the presidency of the ? U issued a declaration stating that the ? U condemns the large-scale arrests , the unfair summary trials and the arbitrary and excessive sentences imposed on numerous dissidents for peacefully expressing their political , religious and social opinions and because they were exercising their right to take full and equal part in public life .
Consequently , the ? U demands that those persons , whom it considers prisoners of conscience , be released without delay and also calls for the immediate release of all political prisoners .
It is also deeply concerned at the continuing repression of members of the opposition .
The ? U roundly condemns the recent executions of Cuban citizens carried out following summary trials and expresses its regret that the moratorium on the death penalty in the country has come to an end .
These latest developments , which mark a further deterioration in the human rights situation in the country , will affect the ? U 's relationship with Cuba and the prospects for increased cooperation .
The ? U will monitor violations of personal and political rights , which continue to affect the Union 's relationship with Cuba , very closely .
I should like to close by pointing out that the ? U will continue to keep the situation under close review , especially as regards the possible exercise of legal recourse for the 78 persons convicted .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the President-in-Office for his extensive answer , but I feel I must suggest that we need to go further .
It is precisely because we support a change towards transition in Cuba and because people 's expectations have been brutally shattered , that I believe we all have a particular responsibility . This is all the more true because last December this Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize to a great Cuban personality in the field of human rights : Osvaldo Payá , who is suffering considerably at the moment .
We must adopt a position of active solidarity , which leads me to ask the following question : is the Council prepared to invite Mr Payá to take part in meetings with the Presidency , with the High Representative and with the Council , in order to give his feelings , in person , about the extremely serious events taking place in Cuba ?
Would the Council consider the possibility of suggesting to all Member States that they do the same , through their diplomatic representatives , in other words , that they convey their solidarity directly and invite Osvaldo Payá , the 2002 Sakharov prizewinner , to visit every European capital and there give a true picture of the Cuban people 's suffering ?
I referred to the declarations made by the Council and numerous , perhaps all , the Member States condemning recent developments in Cuba .
The Council is particularly sensitive to this issue , and discussed it at its last meeting and decided to issue these declarations of condemnation .
Further action will be judged in the light of developments .
It is clear that what happened in Cuba recently has given rise to a general outcry and we hope that this will influence subsequent decisions by the Cuban Government .
As the time allocated to Question Time is at an end , Questions Nos. 39 to 58 will be answered in writing .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0141 / 2003 ) by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council directive on Community measures for the control of foot and mouth disease ( COM ( 2002 ) 736 - C5-0029 / 2003 - 2002 / 0299 ( CNS ) ) .
Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , just as the plenary , just over six months ago , adopted by a large majority the report from the temporary committee on foot and mouth disease , so , today , we are stating our position on the proposal for a Council directive on the control of FMD .
In so doing , we are coming to the end of a very important chapter , and I would like to take this opportunity of again , and very warmly , thanking all Members , as well as the secretariat and , most especially , the Commission for their excellent cooperation .
Our special report , and the report now before us , are the fruit of the best kind of cooperation .
Many of Parliament 's demands have already been incorporated into the proposal that the Commission has now submitted , and so the various amendments we have tabled are about making the proposal more precise rather than giving it a new direction .
As much for the avoidance of misunderstandings as for any other reason , I would like to re-emphasise the fact that we are not calling for any sort of general preventive vaccination of the sort that was customary prior to 1992 , but for emergency vaccination , allowing the animals to live , to be the means of first resort when it comes to containing any outbreak of FMD .
This is an important distinction , and it still needs to be maintained at certain points in the text .
I would also like to emphasise that products derived from vaccinated animals are not in any way hazardous to human health , nor would they even have any effect on it .
That much we know , and that is why it would be impossible to justify banning the marketing of products derived from animals vaccinated in the course of an outbreak .
We know that there will be problems as regards trade with third states such as Japan and USA , but this can be dealt with by regionalisation , and the award of ' FMD-free ' status six months after vaccination , rather than - as was the case a year ago - after twelve months , must be considered an essential contribution towards developing a new policy .
It might be added , though , that we need to keep on working towards getting the OIE to lay down a three-month rule .
This is the subject of an amendment tabled by Mr Böge and others , which I ask you to support .
We must , however , vote against the Committee 's Amendment No 32 , which I do not believe takes adequate account of the present position in international law .
The Greens ' Amendment No 49 also needs to be rejected , as it would reduce the room for manoeuvre that we need .
I do not want to go into the individual proposals in detail right now , but the incidence of fowlpest or chicken flu is now showing us how important it is to find a new direction for the control of zoonoses and fundamentally re-evaluate it .
In the Netherlands , twenty-five million animals have already been slaughtered , and the disease has now appeared in Germany as well .
As we demand in very clear terms in our report , we must eventually find a completely different way of dealing with epizootics , so that it is not trading and economic interests alone that determine what is done .
The strategy must involve ethics just as much as it does economics .
The risk of diseases spreading is , in part , made greater by intensive livestock farming and by international trade relations , and so vaccination policy needs to be thought through anew .
Some viruses are highly deadly and so , in future , another approach will be called for .
In its report , Parliament has very clearly outlined the economic and social consequences of a strategy failing to hit the mark .
In the same way , we have to consider how , in future , we can recoup the costs , whether by way of national funds or in conjunction with a European Epizootic Fund , and who is to be compensated - only those immediately affected , whose animals were slaughtered , or all those who sustained financial losses .
This point has not yet been satisfactorily resolved .
There is also the need for research , especially applied research , to be stepped up if we are to have improved vaccines , but , at the same time , prophylaxis must be maintained in businesses , in imports , and when transporting animals .
This is more important than ever as a means of preventing pathogens or viruses from getting to the animals in the first place .
It is our hope that the Council will , under the Greek Presidency , be able to come to an agreement that will do justice to the needs of the producers , that is , the farmers , the consumers , and also the animals .
In these areas , the EU has competence and options available , which should be used to the full .
We in this House have played our part , both in the committee and on the ground , by talking with the people affected in Great Britain and the Netherlands .
I hope that the future will find us able to break through the vicious circle of killing and isolating .
Mr President , speaking on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I should like to begin by complimenting the rapporteur highly on the way in which he has cooperated with the various groups and also on the very commendable result .
This demonstrates that he has understood the great unease felt at past outbreaks .
He has produced a very good report in response to the Commissioner 's legislative proposals .
I should also like to thank the Commission and Commissioner Byrne for his speedy reaction to the own-initiative report of Parliament based on investigations we had carried out .
He has adopted at least some points from this parliamentary report .
This augurs well for good cooperation between the Commission and Parliament , in achieving , now and in the future , an effective approach to combating animal disease epidemics .
At the same time , Mr President , I must say on behalf of my group that the parliamentary investigation has taught us just how shattering the outbreak of animal diseases can be .
We conducted an investigation into the epidemics of foot and mouth disease .
We saw the consequence for animals and humans alike but we also saw the secondary results .
The health problems that are still occurring in places hit by foot and mouth , the huge economic loss but also people 's distress and all its attendant problems demonstrate that we can no longer view these animal diseases as a technical question but must emphatically also look at the social consequences .
It cannot be denied that the risks of infectious animal diseases are growing in a world where borders are becoming increasingly transparent and where there is ever more international trade .
I need only make passing reference to the outbreak of SARS to indicate the degree of panic it can generate .
We must be fully aware that , if we have opted for a non-vaccination policy , the risks of infectious animal diseases will increase .
We want to keep animals outside , we want to see cows in the fields , and we want to see chickens and pigs ranging freely .
That does mean , though , an increased risk .
In addition there are also the international risks of more transport , more international trade .
That means that we cannot leave the consequences solely at the door of the farmers but must as politicians reflect on how we can tackle these risks in future .
In that respect , the Kreissl-Dörfler report is a good initial step .
If there is a new outbreak we can then at least ensure that through a fundamental change of policy , perhaps also through vaccination , we can achieve a much more effective approach to and control of a number of epidemic animal diseases , in this case foot and mouth disease .
Regarding that fundamental change of policy , namely the provision of more options for Member States , more options for the Commission and most definitely the use of vaccination to keep an outbreak in check , it is of the utmost importance to look at how we can subsequently control the secondary effects and their repercussions .
There are a number of important questions .
To begin with - and so far the Commission has not yet been totally clear about this - how are we to deal with those indirectly affected by future outbreaks ?
Secondly , how can we ensure that there is a maximum market for products from the moment that prophylactic vaccination is used and the animals survive ?
Naturally the legislation permits us to sell our products on the European market under certain conditions but as regards the supermarket chains we are left with question marks .
How are we to deal with this ?
What is our role as politicians in the process , and what is the role of the Commission ?
A third question is , how can we ensure that these kinds of outbreaks are translated internationally in trade relations ?
In that field I should point out that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has submitted an amendment - I tabled it on behalf of Mr Böge and a number of other members of our group , in which we call urgently on the Commission to look at what the rapporteur has said , namely that it is crucial that in the international field the length of export bans following an outbreak be reduced from six to three months .
That is absolutely crucial to our approach in the European Union , and this approach can only be successful if , internationally too , we see the opportunity of reducing the period from six to three months .
We urge the Commission to achieve this through negotiation . I should like to hear the Commissioner 's response to this point .
Mr President , I am glad that we have been able to take a step forward regarding the combating of foot and mouth disease .
At the same time I say this with mixed feelings , now that in my own country , but also our neighbours , Germany and Belgium , the spectre of fowl pest has reared its head .
Once again I appeal to the Commission to examine how we can take social responsibility for those major animal diseases , such as fowl pest , such as swine fever , and in this case foot and mouth , in order to arrive at a coherent policy .
But , once again , the Group of the European People 's Party is glad that we have managed to take a first step in relation to this foot and mouth dossier .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , the FMD crisis has left deep scars .
The culls have brought heartbreak to countless families .
They have led to public indignation and rage , sometimes impotent rage at authorities and also rage at Europe , which blocked the vaccination of livestock .
First of all , my sincere thanks to Mr Kreissl-Dörfler .
Once again he has done an excellent job .
After his report on the foot and mouth crisis he has worked hard to ensure that the list of recommendations that this House submitted last December has been incorporated into the Commission 's proposal .
Meanwhile we are engaged in a legislative process .
I believe that the proposal and the proposed amendments are all in all an acceptable response to the public outcry on the mass culling of livestock .
I am in favour of the use of prophylactic emergency vaccinations , with animals being kept alive until slaughtered for consumption .
I should like to stress two important points in the form of questions to the Commission and would like you to respond in a moment .
The first concerns political responsibility .
The foot and mouth crisis of 2001 heralded the political landslide of 2002 .
We must at any rate teach politicians a lesson too .
Confidence in politics suffered a severe dent .
One important reason was that political responsibility proved anything but transparent .
Who was responsible for the no-vaccination policy - the government , the EU or the International Bureau for Infectious Diseases ?
Ministers pointed to the national governments and to the Bureau in Paris .
For the ordinary citizen it was a complex structure of responsibilities and that led to the image of politicians , who while they were prepared to take a public stand , subsequently preferred to hide behind others .
Politicians who take no responsibility deprive politics of its credibility .
This buck-passing game has backfired badly on Europe .
The hundreds of angry letters and e-mails were signals of the human and institutional tragedy .
A future outbreak of foot and mouth must not lead to the mass slaughter of healthy livestock .
We must make a massive effort to ensure this in the period ahead .
This requires a foot and mouth policy in which there is a clear apportionment of responsibilities , regional , national , European and international and with the parliaments also involved .
Our aim must be a foot and mouth policy that is not anonymous .
Responsibilities for choices and compliance must be clearly established .
It is our task to communicate on this matter .
In an attempt to achieve such clarity , I should like to ask the Commissioner to make explicit once again here this evening where precisely the responsibility lies .
Is it true that a Member State has the option of using prophylactic emergency vaccination and subsequently of keeping the vaccinated animals alive ?
Is it true that animal products from vaccinated livestock can be sold without any problem ?
This brings me to the second point , namely the marketing of animal products from vaccinated livestock .
At the moment that a Member State decides to use prophylactic emergency vaccination and to keep the animals alive , it must be possible to sell the products .
This requires a minimum of two things ; supermarkets to sell the products and consumers to buy them .
How does the Commission plan to create the correct boundary conditions in collaboration with Member States ?
It cannot , of course , be the intention to keep vaccinated animals alive and then to discover that there is no market for them .
That would surely ultimately lead to the culling of vaccinated animals .
I should like to hear your answer to both these questions .
Mr President , at the height of the 2001 outbreak of foot and mouth disease the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party formulated three principles : how can we prevent such outbreaks from recurring , what are we to do if there is another outbreak and how can we pay for such outbreaks in future ?

On the first point : better border controls .
We have heard that the Commission has issued new guidelines .
I have paid particular attention when arriving back in Europe from time to time from another continent .
To be honest , despite the newly announced measures I have not yet been able to detect much change .
What exactly were the new measures ?
What are we to do if there is another outbreak ?
We took the view that the mass culling of healthy stock is not acceptable in future , which is why we fully support the conclusions of the report that prophylactic vaccination must be used .
We went even further .
In 2001 we submitted an amendment to the budget to ensure that the Commission was able to carry out research into better vaccines , marker vaccines against foot and mouth disease .
We did not limit ourselves to foot and mouth disease by the way .
It could extend to all infectious animal diseases .
It is particularly disappointing to note that as of now , some two years after the amendment was submitted and carried , the Commission has still not begun this research .
We are constantly given different explanations .
It will happen .
But it still has not happened .
I should like to know why .
Another point : what is to be done with the products of vaccinated animals ?
That strikes me as a huge problem .
This has already been said by Mrs Corbey and by Mr Maat .
The probability is that it will be more difficult to sell the products of those vaccinated animals , and that it will be at a reduced price .
Will that also be covered by future compensation schemes , yes or no ?
What is the Commission proposing to do in this respect ?
Third point : how are we to pay for such outbreaks in future ?
In that respect we were lucky with the outbreak in 2001 .
There was sufficiency leeway in the agriculture budget .
If calculations are correct there is considerably less slack in the agriculture budget .
The euro is strong against the dollar and there will be very little leeway .
If there were a new outbreak now , how would we pay for it ?
This was in fact why the Liberal Group submitted an amendment in 2001 calling for studies to be carried out in to insurance systems .
In that respect the Commission did do its work .
At the end of May we shall have a report on the subject .
As rapporteur for the 2004 budget I myself made it one of my priorities .
It is not acceptable that we should always leave the financing of such outbreaks to chance , according to whether there is money available or not .
It must be put on a sound financial footing .
I hope to be able to work that out in future in consultation with the Commission .
The point about six months and three months is also essential for us and I therefore recommend that the plenary should accept the amendment of the Liberal and Christian Democrat groups on this .
Mr President , the history of foot and mouth disease in Europe can be traced back over many years , but the great catastrophe began in the South of England on 21 February 2001 .
Although it had been known for decades what damage could be caused by the uncontrolled outbreak of a disease , the opportunity for effective defence against the epidemic was not taken .
The courses of action set in motion in the Member States affected were unable to prevent the spread of the virus .
The state of emergency that was then announced in various regions of the EU left both the rural and urban public equally enraged .
Rural areas began to resemble high-security blocks , and a sort of state of emergency was the order of the day on the farms that had been affected .
At this time , there was no shortage of ideas as to who was to blame .
The EU 's ban on vaccination , which adhered to the principle that , if even only one animal was vaccinated , the whole country was declared to be infected with FMD , met with little approval on the part of the public , and even well-informed officials demanded at the time the use of what are termed marker vaccines in order to prevent the disease from becoming more widespread .
Many members of the public saw the containment of foot and mouth disease by means of the open burning of animal cadavers as demonstrating complete disregard for animals ' dignity , and nor did the bottom line add up in economic terms .
By doing justice to this principle , the report on the control of foot and mouth disease draws the right conclusions from the calamity of 2001 , and has , moreover , been able to confirm the results produced by the work of the committee of investigation .
This is an encouragement to the same course of action in other cases , such as that of fowlpest , a constantly-recurrent disease that spreads from one country to its neighbours , one of the main problems with which is the large number of contacts across frontiers .
Then - if you go by what the press says - there is the great danger of fowlpest , like foot and mouth disease , becoming even worse than a worst-case scenario .
The principle of ' killing rather than vaccination ' or rather its opposite , should , in the EU , apply to all animal species .
It would be worth Parliament 's time and effort to investigate that more closely , examining , for example , whether the German ordinance to prevent the spreading of classic fowlpest is in line with what is actually known and whether all species should be included in the text .
It would also be possible to re-examine how cross-border cooperation is actually organised .
As far as FMD is concerned , all is quiet in the candidate countries , but I would like to take this opportunity to observe that this state of affairs can change rapidly .
Any and every misjudgment in the area of controlling zoonoses and the early diagnosis of them has economic and social consequences .
The report was quite right in stating what had to be done , and the work has been a support .
I endorse the report and the proposals it makes ; above all , I endorse those amendments that have to do with the protection of the fundamental right to property , and which lead the report to emphatically hold fast to some sort of compensation arrangement for those affected .
I also endorse those amendments that seek to increase the freedom of action of veterinarians and the steering bodies in the Member States .
In so far as the Member States ' responsibilities will change at all , they will increase , as the decision as to which epidemic strategy is to be applied , and when , is to become a matter for the country in question , and rightly so .
This does not discharge those who keep animals from their obligation of cleanliness and good order .
Criminal activity in border areas involving the trade in animals belongs in another law , but the report sets out the right approach to this , too .
Mr President , while we are considering this evening how to combat FMD in future , animals and farmers are being hit by the next infectious animal disease , fowl pest .
The EU 's animal disease policy requires re-evaluation .
No one , in 1991 , was aware of the possible consequences of instituting the policy of non-vaccination .
Since then we have learned the hard way .
Vaccination could have prevented the destruction of millions of healthy animals .
If economic interests are paramount , mankind loses its dignity and creation its protection .
I am glad that the Committee on Agriculture has adopted our amendment , in which we make an urgent plea for the observance of ethical principles in combating animal disease .
In the new directive set out by the Commission , concern for creation still receives scant attention .
I did not dare to count on preventive vaccination .
I had , though , hoped that ' emergency vaccination and retention of stock ' would be the first option in the event of an outbreak .
The Commission continues to opt for culling and at the very most extends the possibilities to emergency vaccination .
I there fore support the amendments making emergency vaccination the first option in combating the disease .
Moreover , such emergency vaccination and keeping animals alive must be given a fair chance .
Products of vaccinated animals are no less safe than those of non-vaccinated animals .
Labelling these products , however , does create such an impression .
And that in spite of the fact that , for years prior to 1991 , these products were eaten by consumers in my country and elsewhere .
In addition we must prevent Member States having to opt for culling on the basis of the financial contribution made by Brussels to combating the disease .
Emergency vaccination costs the European Union less money , while a Member State is subsequently forced to incur costs to market the products .
The savings created by vaccination should be used to compensate for these incidental costs .
The existence of various serotypes of the FMD virus is an argument against preventive vaccination .
At the same time it is an extra stimulus for research into the development of FMD vaccines .
This makes preventive vaccination the option for the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the key element in this debate today on foot and mouth disease is the constraints imposed by the OIE with regard to the trade sanctions inflicted on countries that no longer enjoy ' foot and mouth disease free ' status .
It is these rules that make this disease so terrifying for breeders because of the huge economic losses they cause .
We must remember that the foot and mouth that affects livestock is not dangerous to man .
It is not a public health problem .
I therefore endorse our rapporteur 's proposal in Amendment No 5 to recital 14 to the effect that the Member States should submit proposals to the OIE to modify trade sanctions in these situations .
To be more precise , this change to the OIE rules must take two forms .
Firstly , consideration must be given to the progress made on vaccines - marker vaccines , which make it possible to distinguish a vaccinated animal from an infected animal , and more general vaccines - and we must remember that products from vaccinated animals - dairy or meat - pose no danger to human health nor any risk of contagion .
Therefore , there is no longer any reason to discriminate against these products or the countries where they are available .
This change to the rules will also make it possible to reconsider the problem of preventive vaccination , which should be authorised by the Member States in cases where , for their own reasons , the breeders so desire .
I am thinking in particular of animals with a high genetic value , breeding animals and rare breeds that are important for biodiversity .
Secondly , Member States must be allowed to regionalise their breeding areas , thereby ensuring that a case of foot and mouth in Alsace - speaking hypothetically of course - does not prevent Brittany from exporting its excellent animal produce .
Finally , and I am sorry that this point that I raised during the work of our Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease was not taken up by the rapporteur , we must not lose sight of the fact that certain changes in European agriculture , which have been facilitated by shifts in a certain CAP , are in themselves risk factors for the spread of diseases .
I am referring to the increase in the size of farms , excessive intensification , the spread of enclosed breeding , the specialisation of regions and the transporting of animals over long distances : all of these factors , which combine to create very high animal densities , increase the risk .
At a time , Mr President , when Parliament will have to state its position on the mid-term review of the CAP , we must endeavour to remedy these shifts rather than amplify them by giving priority to human-sized farms , extensive breeding in the least favoured regions , the local integration of activities and local abattoirs ; in short , agriculture with a human face .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish firstly to say to the rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , that I have rarely been involved in work on a report that has been handled as diligently and fairly as Mr Kreissl-Dörfler has handled this report .
It is simply admirable , and I want to say thank you .
At the same time , I would draw attention to the fact that , by now abandoning the non-vaccination policy , we are creating changes that will be very significant for those countries that export extensively to third countries .
I want at the same time to say that foot and mouth disease is so infectious that anyone who believes that all the problems are solved merely by opening the way for vaccination and who is also sure of being able in future to contain a future outbreak of the disease will have to think again , for that is not the way foot and mouth disease works .
I therefore choose to go on believing that it is the non-vaccination policy that we shall continue to work towards , and I acknowledge that the situation will meanwhile be one in which we shall use vaccine , as we did for example in the Netherlands , under the very proficient administration of the Dutch .
Ring vaccination did prove effective as a way of containing the disease .
In that connection , it is also important for me to support what was said by my colleague in the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , Mr Mulder , namely that it is important for the vaccinated animals not to remain in the food chain but to be removed from it .
That is not something for which there appears to be a majority right now , but it must be remembered in this regard that the vaccinated animals are of course disease carriers , and , given that fact , it would be a disaster if any of these animals were to pass on the disease .
I should also like to point out that there can be no question of imagining , as is done for example in Amendment No 11 , that milk and meat from vaccinated animals can be sold freely throughout the EU .
In this area , we must be very clear in demanding regionalisation so that , if such milk and meat is to be sold , it is within , and not across , national borders .
Although I am aware that this is not Commissioner Byrne 's area , I shall again draw attention to the fact that there is a need for export agreements , particularly with the Americans , so that we contain the losses there might be in connection with a future epidemic of foot and mouth disease and , especially , in connection with possible vaccination . It would not of course be of help to anyone if , instead of exporting fresh produce to third countries , we were to close the doors , with the result that these products were to end up on the European market at sharply falling prices .
That is not of course what farmers need in this situation . There is also a real need for the Commission to undertake serious regionalisation and to conclude agreements with the Americans .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Commissioner Byrne for the commitment he has shown to the work of the parliamentary Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth and , indeed , for ensuring that the main findings of our report have featured prominently in the Commission 's directive .
I also thank Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for working so tirelessly on the matter since day one .
To have reached this final stage is a positive advertisement for the European Parliament .
When the temporary committee visited regions affected by this terrible disease , including my own country of Wales , we were told by people how grateful they were that the European Parliament had set up this inquiry as they had no other way of voicing their grievances within their own Member States .
This directive makes several valuable recommendations relating to the tightening of import controls - which has already been mentioned - setting contingency plans , establishing expert groups and moving emergency vaccination to the forefront of disease control , in line with the welcome changes made to international trade rules .
Central to the UK Government 's mishandling of the 2001 crisis was its lack of a clear-cut policy on whether and when vaccination should have been used .
This led to the unacceptable continuous culling , which was based on flawed scientific evidence , and the blinkered decision to reject vaccination .
In the event of future outbreaks , slaughtering should be limited to infected premises , based on sound laboratory tests .
We owe it to our rural communities everywhere to learn the lessons of 2001 .
Mr President , there are situations in which emergency vaccination is very sensible , but there is no reason for causing difficulties in terms of exports .
The problem arises due to the fact that the veterinary borders have been removed in connection with the introduction of the internal market .
The EU has become a single veterinary zone .
Denmark has lost its independent veterinary status .
Understandably enough , the United States and Japan also regard the EU as a single country .
They close the door to the import of pork from throughout the EU if there has been vaccination against foot and mouth disease in one location in the EU .
Each year , the EU exports approximately 1.5 million tons of pork at a value of EUR 4 000 million .
Of this , Denmark alone is responsible for 600 000 to 700 000 tons .
If the exports were instead to be transferred to the EU 's internal market , this would mean an increase approaching 10 % in the supply of pork .
This would lead to a total collapse of the market throughout the EU .
The Commission should , from the beginning , have taken account of the risk of third countries ' introducing trade restrictions .
The Commission has not remotely taken on board this loss of exports that occurs if no advance measures are taken regarding third countries ' acceptance of exports .
It must of course be possible to change the vaccination strategy , partly so that what are otherwise good intentions are not pursued at the expense of the EU 's absolutely vital export interests .
I must therefore call upon the Commission to ensure it takes account of all the factors - including those relating to trade - in evaluating what rules should apply in future .
There is a lot to suggest that veterinary regionalisation should be introduced , involving a kind of ' export pocket ' free from vaccinated animals , from which exports could be made even if there were foot and mouth disease outbreaks elsewhere in the EU , with corresponding vaccination against the disease .
Finally , Commissioner , do you intend to comply with my requests ?

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I really do not want to start without thanking our rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , for the truly outstanding work he has done with this report , but , today , I want also to thank Mrs Redondo , who chaired the committee on foot and mouth disease and who managed it with a great deal of circumspection .
Fundamentally , I believe , both the Commission proposal for a directive and this report are to be welcomed .
It is fortunate that the proposal submitted by the Commission takes on board most of the demands made by Parliament 's committee on foot and mouth disease , which , on 17 December 2002 , adopted a resolution calling for the revision of the European Union 's existing policy on the control and prevention of foot and mouth disease .
As the contributions to today 's debate make clear , the next epidemic is already rampant in Europe , and I believe that it really is five minutes to midnight when it comes to our changing the European Union 's policy , for we have to avoid in future any epidemic spreading and becoming the tragedy that we saw in Great Britain in 2001 .
We are not talking here only in terms of the grave financial losses sustained by farmers , especially in the upstream and downstream sectors , or about the damage to rural areas and the profound public disquiet ; this is , rather , an image issue for European farmers such as ourselves and for the agricultural policy as a whole .
One important point that has been taken on board is the retention of the ban on prophylactic vaccination , which strikes me as pointless until such time as there is a vaccine that covers all seven serotypes and the 80 subtypes within them .
There is a need for research into this to be extended and improved .
A further , and decisive , point is that the importance of emergency vaccination is recognised , so that it is no longer seen as a last resort .
In conclusion , it has to be said that the disease , which spread to such an immense extent in Great Britain that we all still shudder to recall it , could have been prevented .
All that was needed was for appropriate control measures to be taken and for the existing vaccination requirements to be adhered to in the Member State in question .
The one thing that has become perfectly clear is that the Member States really do have to discharge the responsibilities placed on them by the Treaties .
I trust that we have learned our lessons from the past in order to be able , next time , to act with more responsibility and coordination .
Never again must there be a catastrophe - for a catastrophe is what it was - of these dimensions .
Mr President , I wish to join the others in thanking the rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , for an excellent job well done .
It is one of the few areas in which I have noticed that all political groups in this House had very little difference at the end of the day , and certainly our mission was exactly the same .
I thank him and colleagues who were on the temporary committee for the first year .
I should like to thank Mr Sturdy , Mr Parish and my UK colleagues who were at the forefront in promoting the original establishment of the temporary committee , for reasons that will be obvious .
It is not often that I agree fully with my Northern Ireland colleague , Mr Paisley .
However , on this issue we would find very little to differ on , and I welcome his comments here this evening .
The outbreak of FMD in the European Union in 2001 was a disaster not only for agriculture but also for many related enterprises and organisations .
The outbreak demonstrated without question that the European Union 's FMD risk-management policy , and the risk assessment on which that was based , needed to be reviewed .
Farmers , vets and politicians all shared the great concern of the general public over the death and destruction of millions of animals , of which many , if not most , were not infected with the disease .
There was huge psychological damage , in particular to farmers and their families when they had to depopulate or destroy their animals .
It is not just in the UK - the epicentre of the outbreak - but even in the Cooley Peninsula in Ireland , which had to be depopulated that to this day the psychological damage to the families concerned is absolutely immense .
While I do not support the return to routine or preventive vaccination , a review of vaccination policy is very appropriate , especially the use of emergency or fire-break vaccination to control the spread of an outbreak .
Further discussion with the OIE , the World Organisation for Animal Health , is urgently necessary to ensure that an infected country can regain its FMD-free status as soon as possible .
After the last case and after the slaughter of the last vaccinated animal it is necessary to regain FMD status .
In contrast to a colleague , Mr Busk , who has just spoken , I do not have problems with vaccinated animals entering the food chain .
However , as long as the OIE has concerns about exporting such animals for the food chain , we have to get in line .
Therefore , we need our scientists to get their heads together on this and resolve it .
FMD-vaccinated animals are not infectious when they get into the food chain .
We already vaccinate our cattle for a whole array of diseases and consume them daily .
Therefore we need to become rational in our approach to this particular issue .
Marker vaccines to distinguish vaccinated animals from animals carrying the virus will have a major role to play in this area in the future .
I would like to make a special plea to ensure that Member States ' veterinary services are properly resourced .
With serious financial losses now for many years in livestock enterprises , we cannot take for granted any longer the existence of rural large-animal veterinary practices , especially in our remote areas , let alone the development of urgently needed herd-health surveillance programmes involving routine visits by practising vets .
The vet is in the front line of surveillance for indigenous and exotic diseases .
The one thing we can be sure of is not whether there is another outbreak of an exotic disease in the EU , but when .
I would also like to thank the Commission for acceding to my plea for a special protocol for non-susceptible animals , in particular equidae .
I refer to Annex VI on the restrictions on the movement of equidae in this area .
A few amendments were accepted at committee and I would urge the Commission to indicate that it would take them on board .
An emergency must be documented by a veterinary surgeon on call 24 hours per day , 7 days a week .
For the equestrian and racing industries , Saturday , Sunday and bank holiday Mondays must be covered for the movement of animals for breeding or for emergency operations or for competition purposes - because the horse does not carry , it is not susceptible .
The transport must be authorised by the competent authorities , but they must be contactable 24 hours a day , 7 days a week .
An on-call official veterinarian must be informed about the route prior to the departure of any horse transported in dedicated transport in an outbreak .
I declare an interest in the equestrian area .
I thank the Commission and the authorities concerned for including for the first time a protocol in an FMD contingency plan for a non-susceptible species .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0066 / 2003 ) by Mrs Ferrer , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on capacity-building in the developing countries ( 2002 / 2157 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am sorry to have to discuss this report this evening , at this late hour , when it was initially scheduled for Thursday , which could have enhanced this debate on development cooperation .
Unfortunately , however , this is the way things are .
Commissioner , the experience acquired over the past few decades in the field of development cooperation and the lack of significant results in this field have highlighted the need for a change in the focus of development policies , in order to improve the effectiveness of aid , reduce the chasm between rich and poor countries and thus fulfil the objectives of sustainable development that we have set for ourselves .
There are certainly many and varied factors preventing the poorest countries from being able to board the development train and win the battle to eradicate poverty : external debt , first and foremost , the great shame hanging over developing countries , the fratricidal wars that devastate so many poor countries , the AIDS pandemic , corruption at every level of public life , but this failure can also be explained by the use of foreign models and the fact that development objectives have in the past been set without the participation of those receiving aid .
We should not be surprised , therefore , that the idea of capacity-building as an essential factor in improving the results of development policies has been gaining ground , in particular since the Rio Declaration of 1992 , which recognises the fact that a country 's ability to follow the path of sustainable development is largely determined by the capacity of its people and institutions .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation , which fully agrees with this principle , therefore organised a public hearing a few months ago on capacity-building and then agreed that a report should be drawn up on the subject , for which I was given responsibility as rapporteur .
It should be noted that this report was unanimously approved , since it was unanimous in committee that capacity-building should constitute a fundamental element in development cooperation , essential to ensuring effective aid .
In order better to understand the scope of the proposals contained in the report , I believe it should be specified that , in my eyes , capacity-building is first and foremost a new form of understanding and , above all , implementing development cooperation policy which requires a long-term global strategy that is individually tailored for the various players according to the different environments represented by their society .
This strategy should aim to improve skills and the conditions required for a country to be able to improve its levels of economic and social growth .
All this should take place in support of national efforts to be carried out by each country for itself based on the plan drawn up by each country according to their specific interests and needs along the lines of what is being done , in particular , with strategy documents for each country .
The European Union and its Member States - although not only them , but all international donors - should therefore review their cooperation methods and change the focus of their development policies so that capacity-building , as a participative process based on appropriation , constitutes the basis for the policy , with the aim of enabling individuals , as well as bodies within civil society , to develop their potential and the skills that should allow them to achieve the development objectives that they themselves must also be in a position to determine .
We should provide them with the means - in a word - to play a leading role in their own development , to which they have a right .
In other words , help them to improve their institutional capacities and achieve the level of training that is necessary in order to open the door to development .
We should also help them to diversify and improve production capacity , develop infrastructures and the macroeconomic framework required to attract investment , provide them with technical assistance to increase trade capacity so that they can integrate world trade and thus share in the profits it generates .
A development cooperation policy focused along these lines constitutes the most suitable instrument for progress to be made towards eradicating poverty and achieving fair , sustainable development for all .
That , Commissioner , is why there is a need - I would say an imperative - for a Commission communication in this regard , to instigate action in the field of development aid from the European Union and its Member States and also the various formulas contained in the motion for a resolution on which we are to vote .
For it is only by means of these policies , by providing the necessary means for capacity-building , that we shall be able to put an end to the injustice which means that 20 % of the world 's population enjoys 80 % of the world 's wealth , while 80 % are deprived of the right to live in the dignity that is the inalienable right of each individual .
Mr President , capacity-building in developing countries is one of the new concepts underpinning the current cooperation policy , based on the appropriation of development processes by societies receiving aid .
It is an endogenic process , by means of which a society increases its social capital , through the activities of individuals , organisations and institutions , in order to carry out its duties and set and achieve its objectives in every field .
It is therefore a very broad concept , which has been effectively summarised in the report we are discussing today , for which I would like to congratulate Mrs Ferrer .
However , although capacity-building in the developing countries should affect all aspects of development , it must be based on essential capacities , which , in the opinion of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , are , on the one hand , organising civil society and strengthening democratic institutions , and , on the other , building individual capacity through education .
All this should of course take place through certain minimum development requirements that guarantee the survival of the people .
This means compliance with certain minimum basic health standards .
The organisation of civil society refers to the structure of citizenship and citizen participation in social and decision-making processes .
All this should take place within the context of an endogenic dynamic and external aid , as we have requested of the Commission , should therefore be devoted to strengthening basic organisations , urban and rural citizens ' associations , local NGOs and traditional social institutions , more than to direct aid to the budgets of the countries receiving aid .
This evening the Commissioner has recognised that this report is timely and necessary and that it effectively details the capacity-building that must take place for development .
Strengthening democratic institutions is one of the matters pending cooperation in general and Community cooperation in particular .
Democracy goes far beyond periodic elections and requires the implementation of flexible participation and dialogue mechanisms between citizens and institutions , as well as their democratisation , based on the concepts of good governance , transparency and combating corruption .
Individual capacity-building through education is the ultimate capacity-building system .
The Socialist Group considers education to be a sine qua non condition for development and reducing poverty , as we pointed out in the Community budget .
With this own-initiative report , the European Parliament calls on the Commission to join large aid organisations in including capacity-building among the general elements of its cooperation policy .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Ferrer once again , as well as all the groups who contributed , with their amendments , to ensuring that this report contains guidelines for updating and improving the Community development cooperation policy .
Thank you very much , Mrs Junker .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is report ( A5-0126 / 2003 ) by Mr Van den Berg , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on education and training in the context of poverty reduction in developing countries ( COM ( 2002 ) 116 - C5-0333 / 2002 - 2002 / 2177 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , we feel the Commission Communication is highly relevant and Mr van den Berg 's report adds certain contributions that enrich the original text .
He has shown flexibility by accepting the majority of the amendments tabled , and , on behalf of my parliamentary group , I would like to say that we shall vote for the report .
In fact , many fora and macroconferences have already been held in relation to the need to increase efforts to eradicate poverty , which is undoubtedly the most serious problem we face .
It is something of a coincidence that , with the resources now available , it will not be possible to achieve the objectives set for 2015 .
It is good , however , that , within our limited means , we are focusing our attention on health and education , which are so closely linked and interdependent .
It has been clearly shown that health and education , education and health , are the best policies for development , that they enable millions of human beings to escape poverty .
It is true that some progress is being made , as stated by the rapporteur .
In Africa , for example , 60 % of children today attend school , which means that 40 % are still not attending .
In other words , 45 million children are condemned to illiteracy and poverty , probably for life .
New difficulties have arisen in some countries .
The tragedy of child soldiers means that , in some West African countries , mothers prevent their sons from attending school for fear that they will be kidnapped and not return home , as we have seen recently , last week , in Ivory Coast , in a report by various agencies and other NGOs present on the ground .
The problems of gender segregation are still causing an unsustainable situation in some Asian and Middle Eastern countries .
In Latin America investment in education has dropped alarmingly over the past few years of crisis throughout the region , and this affects ethnic minorities in particular , as the Commissioner has pointed out today , in Brazil , Ecuador , Guatemala , but also in countries such as Argentina , which until now had an excellent education system but is now moving backwards .
By attending school , both boys and girls can and should receive a basic education that contributes to improving health , not just in relation to HIV and the ways in which it is transmitted - as the rapporteur reminds us - which , although it is a serious problem , is no more serious than other problems that could be alleviated more cheaply .
This is the case of food hygiene , to cite just one example .
I feel it is particularly necessary for international financial organisations , the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , to review their criteria and make them more flexible in order to promote free , universal education .
That is now one of the priorities we must address and try to achieve some progress in this specific area .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since I was the draftsman of the opinion of the committee on women 's rights and equal opportunities on this report , I should like first of all to offer my sincere thanks to Mr van den Berg for his excellent work and of course for having adopted portions of our committee 's recommendations .
So what is the situation ?
We have a good report , we have a good rapporteur , we have a highly-motivated Commissioner here among us , and many committed people in the field , overseas aid workers , and educationalists .
Yet there are a number of infuriating aspects , because everything takes so long .
The clock is ticking and yet I see so many organisations in the field that have to beg in order to be able to build schools and pay teachers .
We have a long road ahead of us .
The right to education and access to education are often empty words in developing countries .
That is right : there are still 113 million children who do not attend school and most of them are girls , as Mr van den Berg has already said .
They have to help with the housework , they have to contribute to the daily provision of food for the whole family , they have to look after the infants , they have to sell any leftovers at market and they have to fetch drinking water .
That means that they have no time to devote to themselves .
I can therefore wholeheartedly endorse the conclusions of this report , namely that education is the key to combating poverty .
Only through education can a country develop , only through an adequately educated population can a country progress .
Give a girl or a woman education and you are educating the whole family .
We also all know that equal opportunities for women are not only achieved by changing legislation and social conditions .
No !
It happens through education .
Participation of women in all sectors of society and the achievement of general social , cultural and economic progress begin with reasonable qualitative and quantitative education .
We have already seen this in Europe .
Only when women were given reasonable schooling and access to education did emancipation take off in all sectors of society , including politics .
But it is a long road .
As the rapporteur rightly says in the notes to his report , educated women have more opportunities for improving the economic situation of themselves and their family , and even down to their choice of husband .
The individual personal development of women also offers more protection against exploitation in all its forms , including prostitution , forced or otherwise , and human trafficking , particularly trafficking in women and children .
I have , despite this , three further observations .
The time frame indicated in this report is in my view somewhat unclear .
The financial consequences are not properly set out .
And I therefore hope that the Commission , jointly with the Member States , will set to work in a coordinated way to achieve the objectives contained in the statement of the Commission .
Secondly the problem of AIDS , and finally , in conclusion , education , which as Commissioner Nielson said at the outset , must be adapted to the local culture .
Mr President , tackling the education crisis is one of the most effective means we have at our disposal for breaking the cycle of poverty and achieving the 2015 human development targets .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation and our rapporteur , Mr van den Berg , therefore deserve thanks for a report that demonstrates a thorough knowledge of the subject and genuine concern .
Now it appears that the 2015 target for universal primary education remains a long way off .
That is the single factor which is significantly undermining all the other work that is being done in the world to reduce poverty .
The financing needed is EUR 8 billion per year .
It is a lot , but not impossible , in order that everyone 's right to education , as stated in the UN 's Universal Declaration of Human Rights more than 50 years ago , might come about .
The rapporteur quite rightly mentions that the Commission must participate in the World Bank 's ' Education for all - Fast track ' programme .
Likewise , he warns the EU , and with good reason , not to agree to schooling being included as a service in the WTO 's General Agreement on Trade and Services .
Primary education must be regarded as being independent of free-market rules and productivity criteria .
We must trust in the notion that raising standards of education and the literacy rate is the best thing global trade can hope for .
That is why the G8 countries must also be reminded of their promise to finance the Fast Track Initiative .
My own experience of cooperation development work reinforces my conviction that it is especially necessary to invest in girls ' education .
That is the key to development .
That way we can combat excessive population growth , as an educated woman will have fewer children .
Women 's education is also a way out of the vicious circle , where , for example , many Asian women and girls find themselves : in mortal danger from the womb to the grave , with discrimination starting even before birth and continuing all their life .
Where a girl is a liability and a burden on the family only a determined shift in attitudes and the commencement of education opportunities will ensure there is any change .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking my colleague Mr van den Berg most warmly for his splendid report and , of course , also for his other activities , such as education for all .
As is set out in this report , the proportion of people who are illiterate is depressingly high in many countries , particularly in Africa , where there are few opportunities , especially in sparsely-populated areas .
As it would , in desert or other uninhabited areas , be unrealistic to build a large number of schools near to where people live , we have to take a good look at other solutions to reduce the educational deficit . This is one of the things Mr van den Berg takes up in his report , proposing , for example , the setting-up of mobile schools , which are of particular importance in providing basic education .
In this context too , though , I will come back to the subject of modern information and communication technologies , the use of which enables distances to be overcome , the digital gap to be crossed , and education to become more widespread .
It is certain , though , that in the long term , the most important mass medium is radio , which could - and should - be even more widely used as a means of providing education than it has been so far .
The example of what is done in the Australian outback can certainly not be followed exactly in African countries , but is one from which one can learn , and it too must form part of any strategy for education .
I am glad that I do not have to point out the need to take especial account of girls and women in all educational endeavours .
In this report , at any rate , this has become a generally accepted fact .
It is not , however , generally known that education - particularly basic education - conducted in the predominant regional languages results in a marked increase in the desire for education and reduces parents ' misgivings about sending their children to school .
This is where we must help with the investment in appropriate teaching material , play our part in promoting the education of teachers and contributing to the dissemination of knowledge that relates to local interests and is therefore an indispensable necessity in terms of raising the consciousness of civil society .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to thank you for your Communication and congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work concerning this fundamental issue of education and training in the context of reducing poverty .
This is not the first time Parliament has addressed this matter and I do not think it will be the last , and not only because for many of us - and for me , of course - achieving obligatory , free , high-quality universal education for all is the absolute priority of development cooperation .
I said that we will continue to talk about it because we are far from being able to achieve the objectives set in Dakar within the anticipated timescale , and we must therefore continue to be vigilant so that there are no further delays and , if possible , to ensure that at least the European Union and the Member States turn the commitments they have made into reality , into practical action , and that they decide not just to give the appearance of making education the priority in development , but really make it a priority , if we genuinely want a fairer society , in which each individual has the same choices and opportunities .
In a moment we shall discuss the report for which I am rapporteur , on capacity-building and its key role in improving the effectiveness of development aid .
How , though , can we think of capacity-building if 113 million children have never been to school and 150 million have not completed primary education , as the rapporteur points out in his report ?
For this reason , I can but agree with the measures proposed to give education its rightful place in development cooperation policy and overcome the obstacles that prevent so many boys and girls from having access to education and , with it , the right to a better life .
In conclusion , I would like to ask the rapporteur to accept the amendment I tabled together with Mr Corrie , on behalf of the PPE-DE , requesting recognition for the State 's obligation to guarantee the right to education and the role that the private sector can play in making the universal right to education , which sadly is currently the most violated right , a reality .
Mr President , education is a crucial weapon in the fight against poverty .
This might be common sense , but it is also a choice in terms of development strategies .
It is a question of priorities .
Some people claim that education is an optional extra and that what is really needed is work , even low paid work requiring no qualifications .
I believe that the low cost option tends to create perverse self-perpetuating mechanisms and that education is not an optional extra .
Education and training involve an effort to provide opportunities to all individuals , in order to give the greatest number of people the ability to form part of society and to participate in shaping that society .
The European Union has distinguished itself internationally for its adherence to this approach , both in Europe and with regard to those countries whose development we support .
We therefore welcome the Commission communication , the content of which fully warrants Parliament 's support . We also congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work .
I simply wish to emphasise some points : the importance of the balance between quality and quantity in education , with a decisive commitment to eradicating illiteracy ; the importance of involving local actors in the programmes we support , strengthening the practice of decentralised cooperation ; a commitment to achieving gender balance - the education and vocational training of girls and women not only have a direct impact on the economy , but also in the medium term , on changing minds and even on liberating societies ; the commitment to protecting education , even in times of conflict and following conflicts and the priority to normalise and improve education and training .
I would also add the need for further efforts with regard to training for the purpose of reintegrating ex-combatants .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Commission 's Communication , but above all I would like to congratulate Mr van den Berg on his excellent report , which I believe contains elements and measures that are essential in this task .
Mr President , 65 million girls in the world are deprived of their right to education and we are doing very little to resolve this situation .
The framework presented by the Commission , as stated by Mr van den Berg , contains very few proposals for action that specifically promote education for girls .
This in itself is serious , but it is even more serious if we take into account the fact that babies whose mothers have not had access to education are twice as likely to suffer from malnutrition and die before the age of five than those whose mothers have completed primary education .
Just one or two years of school for the mother reduce the infant death rate by 15 % .
The education of mothers is far more effective in reducing malnutrition than any other measure , including the availability of food .
We know that women are a determining factor in development : better-trained women mean a higher level of development for their societies .
The strategy to combat poverty and , of course , the fight against AIDS can only be successful if specific emphasis is placed on education for girls .
Therefore , and because it is their fundamental right , education must be our priority : high-quality , obligatory , general , public , primary education lasting at least six years .
Education - I repeat - must be our priority .
That is the reason why I shall use my final seconds of speaking time to plead the case , as the rapporteur has done , against including education in the general agreement on trade and services at the next WTO negotiations .
The right of boys and girls to education cannot be subject to market laws .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is oral question ( B5-0092 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the protection of audio-visual performers .
A very good evening to you , Mr President , at this late hour , shortly before midnight , when we few are together .
I would just like to play a question and answer game with you .
Let us talk about an international hit film , a European film that has been a success around the world .
Let us take as our example the film ' Four Weddings and a Funeral ' .
Do you know who wrote the script ?
No ?
Shame on you !
Do you know who composed the music for it ?
That neither !
Do you know who directed it ?
Perhaps someone can remember ?
No , they cannot .
Could you tell me who the film 's backers were , or who its producer was ?
Hmm .
I assume , though , that you have heard of its two stars , Hugh Grant and Andy McDowell .
We could carry on this question-and-answer game for ever and a day , whether with ' Amélie ' or with ' The Pianist ' , it does not matter which .
Both directors and producers know all too well what is valuable to them about their actors - firstly , their talent , and secondly their name - whilst the public have quite personal reasons for their adulation of their celluloid heroes and heroines .
Successes at film festivals , the sought-after jangling of money in box-office tills , good viewer figures - all these things are directly dependent on a performer 's quality as an actor and on his or her popularity with the public .
Let me clarify this by saying that I do not want to be misunderstood as attempting to assess the merits of any one of the creative professions in the film world ; such is not my objective .
Film-making is a collaborative effort in which everyone is important , from the author to the producer .
All are doing their work , and all of them - with the exception of one professional group - are protected internationally .
Authors enjoy the protection of the Berne Convention and of the WIPO copyright treaties .
Producers and players of music are protected internationally by the Rome Convention and the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Treaty .
Even television stations , which are , primarily , more consumers than creators , have their rights guaranteed by the Rome Convention , and these are to be brought up to date by the WIPO treaty on the rights of broadcasting companies , something that is awaited , being urgently necessary , right and important .
Performers in films , though , are still not covered by the Performers and Phonograms Treaty .
Why ?
Since 1996 , negotiations within the WIPO have produced no favourable outcome for the heroes and heroines of the screen , who also got no result from the diplomatic conference in December 2000 ; nor did bilateral meetings between WIPO members achieve the desired objective .
The signatory states are now to meet again , in Geneva , from 18 to 20 June .
Performers in films have been waiting for years for a minimum of protection for their copyrights at an international level .
Whilst the EU has always acknowledged the economic importance of artistic output , we know all too well that what is today the work of an artist will tomorrow be part of our cultural heritage .
Within the EU , performers are protected by national legislation , but in most countries their rights are minimal or non-existent .
The failure to harmonise these rights internationally means that the performers in works originating in the EU are no longer protected , so that their free circulation is curtailed , with adverse effects on the distribution of European works at an international level .
All in all , then , these are hardly good conditions .
You will be familiar with the saying that ' the world is a village ' .
Technological developments over recent years , media convergence and technological developments yet to come mean that this saying is more true than ever before .
Borders are eliminated and obstacles removed , legislators and all interested parties are faced with a plethora of challenges .
One of them is that of providing international protection for the work of performers , in respect of which the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , Media and Sport wishes to send Geneva a political signal .
As it is the Commission that will be representing the EU 's Member States at the WIPO negotiations in June of this year , we would like to put the following questions to you and be given answers to them .
What view does the Commission take of this discrepancy between audiovisual performers and other creative artists ?
Should they not enjoy the same international protection as all their colleagues in the music world ?
Is the Commission able to inform us of the current position in the WIPO negotiations as regards audiovisual performers ?
Thirdly , what actions does the Commission contemplate taking in order to do away with this discrimination against one single professional group ?
Mr President , I would like , first of all , to thank the Commission for its explanations and then also all the members of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , Media and Sport , especially the coordinators , who were able to find a solution to this issue , something that the short time available made a matter of urgency .
In order to clarify my - perhaps somewhat over-simplified - statement to the effect that broadcasting companies were more consumers than creators , I would like to add that this is not a value-judgment , but simply a statement of fact .
They are both consumers and creators , but not exclusively so , and even so they can enjoy protection at international level , which film performers cannot .
On this I agree absolutely with Mrs Hieronymi .
This is a loophole that we should close , and I am glad that the various powers are making a united effort to do this .
When we talk about this international protection for audiovisual performers that we desire , what do we mean by it ?
This is , primarily , about their moral rights .
Imagine that one of your speeches here in plenary were to be used without your authorisation , in a modified form , or perhaps even misused ; as its author , you would be able to defend yourself , but , as a performer , you would have hardly any options , and only rarely the right to do anything about it .
A second aspect , and an important one , is the use of names . It is of immense importance to any creative artist that he should be able to put his name to his work , even if he is a mere cog , a part of the whole .
That is every bit as important to performers , including those outside the European Union .
Now , although one does not perhaps have to worry as much about the likes of Hugh Grant as about the thousands who are less prominent , even national film celebrities sometimes go through bad years , when it just happens that they are not on set for a single day all year .
That may be the luck of the artist and something that one cannot do anything about , but the rent still has to be paid .
What would help them is something to which they do , in fact , have every right - to have a share in the added value of successful productions - whether this be through the practice of buy-outs , through appropriate remuneration , or by way of the options that are open to us in the European Union .
I do think that all the audiovisual performers outside the EU , who do not enjoy these rights , are waiting expectantly for a signal from us .
I am glad that we are fighting this battle side by side , and I wish you good luck , or , to put it in thespian language : break a leg !
May the exercise be a success !
In conclusion of this debate , I have received a motion for a resolution
The next item is the proposal for a Council decision , by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the conclusion of an agreement in the form of a letter between the European Community and the Republic of Croatia on the ecopoint system applicable to Croatian transit traffic through Austria .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Broad economic policy guidelines ( 2003-2005 )
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0142 / 2003 ) by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the Commission Recommendation on the Broad Guidelines of the Economic Policies of the Member States and the Community for 2003-2005 ( COM ( 2003 ) 170 - C5-0189 / 2003 - 2003 / 2074 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , I would like to start by explaining exactly what we are discussing .
We are dealing with the economic guidelines , and in my view , there are three novel aspects to them .
Firstly , they are economic guidelines for three years , not just for one year .
Secondly , they will be discussed alongside the employment guidelines .
Thirdly , we are holding these discussions at a time of recession .
We have learnt this morning that the most powerful economy in the European Union has entered into recession .
These are therefore no ordinary economic guidelines .
Given these circumstances the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and myself in particular , were requested to draft a report promptly to allow the Commission and the Council to study it .
We were asked to try and arrive at the broadest possible consensus .
We have achieved this .
All the groups had to make compromises but we did manage to reach an agreement .
I should like to take this opportunity of highlighting the splendid work of the spokespersons for the various groups .
Othmar Karas spoke on behalf of my group , Robert Goebbels spoke on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists and Carles-Alfred Gasòliba i Böhm spoke on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
I would also like to say to the Commission that whenever Parliament has been invited to respond , the response has invariably been helpful .
As suggested in the Poem of the Cid , a servant will always respond well to a good master .
I urge you to bear this in mind and to involve Parliament in the discussion of these economic guidelines .
Amongst other things , this discussion will serve to put pressure on the Member States lagging furthest behind .
I shall now outline the key points of my report .
Firstly , we want to know whether the current coordination mechanisms are adequate , or whether further measures are needed .
We understand that the Treaty states that national policies , supply policies and short-term policies are policies of common interest and should be coordinated .
We are now three years behind with the implementation of the Lisbon strategy .
Whenever the Commissioner appears before us , he states that the delay is due to lack of application and due diligence on the part of the Member States We wish to do more than simply wring our hands .
We would like to suggest appropriate action to remedy these failures concerning implementation .
We have two proposals in this regard .
We would ask the Commission once and for all to draw up a list detailing the rigidities hindering implementation of the internal market and structural change .
This list should also detail priorities , measures required and the calendar for meeting the Lisbon objectives by 2010 .
Assuming that lack of due diligence on the part of the Member States is the reason for this delay , we call upon the Commission to explain to us what it could do to remedy the situation .
Once upon a time there was a Spanish constitution stating that Spaniards should be fair and charitable .
Unfortunately this constitution did not contain any provisions detailing how such a transformation was to be achieved .
Subsequently , Spain endured three civil wars during the nineteenth century .
We call for coordination to guarantee that all economic policies are going in the same direction .
That is what coordination is about .
Secondly , I would like to stress that I believe wholeheartedly in maintaining balanced budgetary positions .
There is no need to change things that are working well just because other things are not .
Monetary policy has worked well during this period .
This policy is aimed at achieving price stability .
It is managed through an independent bank and a Stability Pact that has maintained only a certain degree of discipline in the Member States .
I stress that there has only been a certain degree of discipline .
Some States have gone significantly astray .
I would therefore like to reiterate my conviction that budgetary balance must remain the objective .
As the Commission stated , those extravagant countries will have to reduce their structural deficit by half a percent of GDP .
Thirdly , convergence programs should be assessed differently , as the Commission itself highlighted .
The Commission has to verify that budgets are balanced .
It also has to check carefully to ensure Member States do not exceed the 3 % limit .
In future , the Commission ought to take account of each Member State 's starting point .
It ought to take account of each country 's debt and of how it plans to use resources obtained .
It ought also to take account of the country 's anticipated future commitments .
Take the case of a country which is not in debt , which plans to allocate money to public finances , notably to measures promoting the Lisbon strategy , and which does not have significant commitments for the future .
The case of a country where these circumstances do not apply is entirely different .
We call upon the Commission to ensure that Member States build up a budgetary reserve when times are good , or , to use a Biblical image , when the cows are fat .
Such a reserve could be drawn on in bad times .
We stress that countries should also reduce taxes whenever possible .
In particular , we advocate a reduction in taxes increasing labour costs , as this would stimulate employment .
Countries that cannot afford to reduce taxes should introduce supplementary measures .
They should reduce public spending or increase income in other ways .
It is impossible to maintain a balanced budget and reduce taxes at the same time .
You cannot have your cake and eat it .
As regards the policy on wages , we advocate keeping wages in line with the Retail Price Index .
We believe actual wages should be in line with productivity .
We advocate increasing labour mobility .
In addition , we call on the Commission to speed up work on eliminating the fiscal barriers hindering the transfer of employment pensions .
We further call on the Commission to establish an appropriate fiscal policy to complement the agreement reached on pensions .
We appeal for social dialogue .
Allow me to reiterate that we would like to see fiscal incentives for employment .
We call for a reduction of the burdens that make employers unwilling to take on staff , especially those on the lowest wages .
With regard to policies on investment , we are aware it has frequently been said we are lagging behind the United States because of lack of investment , especially in technology .
We are also aware that we are more or less on a par with the United States in terms of public investment .
Under investment occurs in the private sector .
We therefore call for a benchmarking exercise to pinpoint the various needs , inadequacies and shortcomings of those companies .
This is particularly relevant if small and medium-sized companies , with less than nine employees , are to access new technologies .
Resources can only be allocated efficiently if the full picture is clear .
We just need to know how things stand .
We would like the Commission to report on this promptly .
After all , to paraphrase a Spanish poet , there is no such thing as a favourable wind for a sailor who has not yet set his course .
All we are requesting is a report to identify inadequacies and deficiencies in SMEs .
It would then be possible to establish how best to proceed .
I would like to end by thanking all the groups and their spokespersons for their efforts .
Once again , the Commission can be assured that Parliament is ready , willing and able to help overcome the difficult situation we find ourselves in .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Garcia-Margallo , ladies and gentlemen , let me say right from the start that the Commission has always had , and will continue to have , our group 's support for anything that helps to generate more economic dynamism and anything that furthers the implementation of the common objectives and decisions .
There is , however , one point to which allusion has already been made and which it is important to underline from the outset .
We have an internal market concept , we have the Lisbon and Gothenburg strategies , we have European competition policy , we have the Financial Services Action Plan and the Risk Capital Action Plan , we have Article 2 , which obliges Member States to pursue a course of economic policy coordination , we have the Stability and Growth Pact , we have the euro , we have EU enlargement and hence the expansion of the internal market into a home market , and we have the eco-social market economy as our model of economic governance , which means competitiveness within a free market , promoting social cohesion while being mindful of its responsibility towards nature and people .
Should not all this be enough to put us in a better position than we are in ?
Why do we need new economic policy guidelines ?
We need them because we have no European employment policy , because we have no European economic policy , and because the task of implementing all the various decisions that we jointly adopt is therefore primarily a matter for the Member States and because many Member States fail to do their homework .
Half-heartedness , superficiality , a lack of courage , and complacency , indeed , insincerity about many of the key issues on the Community 's agenda shape the picture .
There is a lack of ambition and a lack of political will .
Let me say this here today : new economic policy guidelines are no substitute for political will , for the willingness to act instead of apportioning blame , and for greater commitment and a willingness to accept responsibility for all these issues .
We need more European thinking instead of wrong-headed national egotism .
There can therefore be only one message sent out from here today , and it is this : we need a benchmark .
Who is the best , the most creative , the fastest , the most successful in implementing common decisions ?
It is results that matter , not guidelines or a succession of summits .
It is the successes , not the means of achieving them , that matter , and we must therefore do our utmost to implement what we have agreed .
We need fresh impetus , new and courageous efforts , more own capital , more risk capital , and a climate that favours business start-ups .
We must strengthen the internal market and remove distortions of competition .
We must introduce majority voting on matters relating to taxation and harmonise all business taxes in Europe .
We need more competitiveness , more research , more competition in education and research , and more competition on merits .
If we finally do what we all pledge to do at all the summit meetings , Europe will not only be the world 's number one in terms of its population and area , but also in terms of competitiveness and employment .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , Mr García Margallo 's report , which I consider to be an important contribution to the development of effective coordination of the Union 's economic and social policies , starkly exposes the shortcomings which have characterised the drawing up of the broad economic and social policy guidelines in recent years .
On the one hand , there has for too long been no attempt to establish a proactive policy that can combat the trends towards stagnation and recession which are still raging through many of the Union 's economies . On the other hand , to say the least , the principle of streamlining and coordinating employment policies through the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines has been belatedly recognised .
Moreover , the goal of achieving the strategy laid down in Lisbon in 2000 and the related structural reforms by 2010 has been included in what seems as yet to be a rather ill-defined fashion .
We must not underestimate the progress made , but it must be stressed that we now need to overcome the delays and ambiguities , providing for effective coordination of Member States ' economic , employment and environment policies by establishing a proper calendar setting out the intermediate steps for achieving the Lisbon and Gothenburg objectives by 2010 , particularly with regard to public investment in the research , education and lifelong training sectors and a European network of essential services , starting with transport and telecommunications .
Moreover , we also need to set up an institutional coordinating structure in the euro area so that - as stated in Mr García Margallo 's report - the euro area has a single representative in all the international economic and financial institutions .
Lastly , we need , for the euro area too , to define the phases of an economic , social and environment policy which is also compatible with the Lisbon strategy and with flexible management of the Stability and Growth Pact .
As of 2004 , these measures should become the core of the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines and the new goals for enhancing flexible management of the Stability and Growth Pact .
In this regard , I would stress that we need to avoid general formulae and great ambiguity : not all economic policies can both satisfy the Lisbon and Gothenburg criteria and respect the constraints of the Stability and Growth Pact in terms of public deficit and government debt , even in the event that the Pact is managed more flexibly , as proposed by the Commission - whose efforts we appreciate - particularly in this current phase of virtual stagnation .
In other words , the Commission cannot ignore the fact that a discrepancy of 3 % with regard to the minimum objective of 60 % of government debt is due to an increase in current expenditure , or maybe to tax cuts across the board , or to a policy of boosting public and private investment - for example , in research , in training , in retraining workers of retirement age who wish to continue working - especially considering that such investment is recognised , formally recognised , by the Commission itself as an objective of common interest .
The same priorities should be pursued , as Commissioner Solbes said , in periods of growth too , when the conditions are created for greater compatibility between the broad economic and employment policy guidelines and the parameters of the Stability Pact , which is also - and the Central Bank itself must not forget this - a Pact which should seek to increase income and employment and , after Lisbon , to bring about full employment and social cohesion .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports Mr García-Margallo y Marfil 's report .
We believe it rightly emphasises the importance of providing a more appropriate framework to ensure that the objectives set in the various stability pacts and the main broad guidelines of economic policy are attained .
The stability and credibility of the Union 's economy and its single currency are at stake .
Over the last few days we have become very much aware of social unrest resulting from essential proposals to reform pensions systems .
Reform is needed to guarantee pensions and associated benefits .
These are integral parts of the welfare state system characteristic of the European Union .
The Union provides and guarantees the best social protection and the greatest social balance when compared to other large economies .
If it is to preserve that balance , the European Union must make a more determined effort to take the action many have called for in recent times .
During the preparations for the Spring European Council in Brussels under the current Greek Presidency , we highlighted two shortcomings .
The first was failure to attain the Lisbon objectives .
The second concerned the need to tackle a number of outstanding structural reforms mentioned in Mr García-Margallo y Marfil 's report .
Action on these is certainly needed .
I should like to reiterate the importance of this area .
It encompasses a number of unresolved key issues which are therefore still holding back economies and their development at European level .
Liberalisation of some sectors is one area where action is outstanding .
Another is failure to adopt technological innovation .
Research and development is not being promoted adequately either .
Further , as Mr García-Margallo y Marfil pointed out , it has now become urgent to give priority to SMEs , especially to those with the most potential for growth and innovation .
It is well known that large corporations tend to shed jobs when times are hard .
This is happening at the moment .
It is actually the SMEs that create more employment and stimulate economic recovery .
I would emphasise once again that such recovery must take place within a strict framework and budgetary balance .
It is also essential to attain the objectives set in the stability pacts .
These are an integral part of the framework on which the European Union and the euro are based and from which they will develop .
We cannot afford to restrict or weaken it .
Mr President , I am the rapporteur for the report on the Guidelines of the Economic Policies of the Member States .
The idea was for us also to have voted on that report today .
For the first time , we would have seen economic and employment policy guidelines coordinated in terms of time , but that was unfortunately not to be the case .
As rapporteur , I pulled out all the stops so that we should be ready in time , but to no avail .
It means that this report will not be presented until the June part-session , and by then it will be too late .
It means that the Council will decide on the guidelines on the same day that we vote in Parliament , and the Council will not therefore be able to take account of our points of view .
That is serious because it means that the important balance between the two processes will go to pot .
Instead , the economic perspective will totally dominate .
It is a shift we also see elsewhere in political life .
It bodes well neither for the Lisbon process nor for the social Europe in which so many Europeans have placed their hopes and confidence .
The EU now finds itself in a difficult economic situation , with weak demand , low levels of investment and growing unemployment in ever more Member States .
What was of course needed was a clear overhaul of the economic guidelines , but the Commission continues , unfortunately , to support the Stability and Growth Pact and budget discipline and to believe in the possibility of saving our way out of the crisis .
If , through having a common currency , it is not permitted to increase state expenditure and there is no possibility of regulation by means of flexible exchange rates , only the labour market remains .
The measures proposed by the Commission are therefore concerned not so much with economics as with the labour market .
It is a question first and foremost of reducing labour costs and the attendant social costs , but that leads to a reduction in domestic demand , which is incredibly important .
That , of course , is what needs to be increased if we are not to enter a vicious circle .
The Stability and Growth Pact was duly created in order to keep inflation under control during a period of growth when there was a perhaps justified anxiety about inflation .
Today , the situation is different .
Now , the same Pact is instead giving rise to deflation and growing unemployment .
The policy of economic and monetary union binds all the eurozone countries to a common fate and to a policy of cut-backs leading to a type of collective decline .
' United we stand and united we fall ' , the refrain might go .
It means , on the other hand , that those countries are well placed that are able to say no to the euro and to remain outside the policy of economic and monetary union .
My own country , Sweden , is to hold a referendum on EMU in September , and , with each month that goes by , opposition to the euro is growing , both among the general public and among economic and political experts .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left believe it would be infinitely better to continue with the Lisbon policy and to pin our faith in investment in skills , knowledge and innovation .
Ideally , we need comprehensive public investment programmes strategically designed so as to strengthen demand both for products and services from the private market and for training , research and other such things that increase knowledge .
That is the way forward , and if the actors in the market do not themselves succeed in meeting these requirements , it is we politicians who must create the conditions that induce companies to dare to think in the long term .
It is impossible to save our way out of the crisis .
Mr President , rapporteurs , today it was the intention to have a joint debate on both the global economic guidelines and the employment guidelines .
The rapporteur for these employment guidelines of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs stated a moment ago that we have a problem .
Not only are we trying to simplify the guidelines , not only are we here to talk about a three-year period , but we are also trying , as they say , to ' streamline ' them .
We have not managed to do this .
This is very unfortunate since the broad and global economic guidelines in the text to a large extent refer to the employment guidelines which are yet to be discussed in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The problems are patently clear , and in the light of these problems - some people in the Netherlands say that every disadvantage has its advantage - in the light of these circumstances , we have held emergency talks with the Council and the Commission in order to alleviate this problem we have , namely the inability to submit our opinion on the employment guidelines on time .
The Council has promised that , in the next few years , the consultation period will be longer , and the Commission has also promised that it will submit its proposals more quickly . Both have pledged this in writing .
Having said this , there is still a problem in my view .
As Mr Schmid has already pointed out , we are unable to commit to deadlines in certain areas .
This means that we need to inform both the Commission and the Council of the opinions of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in a more informal manner as and when we can and , at a later stage , of the opinions of the plenary too .
I would mention the fact that , since there were 167 amendments to the employment guidelines , some restraint is called for .
I should like to make a few comments on the broad economic guidelines and particularly those employment guidelines .
As some speakers have mentioned already , we are at the moment talking about both long-term policy - which could be referred to as the Lisbon policy , 2010 - and short term policy , and , in the short term , we are facing a recession , as we were reminded a moment ago .
During a recession such as this , there is no longer a labour shortage , but rather a job shortage .
This means that employment guidelines should be more dynamic in the short term and should also be more country-specific in a number of ways .
This job shortage also translates into a shortage of work placement and work experience places .
Neither does it offer any incentives to solve the poverty problems .
Reintegration is said to be adversely affected and the concept of availability comes under pressure .
Financial incentives that are being mentioned here are more limited and will not immediately have the desired effect on the poverty trap and the promotion of jobs .
In fact , what we need to do in the short term is to consider job sharing again .
Issues that are very much on the agenda and which I should like to emphasise are working shorter hours , options to cut down the number of hours , the reduction of overtime , which is currently growing rapidly , and possibly promoting subsidised work and social economy or the third sector .
Alongside this , entrepreneurship should be stimulated .
In our committee , a number of proposals have already been expressed in the form of compromise proposals in order to stimulate the small and medium-size businesses , and they strongly emphasise the fact that the pillar of equality has taken a knock .
We should like to maintain this equality .
This does mean , however , as the Belgian Employment Minister has already pointed out , that certain target groups , such as the elderly , should perhaps be pleased with the fact that they can enjoy their early retirement at the moment .
This is the subject of political debate .
We will bring our proposals to the next meetings and we will take it from there .
Mr President , it was one year ago yesterday that we held a debate on the global economic policy guidelines in this plenary .
During this debate , I made some critical remarks about the economic policy guidelines .
I indicated that the promises were very rarely kept .
To my chagrin , I have to say that little has been done with this criticism since .
It is therefore logical that the same criticism should now also apply to the report by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil .
Last year , we already saw a decline in economic growth .
We now have to conclude that , despite fine policy intentions , recovery is still not on the cards .
It appears that , with the policy guidelines , which form an open coordination method , we in the European Union are unable to cope with an impending recession .
In addition , the objectives of the Lisbon process do not appear achievable with the current instruments .
In short , the transposition of the policy intentions under implementation and the implementation of the guidelines leave something to be desired .
Meanwhile , I have gleaned from various sources that an open coordination method does not work .
In practice , this method is apparently too non-committal and is also not very well-defined .
Consequently , cooperation by means of the open coordination method is not sufficiently binding upon the Member States .
It would therefore be useful if it were made clear in what way the Member States can work together in the field of employment and social policy , obviously thereby taking into consideration the Member States ' responsibilities .
I should like to put a question to the European Commission , and specifically Commissioner Solbes , in this connection .
Can you indicate whether , and if so when , you will be tabling proposals in order to improve cooperation within the framework of the Lisbon process ?
In this respect , do you deem it possible to come up with a clear definition of the open coordination method in the short term ?
A few years ago at the Stockholm Summit , it was decided to aim for integration of environmental policy and social policy into the economic policy guidelines .
This was with the intention to establish a sustainable and social market economy in the European Union .
At present , economic prospects are uncertain , which has an impact on the creation of a sustainable and social market economy .
I should therefore like to bring two important points to your attention .
First of all , social policy .
In the debate on social policy , the European model is compared to the American model .
The European model is based on solidarity , while the American model is not .
The question is now to what extent this solidarity is still reflected in the policy which the Union is wishing to adopt .
Secondly , I should like to draw your attention to the need for integrating environmental policy into economic policy .
In my view , there is too little attention paid to the environmental aspects of economic policy .
It seems that the integration of economic and social policy is more obvious than integrating environmental policy into economic policy .
Might the reason lie in the fact that environmental policy costs money initially and does not lead to profits that are readily measurable ?
I would therefore welcome , alongside references to the importance of the environment , clear and concrete environmental objectives to be included in the economic policy guidelines .
Objectives with regard to energy consumption and CO2 emission reductions spring to mind in this respect .
Economic growth will need to go hand in hand with a responsible use of natural resources .
Moreover , I consider taking active government measures aimed at increasing birth rates in Europe in a bid to keep pension schemes affordable extremely debatable .
Since both the report by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and this debate are critical about the global guidelines , it is time that the European Commission took these comments to heart .
We , as the European Parliament , will need to ensure that economic policy is implemented in a consistent manner .
The Commission must be pro-active and must inform Parliament in good time about the results achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , when introducing this report on the BEPGs , the rapporteur declared himself to be satisfied with the broad , almost unanimous consensus achieved within the Commission , and , I imagine , within Parliament .
I can see why , but I believe that there lies the limit of our work and , ultimately , also one of the limitations of the BEPGs as such .
It is easy to support the Lisbon objectives - who would not agree on these objectives - but what is difficult is to agree on the instruments .
If you were members of a national parliament , Mr President , Mr Trentin , it would ultimately be a hard task to achieve consensus on the choices to be made and the positions to be adopted .
I believe that this - but we know that now , it is an intrinsic problem - is the limitation of these major guidelines and the open coordination policies , particularly because I feel we need to have the courage to go further on some issues , making decisions rather than seeking the lowest common denominator of different positions held within Parliament and by the different Member States , and getting to the heart of the issues .
I want to mention three points , which I feel receive insufficient emphasis in both the BEPGs and the report .
The first is pension provision .
Let this be understood - and we must shout it out loud and clear - there are going to be generations of poor pensioners in Europe and we are not doing anything about it because we do not want , we are not strong enough or courageous enough to impose certain choices on those who stand to benefit from pension systems not changing in due time .
We have systems which are financially unsustainable , whose treatment of the younger and future generations is wicked , and yet we cannot muster the political will to change the situation .
The issue would cause a heated debate even in Parliament .
We have witnessed the strike in Austria , we have witnessed the strike in France and there will soon be a strike in Italy .
The status quo lobby upholding the interests of those seeking to prevent any changes in the field of pensions is powerful and active .
I believe that the European Parliament 's documents and statements too must call strongly for protection of the interests of all , especially the youngest citizens .
In his report , which is , moreover , valuable , Mr García-Margallo calls for social dialogue .
I believe that , where an issue such as pensions is concerned , what is needed is not dialogue but a social debate instead and , where necessary , a political debate too .
The pensions dialogue with the people filling the squares in Vienna , Paris or Rome , where the people 's fear is exploited with demagogic proposals when they know full well that something needs to be done , is a sterile dialogue , a dialogue that can lead nowhere .
Another point : immigration .
Although I can think of an amendment which I hope will not be supported by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I hope that the reference will be retained in the report to the important role played by immigrants and immigration in increasing the dynamism and flexibility of the European economy at precisely the time when , with enlargement , some of the larger countries are calling for the introduction of the free movement of workers to be postponed until 2011 .
The free movement of workers will contribute greatly to the dynamism of the European economy and the reference must be preserved .
I will end with one last point , Mr President : the Lisbon goals , making the European economy the most competitive knowledge-based economy .
We must ask ourselves how that will be possible in countries such as the European countries which reject the cutting-edge technology of GMOs and stem cells .
Mr President , I fully agree with the previous speaker , Mr Della Vedova , that the greatest challenge to economic sustainability is the growth in Europe 's ageing population , which is a problem we must tackle while its economic impact is still controllable .
The status quo is not really an option for European governments .
In order to prepare for the overall as well as the budgetary effects of ageing populations we have to increase employment , reduce public debt and reform pensions and health care systems .
The additional costs that would result from postponing the pension system reforms will in the future be taken out of the pockets of today 's youth .
Change , even change that is necessary and inevitable , always meets with resistance , which is what we have also experienced this week in Strasbourg .
This resistance to change , however , cannot be allowed to become a pretext for delaying necessary reforms or a barrier to them .
Europe 's economic situation is worrying and our economic growth is clearly poorer than what was forecast .
Avoidance of geopolitical risks now gives us some hope of faster economic growth , but numerous experts are also pointing out that in forecasts made in the last two years faster economic growth has always been put off until the following six-month period .
Our poor economic growth is largely home-made : ' made in Europe ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , sluggish growth , falling productivity , a decrease in external demand , a decline in business and consumer confidence , and the continued rise in unemployment are facts of life this year .
The only positive factor is the low rate of inflation , which has averaged around 2 % and will possibly fall even further .
At their summit meetings the heads of our Member States have promised to implement structural reforms allowing growth and stability .
The extent to which this has been done in practical terms , however , has been inadequate , and poor economic growth and mass unemployment are the price we pay for putting off these reforms .
If we want the broad guidelines of economic policies to have a successful outcome they should incorporate a clear work programme which defines the main areas of action for reform and a timetable for completion .
In addition , the guidelines should list the special actions which are needed in those areas where internal political ' stalemate ' has obstructed progress in certain Member States .
The EU is still characterised by its under-utilisation of human resources .
Our employment rate , which is low when viewed in the international context , is also due to the misconceived incentives embedded in our benefit systems , which are conducive to withdrawal from the labour market or remaining outside it .
Tax and benefit systems should be reformed , for example , by reducing excessively high rates of tax for those on low incomes .
Tax reductions , however , should be made for everyone in paid employment .
More flexible arrangements for working time and less stringent regulatory systems would enhance participation in the labour market and improve employment opportunities .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , one might be surprised at the way in which the first few recitals of this report have been interpreted but , in the final analysis , this merely shows that everyone agrees with the evidence : the disastrous situation facing the European economy , specifically slow growth , the loss of confidence amongst investors and consumers and the increase in unemployment , to which I would add the unsustainable levels of income inequality , poverty and social exclusion .
This situation requires a new approach to drafting economic policy decisions in order to achieve the aims of high growth , full employment , sustainable development and greater social cohesion .
The only problem is that , when confronted with the evidence , the answer is unfortunately always the same : speed up the process of liberalisations and structural reforms , as recommended in the Lisbon strategy - an approach that the employers ' representatives welcome so wholeheartedly - wage moderation and sticking to labour flexibility and job instability .
Let us be clear about this : the rapporteur 's amendments accept and support the guidelines proposed by the Commission .
The rapporteur himself acknowledges that these guidelines are a repetition of previous recommendations , but what is being called a new approach is only ' more of the same ' , with even greater intensity when what is crucial is to find a new direction .
We would need to propose a total change to the liberal shift of the EU 's economic and social guidelines .
We must also ask ourselves about the causes of this situation and the answer to this question can be found in the policies that have been pursued to date .
One only has to look at the current situation to see that making the labour market more precarious , eroding workers ' rights and moderating wages are not going to increase productivity , combat poverty or respond to demand that is falling , both internally and externally .
The link between the economies of the Member States and the reduction in purchasing power is well known , as is the need to invest in education and training and in research and technology in order to facilitate higher productivity .
As has already been stated here on several occasions , however , we need to do the opposite of what the stupid rules of the Stability Pact call for , which is forcing a reduction in public investment , leading to the State having no responsibility in the fields of health and education and making it difficult to use the Structural Funds correctly in the countries with the weakest economies .
Similarly , economic and social cohesion requires a bigger Community budget , not the smallest budget to be proposed in recent years , which is what the Commission has just presented for 2004 , accounting for less than 1 % of Community gross national income .
Similarly , liberalisations and privatisations are calling into question public service and its quality , as demonstrated by recent workers ' protests throughout Europe .
The most shocking aspect of this report , therefore , which closely follows the Commission 's recommendations for this year 's economic guidelines , is the argument it makes for its increasingly neoliberal measures despite the serious consequences they are having .
The Commission makes its aim clear , by expressing the view that wage increases must remain moderate , with the aim of allowing profit margins to be re-established .
The focus of the Commission 's policies is always profit and not people and this is why it is so insistent in calling for a flexible , mobile and cheap labour force , without rights , which can be used whenever , wherever and however employers wish , thereby supporting job instability over employment , and demonstrating total disregard for working people .
I reiterate : this cannot be the way forward .
The European Union must be a project for people and not only to increase the profit of a few and the workers should be given greater respect .
Treating workers with dignity is a crucial step in increasing labour productivity .
Madam President , colleagues , ladies and gentlemen , we are here today to discuss the broad economic policy guidelines of the Member States and the European Union , and I would therefore like to start by making one thing very clear .
I reject any coordination of Member States ' economic policies by the European Union .
The Member States must continue to be responsible for coordination .
The method whereby , in all areas where the European Union has no competence , conditions are stipulated in the framework of open coordination and guidelines , is fundamentally wrong and moves Europe in the wrong direction .
The responsibility for economic policy in Europe must remain with the individual Member States .
What we need in Europe is competition between locations , which can be stimulated by the Member States ' different economic policies and which in turn strengthens Europe as a location for business and investment and fosters positive development in this area .
In my view , economic policy coordination can take place , at best , where the bases for competition are strengthened and also , of course , wherever this common coordination aims to guarantee currency stability .
It follows from this - if we emphasise the Member States ' responsibility in this area - that the Member States also have a specific responsibility for taking the action now required .
To put it another way , the economic problems which we currently face in Europe 's economy are largely the economic problems of large Member States , namely France , Italy and Germany .
What we must do is clearly underline that these are not cyclical problems but structural problems .
The key question for these countries is this : will they manage to summon the strength to undertake reforms ?
These future reforms cannot simply mean tinkering with the system .
No , the key question is this : will they summon the strength to overhaul the systems per se in these countries ?
When I say ' overhaul the systems ' , I mean the areas which exacerbate the structural problems .
I mean the high labour costs , the high taxes , the costly healthcare systems , the inflexible labour markets , the obstructive trade unions , and the soaring costs of pensions .
These are the areas where there are structural problems , and these are the areas which must be tackled .
I believe that by undertaking structural reforms in the major areas of social spending as well as in the pensions sector , we will also remove the budget risks which in turn have an impact on the debt situation in the various countries .
This is a crucial point , also in the context of the Stability and Growth Pact .
What we need in these countries is a common-sense majority to ensure that the Stability and Growth Pact is not undermined even more than it is at present .
Madam President , Mr García Margallo has drafted his report in the tradition of the Lisbon approach .
It is a balanced report which , more so than the guidelines themselves , is seeking to strike a balance between financial-economic and social and employment-directed policy .
Like others , I think it is unfortunate that we were unable to discuss Mr Schmid 's report on the employment guidelines today , for it is precisely this integrated approach that is of great importance .
Something which I would particularly like to address is the report 's plea to set up a structural reforms action plan .
Like others , including the Commissioner , I am critical about setting up yet another plan .
I do think that the underlying analysis is right , namely that so little comes of the recommendations from previous global guidelines and of the Lisbon agenda because the Member States do not actually implement those recommendations and because the Commission does not have any actual power of enforcement in these matters .
I share this view .
Very often , many fine words are spoken and nothing is done about them .
Furthermore , the same government leaders who agree on this are , in Brussels , often those who are reluctant to actually implement the attendant legislation .
What I would welcome is for the plan for a task force , which was set up during the previous European Summit and which mainly aims to implement policy , to be coupled to this idea of structural reforms .
I think that this idea fits in very well with what must be done by this task force under the leadership of Wim Kok , namely to draw the attention of the Member States to the need for implementing the strategy .
In my view , the economic rigidities which Mr Margallo mentioned are precisely those things that fall within this scope of financial-economic and social and employment policy .
I should like to mention a few points .
Flexible employment patterns with certainties for workers ; increase in labour productivity with a better quality of work ; less rigid working and opening times , but also workers ' having more say about their hours ; intensification of the knowledge potential , but lifelong learning for all , and all age categories ; greater labour mobility , but with continuity of accrued rights ; and the list goes on .
In all those structural reforms , it is important to strike this balance and to create a basis for improvements rather than to call for protest .
I think that the urgency is clear , that the direction is also clear if viewed in this context and that it is essential that those paper recommendations should be translated into real policy .
Moreover , I hope that this task force can play an important part in this .
Madam President , the report states that the EU is at present in a difficult situation , with sluggish growth , falling profits , lower external demand , reduced confidence among companies and consumers and increased unemployment .
Indeed , it is a genuinely disastrous situation , but the question is : what is it due to ?
I agree with the rapporteur that a new approach to economic policy is required , but what new approach ?
Neither the Commission nor the rapporteur seems to have a proper answer to that question .
Might it have to do with the fact that the very starting point for the analysis has no basis in reality ?
The report says that economic development is poor in the EU .
On average , that is of course no doubt the case , but the fact remains that , beneath that average , the reality varies incredibly from one EU country to another .
We are all aware that the situation in Germany is incredibly serious . At the same time , it is by no means as bad in the three EU countries that have chosen to remain outside the eurozone : Great Britain , Denmark and Sweden .
In these countries , inflation and unemployment are lower than in the eurozone , and growth is higher .
In 2002 , growth in the eurozone was 0.9 % compared with 1.8 % in the three EU countries not participating in economic and monetary union .
In Scandinavia , growth is highest in Denmark , the only country which , in a special referendum , said no to EMU .
The German financial newspaper , Handelsblatt , also stated the other day that one of the main causes of the German crisis is the exorbitant rate for the euro that makes German exports more expensive .
In Sweden , we do not have this type of problem because , fortunately , we still have our own currency , the rate for which varies in relation to other currencies and is thus continually adjusted to the actual situation in the Swedish economy .
Another problem for Germany is that , in a depression , it cannot , independently and on the basis of its own needs , decide how large a budget deficit it is to permit for the time being in accordance with normal principles of economic policy .
When , as now , it is permitting an increased budget deficit to avoid a total economic disaster , the EU instead threatens to impose a fine upon the country .
All this shows that the attempt , via EMU and the euro , to conduct a centrally managed economic policy in 15 different countries has been a failure .
The report does not , however , touch upon this .
There is the feeling that EMU and the euro have become holy cows that cannot be criticised at all within the EU .
When all the facts conspire to indicate that the EU countries should be permitted a greater measure of democratic self-determination , the rapporteur nonetheless chooses to emphasise dogmatically that the Member States are responsible for coordinating economic policy .
We now know that a centrally directed bureaucratic economic policy within the EU is a disaster .
There are many tasks to which the EU can profitably devote itself , for example those of contributing to peaceful conflict resolution and counteracting cross-border threats to the environment .
The experiment involving a compulsory , uniform and standardised economic policy for all the EU countries has proved a failure .
This is something I hope the Swedish electorate will remember when , on 14 September , it votes on whether or not Sweden is to exchange the krona for the euro .
Madam President , the euro 's strength at present is supposed to be an indication that the European economy is in quite a healthy state .
We all know that this is actually not the case .
In reality , things are not looking good for us .
In recent decades , we have lived beyond our means .
The fact is that our social , pensions and healthcare systems are no longer affordable .
The result is that those who are willing and able to contribute find themselves burdened with levies and taxes which they can no longer afford .
If we want to solve the problems , we must ease the burden on our contributors , which also means cutting taxes .
Europe must distribute the burdens more fairly .
As well as cutting taxes , we must also create employment conditions which once again enable businesses to create jobs so that working becomes a worthwhile option again .
Work must become a worthwhile option in Europe once more .
This is the only way to ensure that we can tackle our economic problems effectively in future .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have heard a great many noble objectives being expressed in today 's debate .
We have heard about full employment and social security , and there is undoubtedly a broad consensus here in this House .
The only question is : how do we achieve it ?
The EU is responsible for competition , the internal market , the euro , for areas where there are common objectives and a common need for action , and I think that is the right approach .
However , I am a fervent opponent of the plan to coordinate economic policies at European level in future .
In fact , I would be happy if the things that do fall within European competence actually worked out in practice , which brings me to two points .
Here we are today , with yet another debate about the Lisbon strategy ; my astonishment mounts from day to day whenever the Commission talks about this strategy and claims that it is continuing to pursue this objective .
Perhaps in many years ' time , we will talk about how Europe had a dream .
We should look at ourselves self-critically for once and ask how on earth we are ever to achieve this goal .
I would like to focus on two points here , and I am particularly interested in tangible action .
Firstly , I expect the Commission , in future , to identify exactly where the homework needs to be done at national level .
In other words , it must put its finger on the weak spots , and do so promptly .
This issue has already been addressed on numerous occasions .
The second point that I see as being very important is that the Commission should not undermine its own actions in future .
We have Commissioner Monti who is responsible for competition , we have Commissioner Bolkestein who deals with the internal market , we have Commissioner Liikanen who is responsible for business and who says what form it must take in Europe , we have Commissioner de Palacio , and we have Commissioner Solbes , who regularly tells us which structural reforms are needed in Europe and the Member States , and I support that , I am not criticising .
However , where I do criticise these Commissioners and what annoys me is when the Commission itself produces proposals which conflict with this Lisbon objective , which conflict with the aim of deregulating the labour market .
I am thinking , for example , of the directive on precontractual employment relationships and the form that they will have to take in future and also the discrimination which will occur if an entrepreneur - even if he has not yet signed a contract - fails to keep his eye on the ball and ends up being sued because the Commission did not think to build in a reversal of the burden of proof here .
I have written to these Commissioners .
Mr Solbes , you have answered on behalf of the Commission .
Unfortunately , your answer was not specific enough .
What I want from the Commission is a shift away from the principle that each Commissioner conducts the affairs of his or her department independently along the lines of ' I 'll do my thing and you do yours ' .
Please stop the Commission from producing any more directives like this , which , in practice , conflict with the objectives that you yourselves have set for the Member States .
This brings me to my second point , namely the Stability and Growth Pact .
On the one hand , I would like to thank you , for at a time when criticism of this issue is being voiced in the Commission , you have kept the flag flying and ultimately campaigned resolutely for the Stability and Growth Pact .
However , here too , I expect you to put your finger on the weak spots clearly and promptly in future .
The last time you appeared before us in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the opinions you expressed on Germany were quite opaque .
I asked you this : ' Are you assuming that what is planned is adequate ?
Are you assuming that the deficit criterion will not be exceeded this year ?
Are you assuming that the target will be achieved in 2004 or 2006 ? '
We all knew that this would not be the case .
Here , your task would be to speak up promptly and send out a clear warning signal so that no one is surprised when the target is not achieved after all .
False expectations are being awakened , and you have a responsibility to ensure compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact .
Madam President , once again the workers are being called on to pay the price of the crisis plaguing the European and global economy in order to support the competitiveness of European big business within the framework of the struggle taking place for control of the raw materials markets and thanks to the unbridled pursuit of increased profitability .
The reference point for the essence of the economic guidelines was set by Ecofin itself , when it decided that the main objectives for the next three years would be to reform the pension systems in order to cope with the challenge of the ageing population , increase the efficiency and flexibility of the job market and improve competitiveness through education and training , research and technology .
Whereas the socio-economic situation is worsening and inequalities are multiplying , the policy of structural reform , which results in unemployment being shared out , makes uncertainty and insecurity the norm and limits workers ' incomes , is again being promoted in order to safeguard the lasting growth of the profits of big business .
The broad economic policy guidelines are guidelines to promote the notorious Lisbon strategy , especially in the fields of employment relations and the social security systems .
For the first axis of the economic guidelines , boosting economic growth , there is a call for the faithful application of the Stability Pact , a reduction in wage and non-wage costs , a link between wages and productivity , measures to make part-time and temporary work the norm and the promotion of disincentives which will prevent workers from leaving productive activity , the aim being the mandatory extension of working life , and measures for training in early retirement .
For the second axis , reducing public debt , there is a call for a drastic cut in social spending on workers ' health and health care , the aim being for government pension , health and welfare systems , spending on health care , programmes to support the unemployed etc . , in other words all forms of social spending , to be cut back because they undermine financial stability , given that government budgets are not in a position to meet these costs .
For the third , the reform of the pension systems and health care systems , and in the name of financial equilibrium , there is a call for the speedier overturn of the pension systems by increasing the retirement age and reducing pensions , in other words , the gradual abolition of the state 's social security obligations and the encouragement of privatisation and commercialisation of the health and welfare sectors .
In other words , the aim is to impose the liberal choices of big business by fire and sword .
It is , to say the least , unacceptable , under pressure from monopoly interests , to persist with such unsuccessful measures , which lead the workers into impoverishment and marginalisation , in order to support the unaccountable profiteering of big business .
The workers are reacting intensely to this policy and are taking to the streets en masse in all the countries which are trying to apply it .
We support them in their struggle and join with them in condemning this anti-grass roots policy for serving the interests of capital and we are contributing to their fight and supporting the formation of anti-monopolistic , anti-imperialistic rallies to overturn it .
Madam President , I would like to thank all those who have spoken in this debate .
Unfortunately , time does not allow me to deal in detail with all the points raised .
I will however make a few remarks I think are relevant .
Firstly , I am grateful to the House for its cooperation .
I appreciate the problems it is up against .
I too would have welcomed a joint debate on the broad economic guidelines and the employment guidelines today .
Sadly , one was not possible .
I appreciate how little time Parliament has available .
The Council and the Commission are under similar constraints .
It should be borne in mind that the Commission 's proposals need to be based on decisions taken at the Spring European Council .
It is therefore very difficult to start on this kind of work before April .
Secondly , today 's debate is essentially about whether the economic policy decided on is right for the current situation , or whether this situation should lead us to change our economic policy .
It appears that two issues have become confused in the course of the debate , namely economic policy and the instruments of economic policy .
In my view , a study of the operation of macroeconomic policy during this period suggests it is helping to handle the crisis .
Monetary policy has changed , obviously .
Also , fiscal policy is now markedly more expansive than before as a function of the limits agreed under the Stability and Growth Pact .
I shall return to this point later .
I do believe , however , that the current situation should not lead us to back pedal regarding structural reform .
After all , structural reform is about modernising our economies .
It has been suggested that the Stability and Growth Pact is acting as a brake on the economy at present , and that it is a problem .
I would argue that the Stability Pact has been presented in too simplistic a way , as a rigid tool that does not allow any room for manoeuvre .
This is not the case .
A further mistaken assumption was made , namely that discretionary fiscal policies are right for any economic situation .
I think economic theory says otherwise and holds that such policies are only appropriate in very specific circumstances .
I believe it is worth thinking carefully about what I consider a crucial issue .
It appears that the very countries experiencing the greatest difficulties are precisely those that currently have the greatest deficit .
One might wonder whether the deficit caused the poor economic situation or whether it was the other way around .
I feel we need to look elsewhere in search of a solution .
Recent developments in Japan and the internal impact of measures taken by the present Administration in the United States are worth considering .
I remain convinced that the Stability and Growth Pact is the best instrument at our disposal .
It provides for an appropriate and flexible fiscal policy .
This policy is created automatically , insofar as the automatic stabilisers are allowed to operate .
Impulsive action is controlled and the potentially negative consequences prevented .
I believe that the vision of our economic policy presented has , in some cases , tended to be anecdotal .
It focused on detail and veered towards caricature .
This is most certainly not a policy based more or less exclusively on wage restrictions .
Nothing could be further from reality .
Wages are always set in relation to productivity .
This is not a policy focusing solely on employment either .
The policy consists of three key instruments I referred to earlier .
These are sound macroeconomic policies , structural reforms together and medium and long term economic , social and environmental sustainability .
We do not have flexibility in the labour market exclusively in mind , not even when referring to structural employment policies .
What we are about is the development of the population , the rate of employment and , of course , labour markets adjusted to the new situation .
It goes without saying that the economic policy guidelines do not run counter to what was agreed at Lisbon .
Rather , they are one of the many instruments allowing us to implement the Lisbon process .
I am surprised at the emphasis on drawing up new action plans and new lists of things to be done .
I am also surprised at the many references to the need to be better informed about what is happening .
I assume the House is aware that the Commission 's summary report on the implementation of the Lisbon strategy was published in January .
This report contains all the necessary information on the progress made by each of the Member States in implementing Lisbon .
You will even find lists and tables showing which countries performed best and which did worst .
In addition , you will find details of which three countries performed best or worst on each of the objectives .
All the information is therefore available .
Furthermore , a report on implementation of the broad economic guidelines is drawn up annually and indicates clearly where the shortcomings are .
Our main problem does not therefore involve understanding the situation we are in , but in trying to change it .
By virtue of our system , this falls within the competence of the Member States .
Our present system is based on peer pressure , as I stated earlier .
This is obviously a crucial point .
A number of honourable Members mentioned the open method of coordination .
In my view , this should only be applied in cases where the Treaty does not provide for a specific method .
It is therefore a useful method , but one to be used sparingly and by agreement .
I am sorry time does not permit me to go into further detail .
I would however like to take this opportunity of thanking you all for your contributions to this morning 's debate .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0153 / 2003 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the appointment of Mrs Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell as a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank [ 8090 / 2003 - C5-0193 / 2003 - 2003 / 0810 ( CNS ) ] .
Madam President , it falls to me to convey to the House and to the Council the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell 's appointment .
I speak on behalf of the chairman of the committee , Mrs Randzio-Plath .
I should first like to say that the vote of acceptance , the vote in favour of the appointment of Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell , was carried unanimously within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
I should also like to say that this was no accident .
It was because all the members of the committee agreed that the candidate has the requisite training and ability to carry out the task before her .
Secondly , I should like to say that the committee was fully satisfied with the written and oral answers provided by the candidate .
We were particularly impressed with her pertinent responses to questions on three key issues .
I am now speaking on behalf of my group .
We noted that the candidate is a firm believer in the dogma of price stability formally proclaimed at Maastricht .
We found too that the candidate believes equally firmly that it is for the European Central Bank , acting quite independently , to guarantee the dogma of price stability without prejudice to its duty to work towards the other objectives contained in the Treaty .
Further , we were delighted to find that the candidate is fully prepared to cooperate with the European Parliament .
This will be to the advantage of the European Central Bank .
It will render its positions clearer and more public .
It will also serve to boost the image of this House .
I would remind you that we have been discussing the broad economic guidelines and that all the speakers emphasised the willingness and ability of Parliament to work loyally towards strengthening an economy that is currently in poor shape .
Indeed , the European Union as a whole will benefit and Parliament will help to bring the Bank closer to the citizens .
The latter will be better able to understand the Bank 's objectives , methods and actions .
I should also like to underline , further to this morning 's debate , that Parliament is fully prepared to cooperate with the European Central Bank in its task of maintaining price stability .
This stability is one of the main achievements of the latest stage of the European economy launched at Maastricht .
I trust this morning 's vote will provide confirmation of this .
With regard to the economic guidelines we would like to point out that it is for the Member States to strive to reduce inflationary pressure in sectors where it occurs , notably in the service sector .
It is also for the Member States to create the conditions in which the social partners can initiate a wages policy .
This should be a policy of collective negotiation , keeping nominal wages in line with inflation and not allowing them to rise above it .
It would also keep real salaries in line with productivity .
We are all tasked with ensuring price stability , even though the European Central Bank is specifically charged to do so and will take the lead .
In the context of the broad economic guidelines we also underlined the need for coherence and consistency across all economic policies if we are to pull ourselves up out of the hole we are in .
Monetary policy is handled by the independent Central Bank .
Budgetary policies must be consistent across the Union too .
They remain within national competence , but are governed and bound by the Stability and Growth Pact .
They are also subject to monitoring by Union institutions , including Parliament .
These assess stability and convergence programmes , on which we have made recommendations .
I referred earlier to wages policies .
They also need to be in line , though they are part of national competence .
All short-term supply policies required to deal with the economic crisis should be in line too .
They must not be allowed to disturb the economic balance .
That must be protected at all times by the European Central Bank as regards monetary issues .
The Union 's institutions and the Member States will ensure coherence with the Stability Pact is maintained .
I imagine Mr Friedrich will mention this too , but we are pleased to note that the candidate is to be appointed for an eight-year term .
This should be time enough to see the programme through .
We are pleased to note too that the candidate may not stand for re-election , so her independence is guaranteed .
On behalf of the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs I strongly recommend the Council to appoint the candidate and offer her our congratulations .
Madam President , the Commission is not directly involved in the appointment of members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank .
I would however like to say how delighted we are that Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell has been nominated as a candidate for membership of the Executive Board .
We have come to know Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell well in her capacity as Deputy Governor of the Austrian Central Bank and also through her active involvement in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
We believe she is an outstanding candidate for the post and offer her our unreserved support .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , you have before you a unanimous resolution by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs to appoint Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell as a member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank and to support this recommendation .
Who is this lady ?
As we observed in the committee - and I am also responding to the critical comments voiced by my fellow Members - she is certainly not a media product .
Nor is she a token woman .
She is certainly not a cloned version of other comparable bank directors either .
Mrs Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell is her own person with rough edges , principles , experience , demonstrable results and intuition .
This was why , after the hearing in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on 29 April , we all concluded that she merits description as frank , competent and a consummate professional .
I have six demands to make of the new member of the ECB 's Executive Board .
Firstly , Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell , please strengthen the independence of the European Central Bank and boost its defences against populist and politically motivated interjections and apportionment of blame , including from politicians !
In doing so , however - and this is my second point - do not hide behind the ECB Statute ; instead , step up the dialogue on economic and monetary affairs with politicians , with Parliament , with the media and with the citizens of Europe .
Thirdly , explain the economic context and background to the decisions more fully .
By doing so , you will help to enhance the transparency and comprehensibility of monetary policy decisions .
Fourthly , Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell , please also have the courage to make demands and even challenge the politicians - despite , or perhaps even because of , your independence and the variety of tasks on the agenda .
We need this competition of ideas , this intellectual rivalry , in order to intensify the economic and monetary policy debate .
Fifthly , Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell , you took a leading role in coordinating the preparations for Austria to join the economic and monetary union .
I would ask you to place your experience at the disposal of the EU Member States who are not part of the eurozone .
Our goal must be to make the euro the home currency of all citizens in all the EU Member States and ensure that it is seen as a strong brand for the most competitive internal market in the world .
Sixthly - and a number of speakers have alluded to this - I would ask the new member of the European Central Bank 's Executive Board to uphold the principle of price stability and adhere to it rigorously .
Price stability produces low inflation and interest rates and is thus the prerequisite for growth , employment and an economic policy leading to prosperity .
The candidate will join the ECB Executive Board at a very dynamic and exciting time .
There is EU enlargement , which means that we will have more Member States outside the eurozone than in it .
There are the different economic cycles , the cyclical and structural problems within the European Union , which we have just been discussing , the absence of economic dynamism , the lack of a pro-active approach and the lack of confidence in politics and economics , the forthcoming conclusion of the Basle II Accord and the drafting of a directive , and also the issue of whether Europe will become the financial centre of the world compared with other continents , regardless of the narrow-minded provincial outlook .
All this requires a very self-confident , objective and persuasive personality capable of engaging in the debate , not only within the ECB .
We are convinced that you are this person and can achieve the levels of performance required .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports your candidacy and wishes you every success .
We look forward to what will undoubtedly be very constructive cooperation .
Thank you , Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be fairly brief .
The hearing we have had with Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs showed that this lady was very competent and certainly capable of maintaining her crucial role on the European Central Bank 's Executive Board .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists will therefore vote in favour of Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell , and we wish her much success in her very difficult work .
Allow me a more general remark which has nothing to do with Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell 's candidacy .
Until now , all the governors of the European Central Bank have come from the inner circle of central bankers .
They therefore give the impression of having come from the same mould and sometimes take the same line , and one which , while it is very often sound , does not always reflect the economic realities of this world .
I know that many MEPs , both in my own and also in other groups , would like to see governors from the financial and commercial worlds , and perhaps even from the world of politics , at the heart of the European Central Bank .
We should also like to see a lot more women there in addition to Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell alone .
I would therefore express the wish that , when appointments are next made , the profile of candidates be deepened a little so as to ensure rather more balanced representation within this crucial institution .
The European Central Bank has so far done some excellent work .
It has in actual fact made good its wager when it comes to stability .
That being the case , the ECB 's task is not only to maintain stability but also to combat deflation .
Although it may have defined its stability policy , it has no point of reference for judging when it is necessary to combat recession .
For my part , I should like the European Central Bank to conduct a much more pragmatic monetary policy on the model of the American Federal Reserve , which combats not only inflation but also recession and which contributes to other American economic policies .
Madam President , let me begin by saying that Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell is an outstanding candidate for this post .
It is quite obvious : she has great charisma , she has high-level and demonstrable expertise , and she has a wealth of experience in the field of monetary policy .
She meets all the requirements to perform her new role in the service of our monetary system and the euro .
What I particularly liked was that when she was responding to the questions from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , she excelled with her brief , concise and persuasive answers .
What is also important is that she supports the European Central Bank 's basic policy direction , with price stability as the primary objective , and also the new shape of the European Central Bank 's pillar structure .
Mr Goebbels , let me tell you that even the new constitution - in its present Article 21 - states that the European Central Bank must guarantee price stability as its primary objective .
Of course , it contributes to the achievement of the Union 's other goals as well .
In this respect , the European Central Bank has performed outstanding work to date .
The euro is a stable currency at domestic level , while its value on the external markets is currently amazing almost the entire financial world .
What is more , the euro is already making a significant contribution to stabilising the world currency markets .
The Maastricht Treaty has also proved its worth inasmuch as re-election is not an option , which means that Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell will be appointed for eight years .
What is particularly appealing is the fact that we will have a lady as the successor to the outgoing female member from Finland ; this demonstrates that we are attempting to ensure that women are appointed on an equal basis to high-level positions .
I am wholeheartedly committed to the central importance of the European Central Bank 's objectives .
In Germany , the largest Member State in the monetary union , it would be a great mistake if we tried to address our acute problems through the simple but extremely dangerous strategy of taking on further debt and raising taxes .
Of course , I cannot rule out that the time may come when a further cut in interest rates , as part of the European Central Bank 's policy on interest rates , may reduce the gap with rates in the United States and stimulate business investment and performance .
Since the candidate - as Mr Goebbels has indirectly pointed out - also meets the main requirements laid down in the Treaty , namely recognised standing and professional experience in monetary and banking matters , I believe that we can support her appointment with a clear conscience .
I would like to wish Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell every success , so that Europe can genuinely develop into what we need , namely the most dynamic economic area in the world , offering job opportunities for our young people .
Madam President , by virtue of the rules of the EC treaty , we on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs heard Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell , the Council 's recommended candidate for the Executive Board of the European Central Bank , as successor to Sirkka Hämäläinen .
Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell 's curriculum vitae would indicate that she is an excellent choice in terms of the main requirements laid down in the EC Treaty for membership of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank , namely personal integrity and recognised standing and professional experience in the monetary and banking field .
In addition to these formal qualifications , however , there are three factors that would especially favour the choice of Mrs Tumpel-Gugerel for this job .
Firstly , her enormous experience and impressive levels of expertise were natural prerequisites for the job .
Even excellent individuals do not succeed on their own merits , however , if their background is felt to be less than favourable .
It is likely that Austria 's good reputation as a competitive Member State driving responsible policies under the leadership of its present government helped in making the choice .
The Member States of the Union together committed themselves to the Stability and Growth Pact ensuring European competitiveness and economic success .
The challenges are largely the same in all the Member States : a damagingly inflexible labour market that allows mass unemployment to continue in the Member States of the European Union , and the need to balance state income and expenditure .
An ageing population will put intolerable financial pressures on our pensions and social welfare systems unless we implement the necessary changes in time .
The Austrian Government has taken the first important steps to safeguard its public pensions system .
I wish the Austrian Government luck and success in this work , in spite of the considerable resistance to change .
The immense importance of public pensions systems is indicated by the fact that it is our poorest citizens in particular who need them most of all to provide for their retirement .
Secondly , the choice of Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell especially supported the notion that the European Union is a forum of collaboration between Member States of different sizes .
To ensure that the Union is equal and functions properly it is essential that experts from the small Member States can also participate directly in decision-making .
As a Finn , I know that the choice of Mrs Tumpel-Gugerel , an Austrian , was the right decision from this point of view also .
Thirdly , it was not a foregone conclusion that a woman would be chosen to succeed Sirkka Hämäläinen .
I am pleased that female representation in the European Central Bank 's main decision-making body was allowed to continue , and obviously with no compromises being made with regard to expertise and professional skill .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is quite certain that Parliament will confirm Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell 's appointment , and will probably do so unanimously .
I believe that this is a good basis for setting new objectives in this key area of economic policy in future as well .
At the hearing , we were told that she will work on developing new structures for the future of Europe .
I met her in person at the debates on Basle II , and there too , she was able to assure us , very competently , that this issue is being taken seriously and that the European Central Bank is certainly also preparing analyses on this topic .
I think that the issue of Basle II , especially as regards the creditworthiness of small and medium-sized enterprises and the securities they are required to provide , and the introduction of Basle II must be properly prepared , and the European Central Bank will play an important part in doing this .
For this reason , the inclusion of the social partners in this area is also essential so that the requisite preparations can be made by common consent , for liquidity is naturally very important for the enterprises .
After all , the wages have to be paid at the end of each month and in many cases , financial arrangements with the banks must be made as a matter of great urgency , and this can only be guaranteed if appropriate securities are provided .
That is why we want best practice and benchmarking in tax policy as well , so that in future , adequate risk and own capital can be made available to the companies .
Thank you , Mr Rübig .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon
We shall proceed to the vote shortly .
Mr President , I should like to draw the attention of our Assembly to certain provisions of our regulations that we are going to flout in the next few minutes .
We are concerned here with Rules 1 , 2 and 3 of Chapter 2 of the provisions in force since 1 July 1998 and governing the holding of meetings in parallel with our Parliament 's plenary sittings .
The basic principle is that our Parliament should not organise any meeting of its Members when the plenaries are being held , the rare exceptions being mentioned in Rule 3 and no exception being tolerated in the case of the crucial sittings at which votes are taken .
I would point out to you that quite a few of our fellow MEPs that are members of the Convention - in theory , 32 , consisting of 16 representatives and 16 deputy representatives - have for the most part had to leave this Chamber in order to be present at the important work of the Convention which will begin this afternoon on the premises of our Parliament , but in Brussels .
So that our fellow MEPs might have done their work both as members of the Convention and as legislators , it would have been enough for the work of the Convention - which our Parliament happily has the privilege of hosting - to take place for once in our Strasbourg buildings .
Due to our absurd petty squabbling , this morning 's votes are going to be tainted with irregularity , because any votes that are passed by a majority lower than or equal to 32 may be suspected of having been distorted .
I leave it to you to be the judges of the possible legal and political consequences of this .
In conclusion , I would also point out to you that , if we do not take steps , this same regrettable situation is going to occur again at our plenary on Thursday 5 June .
Mr Onesta , I think a copy of your speech should be sent to the Chairman of the Convention , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
Personally , I do not share the opinion expressed in the second part of your speech regarding the conformity of the votes we are about to take .
The next item is voting time .
There is a problem with the report by Mr Schmitt , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the prevention of money laundering by means of customs cooperation .
I propose , pursuant to Rule 111 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to deal with it without a debate and put it to the vote later .
Mr President , there is absolutely no reason for this .
The fact is that time was scheduled for this afternoon .
The report was supposed to be dealt with this afternoon and the speakers have been listed .
I see absolutely no objective reason to postpone it .
Mr Schmitt wishes to take the floor to explain his reasons .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Posselt , in agreement with the shadow rapporteur , Mr Schmid from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , we felt it was more appropriate to vote this afternoon when most of the Members are here .
There was a lengthy discussion on this matter in the committee and this report is largely uncontentious .
After all , there are no further proposed amendments , and that was why I felt it was sensible , and would ask the plenary to agree , that the vote be held this afternoon when all the Members are still here .
Mr President , I just want to say that this sets a dangerous precedent .
We can propose in advance that the report be dealt with without a debate if it is uncontentious , but a debate on the report was envisaged and so a debate should take place .
The House has decided , Mr Posselt .
I do not consider a decision by the House to be a dangerous precedent ; it would seem to me to be a perfectly normal way of proceeding .
Mr President , I would like to spring to Mr Posselt 's aid .
There have been other precedents , dangerous precedents , which were agreed by plenary .
The mere fact that plenary has decided something does not mean that it is not a dangerous precedent .
Mr President , I have just two comments to make .
Firstly , the German translation of recital A is incorrect , so please use the English version here .
A further point is this : in our calls to the Commission , a mistake has crept in to paragraph 2 .
I would ask you to delete the following words , as they make no sense in legal terms . After the words ' WIPO Treaty ' , the following four words - ' on Performances and Phonograms ( WPPT ) ' must be deleted .
It is incorrect .
' WIPO Treaty ' should stand , and the following four words plus the parentheses must be deleted .
Mr President , this involves replacing the English sentence ' that do not reduce ' with the following sentence ' in order that they do not reduce ' .
That is all .
- ( ES ) This involves replacing the adjective ' High ' , qualifying the noun ' representative ' , with the adjective ' Single ' .
The phrase would then be : ' Single representative ' and not ' High representative ' .
That concludes voting time .
I have received from the Conference of Presidents the list of observers appointed in Parliamentary committees .
The list of names will appear in today 's Minutes .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

. ( PT ) The European Central Bank ( ECB ) , a symbol of the monetary orthodoxy that we have witnessed in Europe , is one of the least democratic institutions , not only because its policy-making is free of any democratic control , but also because it is the only Community institution in which not all Member States are represented on the Executive Board .
The recent changes to its decision-making procedure , establishing a rotating system , have removed permanent voting rights from members of the Central Bank 's Governing Council , distancing some countries , such as Portugal , even further from decision-making on monetary policy - an approach that we reject .
We therefore hoped that replacing one member of the Executive Board , in this case by Mrs Tumpel-Gugerell , an Austrian , might help to change the current situation .
If we study the answers she gave to the parliamentary questionnaire , however , what emerges is her unconditional support for the monetary and budgetary orthodoxy in force .
She believes , for example , that the best contribution she can make to the economy is to apply the Stability Pact and insists that the ECB focuses on price stability .
This means that everything will carry on just as before .
Money laundering is a major problem because it is a method used by criminal groups and terrorists to finance their activities .
We Moderates have today voted against Mr Schmitt 's report because we believe that the stated legal basis is inadequate .
. ( PT ) We have become increasingly concerned about money laundering , which constitutes a source of funding for international terrorism and crime .
We know that cash is crossing borders as a result of the absence of controls that would allow movements to be monitored along the entire length of the Community frontier .
The directive on money laundering lays down controls on transactions carried out by financial institutions involving sums of EUR 15 000 or more but not on cash movements .
This must be achieved by other means , such as introducing controls over cash movements across the Community border , creating uniform rules , plugging loopholes and seeking to balance the need for these controls with the need to protect the internal market and the free movement of capital .
What is required is a Community-based approach , but one which respects , in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , Member States ' freedom to choose the procedure that suits them .
Defining the objectives and rules to be complied with should be done at Community level , but the way in which these are implemented should be left to the discretion of each Member State .
. ( PT ) The lack of mechanisms for monitoring the unrestricted movement of capital , the creation of instruments for obviating prudential rules and the presence of considerable sums of money in tax havens all contribute to the abuse of the financial system and facilitate the laundering of money that represents the proceeds of crime , especially trafficking in drugs , arms and human beings , making the role of organised crime in today 's capitalism abundantly clear .
In 1995 , the World Bank estimated that money laundering accounted for between USD 300 billion and USD 500 billion , not counting estimated tax evasion .
More recently , the IMF suggested a figure of between 2 % and 5 % of world GDP , in other words , between USD 600 billion and USD 1500 billion .
Combating money laundering requires , specifically , the political will to control and effectively tax international movements of capital .
Although this proposal is limited , it is a step in the right direction , promoting the harmonisation of customs procedures , with the aim not only of supplementing the supervision of cross-border fund transfers by financial institutions , but also of monitoring cash movements at or above the threshold of EUR 15 000 , which warrants our support .
British Conservatives have been in the forefront of the fight against international criminality including previous anti-money laundering initiatives .
However , we believe that these measures go too far and are too restrictive on the freedom to transfer small sums of money and securities across European borders .
The proposal 's negative impact on legitimate transactions on this occasion outweighs the suggested benefits against money laundering .
Therefore , British Conservatives will abstain on the final votes .
- ( DA ) The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is able to support many of the proposed measures in the directive but is not in favour of its being possible to sell milk and meat from vaccinated animals within the common market on the basis of current technological capacity . We also believe that consumers are entitled to opt not to buy vaccinated meat .
The change from the current policy of non-vaccination to one permitting emergency vaccination also requires the international agreement to be strengthened that guarantees full utilisation of the regionalisation principle , so that exports from EU countries not affected by foot-and-mouth disease can continue .
. ( PT ) Where farming is concerned , 2001 was marked by the speed and the scale of the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the EU , in particular in the United Kingdom .
We recall the burning pyres and the mass slaughter of animals which , apart from the environmental , economic and public health consequences , caused enormous social disruption in the countries affected .
Two things are clear : health policy cannot be determined by commercial issues and a strategy for combating the disease that provides only for preventive culling , ignoring new scientific developments , is unacceptable from the ethical point of view .
This outbreak , in conjunction with the other food and health crises that have beset the EU ( BSE , dioxins , sewage slurry , nitrofurans , etc ) , demonstrates the bankruptcy of the current model of agricultural development and the consequences of a CAP based on exports , on bringing prices down and on opening up the markets .
The transport of live animals , the closure of local abattoirs , the lack of border controls and the elimination of production at local level are only some of the problems .
Hence our broad support , reinforcing our budgetary proposal , which is intended to establish an agricultural disaster fund , acknowledged in part by the rapporteur when he suggests that a European animal health fund should be created .
. ( EL ) The new proposal for a directive presents important differences in comparison with the perception that has applied to date for combating foot-and-mouth disease and moves in a more positive direction .
The most basic difference is that the use of vaccines as a basic measure for combating foot-and-mouth disease is permitted , while measures to isolate , ban movements and culling , which were the only measures allowed to date , are treated as supplementary measures .
Similarly , it establishes the marginalisation of the countries in which the disease appears and requires even greater veterinarian monitoring and more staff with the necessary flexibility .
We are opposed , however , to the provision which allows the European Commission to decide about vaccines or refer the matter to a Community body for a decision to be taken on its own , even without the assent of the Member State in question .
The Member States and the competent national services are the only authorities competent to evaluate the problem and promote measures to deal with it .
Space science and technology have offered mankind a great deal , in the form of both new knowledge and advanced technology and everyday applications ( telecommunications , surveys of the earth and the atmosphere , navigation ) .
European countries have made a particularly important contribution along the way : to launching systems , to research , to applications .
However , further development is threatened by the fact that the driving force is the commercial exploitation of space services and applications .
Thus , operating under the conditions and the rules of the free market and liberalisation , the aerospace industry in Europe is in danger of shrinking as the result of competition from mainly American companies .
Many people forecast the development of military space applications within the framework of the EU 's common defence and security policy .
The ? U also often cites the requirements of the space industry in order to justify the military use of space .
The Communist Party of Greece is categorically opposed to any such prospect , which will result in further militarisation of space with the ? U leading the way .
We are in favour of the exclusively peaceful use of space and public funding for the relevant activities .
Further development cannot be accomplished within the framework of the market ; it must have as its incentive not commercial profit but the development of activities for the benefit of mankind as a whole .
. ( PT ) Space is a unique platform from which we can carry out observations and experiments that are of the utmost importance to our understanding of nature , to promoting people 's well-being and to protecting this blue planet of ours .
Research and technology must not be developed under conditions imposed by competition and the market .
Public investment and the public sector are crucial to ensuring that the achievements and advances made are designed to serve the common good and that everyone benefits from them .
Space-related activities must serve only peaceful purposes , and we therefore reaffirm our opposition to the militarisation of space ( in particular under the CFSP and ESDP ) and call for policies that use space to be based on the non-proliferation of weapons and on renouncing the use of weapons .
We support the development of a space policy based on cooperation and on the coordinated efforts of various countries , particularly in Europe , and we therefore believe that the European Space Agency must retain its independent nature , and not become an EU institution .
We also believe that public investment in this field must be increased .
I would just like to explain why I abstained in the vote on the resolution on the search made of the headquarters of the Human Rights Association of Turkey .
It is true that Turkey is flouting human rights under the pretext of combating terrorism . It is doing so , as you are quite aware , in the Kurdish issue .
I am a friend of the Kurds and I consider this search to be scandalous .
Why did I abstain , then ?
I abstained because we need to put our own house in order .
Exactly the same thing is happening in Spain and in the Basque country in the name of combating terrorism , and Parliament is turning a blind eye .
We have not managed to hold a single debate on the banning of the only Basque newspaper , Egunkaria .
This newspaper was banned and its journalists thrown into prison by a magistrate on the pretext that they were collaborating with ETA , but this claim is absolutely unfounded .
Egunkaria is merely a newspaper .
Therefore , let us put our own house in order .
That is why I abstained .
. ( PT ) We are extremely concerned at the situation in Turkey , where the population is fighting to attain democracy .
We condemn certain unacceptable situations , such as the recent bans on activity by political organisations , the existence of countless prisoners accused of fighting for democracy and to end the military dictatorship in Turkey , the repression of demonstrations and the constant intimidation , threats and persecution to which progressive activists and organisations are subjected . One example is the recent repressive action against the Human Rights Association of Turkey .
Once again , we wish to express our solidarity with the Turkish people and we will pursue our attempts to contribute , particularly in the context of activity undertaken by the GUE / NGL Group , to stepping up actions to support the struggle being waged by progressive forces in Turkey .
We reiterate the call for the immediate release of Leyla Zana and of three other Kurdish former members of the Turkish parliament who are undergoing a re-trial in Ankara , which opened on 28 March 2003 , following the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights .
It should be noted that our group has followed this trial from the beginning , with the European Parliament deciding to do so only later .
. ( FR ) I refused to vote for the joint resolution , which is the product of non-transparent bartering between groups .
We cannot discuss EU-Russia relations without mentioning the situation in the Caucasus .
Do we need the results of the ad hoc committee to condemn the abuses in Chechnya ?
Is there any meaning left to the Tacis Democracy Programme when the Russian authorities organised an undemocratic referendum ( 90 % in favour ) in Chechnya ?
The electoral campaign was not pluralist because voting ' no ' was considered by the federal troops to be supporting the terrorists .
The electoral process was marked by numerous failures to comply with democratic rules .
Several thousand Russian soldiers voted . Pressure was put on the inhabitants and refugees to force them to vote ' yes ' .
We must establish as conditions for political cooperation with Russia a cease-fire , an end to the bloody oppression by the Russian army and a negotiation process with a view to putting an end to military operations and seeking a political solution .
Lastly , the European Parliament must stand absolutely firm regarding the fate of the Chechen refugees in Ingushetia .
They are being threatened with being forced to return to Chechnya , in violation of the rights recognised by the Geneva Conventions on war refugees .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Although it is already a reality in the EU , as proved by the Directive on emissions trading , the Kyoto Protocol needs to be ratified by Russia in order actually to enter into force .
Unfortunately , Russia , unlike more than 100 States , has not yet kept its promise to ratify the Protocol .
The damaging consequences of delaying the Kyoto Protocol 's entry into force with regard to alleviating the effects of global climate change , and also with regard to the competitiveness of businesses are obvious .
The more States that are involved , the lower the cost of complying with Kyoto will be .
The carbon economy must be a reality throughout the world and not only in Europe .
I therefore hope that the EU , which in Bonn and Marrakech was able to rescue the Kyoto Protocol from certain death , will also be able to give the utmost priority to the need to convince Russia to ratify this Protocol .
Mr President , Mr van den Berg has tabled a scholarly , competent report on the Commission proposal on education and training in the context of poverty reduction in developing countries .
I could not fail to vote for the report , so that education can be provided and poverty reduced in developing countries .
I would point out to the President and the House - so many Members are present , as always , during my explanations of vote - that there are poor countries with a few wealthy inhabitants and wealthy countries with a few poor inhabitants .
I would like Europe to help , in particular , the poor inhabitants of the poor countries and the poor inhabitants of the wealthy countries , for they all have the right to assistance , and I would especially like Europe to check up on what happens to the money given to them .
Most of all , however , I would like to inform the House that retired teachers associations throughout Europe are offering their disinterested , free help , offering to teach , to pass on the knowledge that they have acquired over a lifetime 's work to all those in the developing countries who wish to learn in order to increase the prosperity of their states .
. ( EL ) No one doubts the role of education in reducing poverty .
The problem lies in how to safeguard the access to education of hundreds of millions of children , how can education be made to serve development .
The Commission communication and the report by the Committee on Development and Cooperation , despite the positive findings and proposals , are no more than a wish list .
Even if , as proposed , aid is increased , it is just crumbs , a philanthropic gesture , in the face of the real needs of developing countries .
The development of the grass-roots movement against globalisation and poverty has resulted in frequent discussion of the situation in developing countries .
The ? U wants to show that it is listening to the protests , that it is interested in combating poverty , in order to improve its image in the eyes of the people , in order to wipe out old and new crimes .
However , there is no discussion of who is responsible , nothing is heard about the consequences of long-term colonialism or of how natural wealth continues to be plundered and people robbed .
The attempt , through the WTO , to impose terms which benefit big business is undiminished .
Nothing is said about foreign debt .
The Communist Party of Greece does not believe in the charity of the ? U. It is the fight of the peoples itself which will get them out of poverty and lead them to development .
. ( PT ) The European Union played a leading role at the Johannesburg Summit .
The ongoing credibility of this leadership depends , however , on the rigour and the speed with which the Johannesburg commitments are met , in terms of eradicating extreme poverty , of promoting access to drinking water and sanitation , of changing standards of consumption and production , of reversing the loss of biodiversity and of funding development .
If , however , we wish to be credible partners in the eyes of the developing countries and if we wish to narrow the shocking divide between living conditions in the two hemispheres , we must also take action on training and education , on debt relief and funding for the poorest countries , on eradicating trade barriers and on gradually eliminating our subsidies to agriculture , fisheries and energy .
In this regard , the European Union can get a head start , setting an example by reforming the common agricultural policy , but must not fail to exert pressure on the United States to do the same with regard to its own farming subsidies .
. ( PT ) This initiative by the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport is timely and warrants our support .
As a matter of fact , it is hard to understand why the World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) Treaties and Conventions dedicate an enormous range of rights and protection to musical authors , performers and producers and even to radio broadcasting organisations and do not do the same for audio-visual performers , who have no international rights other than a single payment for their work .
This lack of protection abroad is due to the absence of any international harmonisation of international rights and it is regrettable that the WIPO Diplomatic Conference , held in December 2000 , ended without a final agreement being reached on this matter .
We have therefore agreed with the EP resolution not only with regard to the Commission providing information on the current state of WIPO negotiations , bearing in mind the informal meeting of June 2003 , but also for the Commission to ' take action to reach the adoption of an effective WIPO-Treaty in favour of audio-visual performers ' rights ' and to encourage , more generally , the protection of performers ' rights .
We have chosen to vote in favour of the report on the Broad Guidelines of the Economic Policies of the Member States and the Community .
The report as a whole is sound .
We do not , however , agree with certain of the points , to the effect that there must be greater wage flexibility and that it would be good to reduce the overall tax rates in the EU .
Nor do we support the view that the Commission and the other institutions of the EU must be given further executive influence over the Lisbon process and economic policy .
We are also opposed to the appointment of a high representative of the euro area .
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr Posselt has the floor .
Mr President , I did not want to say anything about the Minutes , but before you come to the Minutes , I would like to come back briefly to the procedure adopted this morning in respect of the vote .
During the lunch break , I checked again to see which of the Rules of Procedure could be the basis for holding the vote on the Schmitt report - which was firmly on the agenda for this afternoon - at midday without a debate .
I failed to find in the Rules of Procedure any rule which , in my view , would cover this procedure .
I therefore wish to request the Bureau to notify me formally which article in the Rules of Procedure formed the basis for this morning 's decision .
Mr Posselt , Rule 111 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure is relevant to your concern .
This paragraph states ' Once adopted , the agenda may not be amended except in pursuance of Rules 112 and 143 to 147 , or on a proposal from the President ' I believe this clarifies the issue .
Mr Wieland has the floor .
I would like to take up the matter raised by Mr Posselt .
The President 's phrasing - and I will take the liberty of checking the Minutes from this morning - did not imply that the President endorsed the proposer 's concern .
The phrasing was this : ' Does the House have any objectives ? '
That means that the precise case described in the Rules of Procedure did not apply .
As a Member of Parliament , I refuse to be passed around this House like a surplus tomato in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I have groups to attend , we have invitations , and we have meetings .
Votes and other matters are constantly being postponed , especially on a Thursday .
I do not think that we should simply rely on decisions by the Administration which are ultimately whispered in the President 's ear .
We even have votes - every Member from every group has been affected by this - where there is an asterisk and a note saying ' This proposal is out of order under paragraph so and so ' , so no vote is taken .
Who is making the decisions here ?
We - the people looking at you - are the European Union 's elected representatives .
Apart from you , distinguished President at the front , the people looking at us are supposed to be reporting to us .
' Reporting to ' does not mean making decisions for us .
I therefore fully support Mr Posselt on this issue .
Yes , your comments have been noted and will be dealt with appropriately .
Mr Korakas has the floor .
Mr President , before the order of business I must announce that the riot of criminal attacks being carried out by the Israeli army in Palestine and the occupied territories included a savage attack at midnight on 10 March on the offices of the Palestinian People 's Party in Ramallah .
This attack is not the first .
There have previously been similar attacks in Nablous , Toulkarem , Salfit , Kalkilia and Jenin .
The Jordanian Communist Party has announced that the Israelis ' objective is to hit the Palestinian People 's Party , which is fighting and is continuing to fight for a fair solution to the question on the basis of the UN resolutions against Israeli aggression , the occupation and the war crimes being perpetrated by the Israeli army .
We agree with or subscribe to this announcement and express our solidarity with the Palestinian People 's Party and the Palestinian people in general , who are being given a particularly hard time at the moment by the Sharon regime , which is taking advantage of the fact that the world 's attention has turned elsewhere , including to Iraq , in order to promote and complete its crime .
Mr President , I call for your and Parliament 's support so that there is a reaction and this sort of arrogance stops .
Mr President , I apologise for coming back to the issue I raised before .
Thank you very much for precisely citing the article to which reference was made .
However , like Mr Wieland , I take the view that this refers to other articles , all of which I have read and which have nothing to do with the procedure adopted this morning .
Then there is the option of a proposal by the President .
I would like to know whether what happened this morning was a proposal by the President and was based on a decision by the Bureau , or whether the President decided to move such a proposal spontaneously .
We must recognise one thing : the Rules of Procedure deliberately make amendments to the agreed agenda difficult , for after all , they should not occur all the time .
On the other hand , obstacles are deliberately erected and , as we must acknowledge , there are minority rights as well .
If , for example , the Conference of Presidents decides that no debate should take place on an issue , it is possible to counter this with 32 votes .
In other words , very carefully balanced rights exist which also make it possible to proceed against a short-lived majority .
These obstacles are deliberate .
The only possible exception is ' a proposal by the President ' .
Here , the question which also arises is whether that is correct .
I therefore request you to clarify , firstly , whether this was a proposal by the President , and , secondly , whether it was based on a decision by the Bureau .
Thirdly , I doubt whether this is an adequate legal basis for this procedure .
Mr Posselt , I understand this was done further to a proposal from the President , pursuant to Rule 111 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr Schmitt had previously consulted the President .
There was in fact a sufficient majority to take the decision .
( The Minutes were approved )
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission , referring to postal services :
B5-0090 / 2003 by Mr Simpson and Mr Savary , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; and
B5-0093 / 2003 by Mr Sterckx , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
Mr President , I should like to apologise for Mr Sterckx 's absence .
I wish him well in Sunday 's elections .
I do not like nuclear options , to use the term adopted by someone in Mr Bolkestein 's cabinet to refer to Mr Monti 's proposal to force the postal market to split its activities .
Only recently did I find out that nuclear options or nuclear explosions are not always dangerous .
Thailand is about to decide on digging a canal right across the country , just like the Suez or Panama Canal .
This mechanical excavation work would certainly cost 20 billion .
The Japanese are very interested because this would save them USD 300 000 annually if oil tankers heading for Japan would no longer need to pass through the perilous strait of Malacca .
The Japanese subsequently suggested helping to build it by removing a number of difficult mountains along the way by means of a few friendly nuclear explosions .
This would cut down the building costs to 3 billion .
As you can see , the nuclear option does not always cause as much damage as we imagine .
The Commission has applied Article 86 before , notably in the early nineties , to the telecom sector .
This worked well then .
The liberalisation of the telecom sector is still known as one of the most appealing successes of European policy of the nineties .
To me , Mr Monti 's proposal is therefore aimed at the Council , which will now have to take some serious decisions concerning the liberalisation of the postal services .
The fact that the EP is being by-passed with this proposal is not easy for me , and cannot be dismissed just like that .
Nevertheless , together with the European Commission , I am turning my gaze to the Council , for they are the ones that matter in this case .
With regard to the universal provision of services by postal companies , Mr Bolkestein once mentioned the compensation fund which could be a purely mechanical way of solving the problem of cross-subsidisation at the coalface .
It will therefore remain possible , Monsieur Savary , to send a letter to the remotest corner of Provence .
Does the Commission intend to table further proposals in this area ?
Would a compensation fund of this kind then be able to run parallel to the Commission 's recent proposal ?
As for the plans to impose VAT on public post office services , I should like to point out that these post offices can also deduct the VAT from services they would need to pay for .
In addition , the plans provide for the possibility of charging a lower VAT rate .
With reparations and new-fangled proposals of this kind , we will not achieve a sufficiently effective and decisive policy in Europe in a hurry , not to mention the Lisbon objectives .
Surely we wanted a dynamic Europe ?
Let us , then , try to send out a signal that the European Parliament will make every effort to give this economic sector in Europe , which is currently in difficult waters , a shot in the arm .
I do hope that we will stand united and attach more importance to the goal that we want to achieve than to these methods , which may be needed just once to make true progress .
Thank you very much Mr Vermeer .
I am sorry , but I had two minutes more for you later during group time .
In any case , you have already used three minutes .
. Mr President , promoting competition in the postal market to the benefit of consumers is one of the declared priorities of the Commission .
I am pleased to have the opportunity , speaking also on behalf of my colleague , Mr Monti , to summarise and explain our policy to Parliament today .
In its work programme for this year , the Commission had , subsequent to recent competition decisions regarding the postal sector , foreseen to reflect on introducing more transparency in the relationship between incumbents ' activities inside and outside the universal service in the postal sector .
The Commission is at present still evaluating this question .
However , as you know , the Commission will be publishing in the coming months a Green Paper on services of general interest .
Given the wide debate which has already accompanied this initiative and that will certainly follow the publication of the Green Paper , the Commission would like to re-evaluate its proposal for a directive on transparency in postal services in the light of the results of the above-mentioned debate .
Therefore , the Commission has decided to withdraw it from its work programme for 2003 .
In any event , whatever the result of this further analysis , should the Commission decide to go on with the project , this evaluation will not result in the introduction of new , substantive obligations for postal operators but only in transparency obligations to enable the Commission to monitor anti-competitive practices throughout the Community .
Mr President , I would not normally rise to speak on this issue , which is handled very competently by my colleague Mr Ferber , who is one of the most vigorous champions of postal service liberalisation , but who also works tirelessly to ensure that the customer 's interests and rights and consumer protection are taken seriously in the European Union .
I have risen today because I believe that we really must press hard - as my fellow Members have pointed out - to ensure absolute transparency .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for the plans that she has announced .
However , it must be said that such transparency has often been , and continues to be , sorely missed in both the Commission and especially the Council , although , of course , we also demand absolute transparency from the postal services as well .
Moreover , and I fully endorse what my fellow Members have said on this issue , we of course need Parliament to be in a strong position in terms of its legal status .
We need codecision .
We must be quite clear about this , because no one else , apart from this House , represents the interests of postal service users adequately .
I would like to make one thing quite clear : the reports which have appeared in the media in the last few days - my fellow Member has already mentioned them - which claim that value added tax is to be imposed on postage stamps really are designed to generate anti-European feeling among European Union citizens .
I really do urge you to bury these plans as swiftly as possible .
I do not mean that you should play them down , I mean that you should bury them .
I do not think that it is the European Union 's task to put forward this type of proposal , which is completely half-baked and really only has an impact on consumers .
Secondly , let me say this : we must ensure - and this too has already been mentioned - that the postal services , notwithstanding all the liberalisation which we are trying to achieve , of course also continue to have a key social function .
As we know , our society is increasingly fragmenting into those who can make dynamic use of modern technology and those who cannot .
We must not forget the people in peripheral regions , the socially weak , and the increasing numbers of old people .
The age pyramid is turning on its head .
In many Member States , the postal systems seem to combine all the disadvantages of the old state monopolies with the shortcomings of the new liberalised market , instead of creating synergies by drawing on the positive aspects of both new systems .
This clearly demonstrates the problems associated with the current transition period , especially for customers , as well as the serious lack of transparency .
Let me give you just one example : Deutsche Post removed large numbers of post boxes throughout Germany by stealth .
In my electoral district , there is a hotel called ' Zur Post ' , which has provided postal services for centuries .
Overnight , its post box was dismantled , causing damage to the building 's façade .
The licensee , whose family has operated a posthouse in conjunction with the hotel for centuries , was deliberately not informed .
Just imagine the scenario : so many post boxes have been removed that the ones in Munich are now overflowing .
It has actually become impossible to post a letter in the city centre at certain times of the day : the number of post boxes has been cut back to such an extent that they are completely full by the afternoon .
That is not competition .
That is not customer-friendly conduct .
It shows that there is also still a tendency to think in terms of the old monopoly structures while ruthlessly ignoring what was perhaps their social dimension , namely the provision of a service to citizens and a service to customers .
I therefore believe that we need as much market as possible , as quickly as possible .
We need as much transparency as possible as quickly as possible .
However , we also need minimum standards of consumer protection in areas where the market alone cannot regulate the problems that arise , which means the areas I have described , in particular .
I therefore believe that it is essential to press ahead with this process , not only through communications and Green Papers and so forth , but by working in close cooperation with the European Parliament on a legal basis which enables us , the only legitimate representatives of the European citizens and hence the postal service users , properly to monitor this complex process , which profoundly affects the life of every individual , and ensure that it is economically profitable , socially just , and compatible with people 's needs .
Mr President , for the sake of clarity , I would like to repeat that we do not intend to present a proposal on this subject in our work programme for 2003 .
However , the whole debate will continue within the context of the launching of the Green Paper .
I would also like to clarify that this initiative was launched against the backdrop of competition concerns regarding the postal sector brought to light in recent European case law and by the Commission .
From the outset , this initiative was conceived as a means of enforcing competition law and not as a legislative measure .
We are fully aware of the limits of the power of the Commission and of the European Union in what we can decide in this case .
More generally , the Commission considered on the one hand that the situation in the postal market could engender various forms of abusive behaviour by public postal operators .
On the other hand , it considered it would be worth exploring whether extending the transparency requirements in question to all incumbents might adequately assuage these concerns .
The debate will definitely continue .
I will of course also make sure that my colleague , Mario Monti , is informed of all your best arguments , and we will have an opportunity to come back to this discussion .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The next item is debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The next item is the joint debate on the following draft resolutions on the Democratic Republic of the Congo - Ituri Region :
B5-0241 / 2003 by Johan Van Hecke and Bob van den Bos , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in the Ituri Region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo ;
B5-0243 / 2003 by Nelly Maes , Didier Rod and Marie Anne Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the situation in Ituri ( DRC ) ;
B5-0249 / 2003 by Thierry Cornillet , Philippe Morillon and Bernd Posselt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the state of human rights in the Ituri region of the DRC ;
B5-0252 / 2003 by Francisca Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Margrietus J. van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Ituri ( DRC ) ;
B5-0257 / 2003 by Joaquim Miranda , Fodé Sylla , Jonas Sjöstedt , Luigi Vinci and Armando Cossutta , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the situation in the Ituri region of the DRC ;
B5-0258 / 2003 by Isabelle Caullery , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on the situation in the Ituri region , DRC .
Congo is a jungle where people behave like animals and where only the law of the jungle applies .
The country is massive , rich in resources and has virtually no state structure that can guarantee stability and security for the population .
Foreign troops and national militia , with countless child soldiers among them , have free play to plunder the country of its assets of gold , uranium , oil and diamonds to their heart 's content , destroy fields and villages , rape women and girls on a massive scale and assist one ethnic population group in massacring another .
The last shred of civilisation has left Congo .
Even animals do not behave like this towards each other in the animal world .
The human suffering is too awful for words : more than 2 million casualties and many times more injured , traumatised women and countless AIDS and malaria victims .
How does the international community respond ?
It sends a handful of lightly-armed UN soldiers , described by Uganda 's President , Mr Museveni , as constituting a worthless mission .
According to him , they stay in their cars while , 50 metres further along , people are being gunned down .
On the diplomatic front , agreements are made about the withdrawal of troops and national reconciliation , but these result in precisely more fighting and more irreconcilability .
Since the Ugandan soldiers left Ituri , massacres , plundering and rape have become the order of the day there too .
This must stop at all costs .
A well-equipped international armed force must be set up to assist MONUC and with an extensive mandate to protect the population as a matter of extreme urgency .
We certainly do not only need French soldiers .
Only far-reaching federalisation of the country with strong , regional governments can provide an answer .
The European Union must insist on this .
Without drastic reforms , without an actual , working state structure , the Congolese population is at the mercy of the wild animals among people , and only the rule of the jungle applies .
Mr President , the massacres in Ituri are extremely serious events and should indeed be one of the subjects in our debate on human rights .
We in the Group of the Party of European Socialists denounce once again the use of the rape of women and girls as a weapon of war and the recruitment of child soldiers .
We denounce the problems concerning access to humanitarian aid and the presence of foreign troops on the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
Finally , we denounce the neighbouring countries supporting the armed groups operating within the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
I would also like to draw attention to the peace process and to the urgency of supporting it , further to the so-called Final Act adopted on 2 April in South Africa .
We must not fail to see the wood for the trees .
These massacres must not deter us from working for peace in the long term .
The government of national unity provided for in the peace agreement must be formed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
The country needs an integrating government able to compel armed groups to withdraw .
The best means of achieving peace is to form a solid and stable integrating government .
The peace agreement timetable provided for the formation of the government of national unity on 28 May .
The parties and the rebel groups have presented their lists to the Government .
Paradoxically however , it is Mr Kabila 's government that is dragging its feet .
Once again , I would urge the Congolese authorities to comply with the terms and timetable in the peace agreement .
Similar problems are delaying the formation of a Parliament .
The measures required to form a Parliament by 10 June , the date set in the peace agreement , are not being taken .
Further , it has become evident that the mandate of the United Nations Observation Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( MONUC ) must be amended , as was previously proposed .
The United Nations has a mere 5 000 men deployed in a huge country .
The MONUC mandate needs to be extended to allow UN troops to intervene between the warring parties .
At present they are only there as observers to monitor the cease-fire .
In addition , UN troops should be allowed to intervene to protect the civilian population if necessary .
This must however remain a United Nations mission .
Under no circumstances should foreign troops be deployed , especially troops from countries with interests in the Great Lakes region .
French troops must also abide by the MONUC mandate .
Clearly , the presence of foreign troops in this area has been at the root of many of the conflicts that laid waste to the region , including the Rwandan genocide .
Consequently , it is necessary to ensure that the United Nations alone is responsible for guaranteeing peace .
I therefore believe the House must continue to insist on this .
I would like to take this opportunity to call upon the Commission to direct as much humanitarian aid as possible to help the civil population of the region .
These people have been suffering for a very long time .
Mr President , it seems that Africa is neglected by the UN and the rest of the world .
Two tribes , the Hemas and the Lendys have been fighting in the town of Bunia in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Hundreds of people have been injured .
Many people have been killed and yet , despite the presence of French troops and UN troops in DRC , they are still fighting , they are still killing and there is much trouble and displacement of the population .
The key to all this , as I have said many times before in Parliament , is that until rural areas in Africa have security in terms of land , the economy , rural assets and rural development , there will always be conflict .
There will be no democracy in Africa until people have something they can call their own , a stake in the local economies .
We are trying to encourage democracy in these countries .
Democracy cannot filter from the presidential palace down to the rural areas .
It has to grow from rural areas and until we improve the economies of the rural areas , until we provide security for these people through land tenure , through police , a chamber of commerce , political representation , local schools , local hospitals - assets that they can call their own - conflict will continue .
We seem to turn a blind eye to this .
I have been an MEP now for four years .
I have lived in Africa for many years .
My family has been there for 170 years and I know what it is like in the rural areas .
It is about time the European Commission , the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers recognise that Africa is not like the US or Europe , where democracy can be understood .
You knock on any mud hut in any part of Africa and tell the inhabitant that you have come from the European Parliament .
Tell him : ' here are your rights , rights for your women , rights for your children , rights for you to assemble , to worship , to have democracy in your parliament . '
As I found out with Mr Goebbels and Mr Van den Bos when we went to Ethiopia , these people ask only for water , seed , peace and security .
At the moment they have no stake in their economies .
Any rebel leader can come along and say : ' I will give you a hundred dollars , come with me , let us go and plunder , let us go and loot , let us go and fight ' , and they of course fall prey to that .
We see this in Uganda , we see this in Somalia , we see this in Ethiopia and Eritrea , we see it in Kenya , we see it in Central Africa .
Mr President , the wars going on in the Congo are tribal wars - ethnic wars - which , in terms of their duration and the devastation they cause , are basically comparable to Europe 's religious wars of the seventeenth century , such as the Thirty Years War .
The Congo has been called a continent in a continent and the disaster there is indeed taking place on a continental scale .
The Ituri region should be one of the most beautiful in the world .
If peace were to prevail , it could be a centre of tourism and prosperity .
That is why - and I would like to make this very clear - our task is not to point the finger arrogantly at others but to provide help by attempting to deploy our troops in the country as part of a robust peacekeeping mission .
We really cannot leave this task to the French , no matter how grateful we should be to them .
At present , we spend a great deal of time arguing over the role of the UN .
We are moving towards an odd situation in which major powers want to create legitimacy and the UN , with all its shortcomings , is expected to provide the instruments .
It has to be the other way round .
The UN must provide legitimacy and the world 's major stabilising factors must attempt to supply the instruments .
For example , a politically and militarily united Europe , in partnership with the United States , can be a peacebuilding factor there , but a group of troops slung together arbitrarily without a mandate cannot .
This is not an isolated or indeed a minor problem .
In Africa , survival is the problem , and the Congo is its most acute manifestation .
These conflicts are also inflamed , not least , by vested interests in the country 's resources .
We cannot leave the task to the Congo 's neighbours , for in many cases , there are ethnic groups in these countries who also have an interest in fanning the flames of conflict in the Congo .
As we have seen , the borders are artificial , with ethnically homogeneous peoples living on both sides of them .
If there is to be peace , there has to be a new order , and we must make a robust and substantial contribution to achieving this at last .
Mr President , too many people have died in this conflict , killed in a war of fratricide and poverty : out of three and a half million inhabitants two and a half have been dispersed , there are rapes , summary executions and enforced conscription of children to the army and military groups .
This death and destruction weigh like lead weights on our consciences too .
We cannot fail to feel responsible for the neglect , the indifference , the interests of our multinationals who are greedy for this large country 's resources , the colonial heritage , the misdeeds of the international and native communities which are , in reality , mixed , for neither is blameless .
We must act .
The peace agreements are in jeopardy , and the different parties fighting are to blame for this in a number of ways , particularly where the various countries have failed to withdraw troops .
There must be no more massacres like that which claimed hundreds of victims on 3 April 2003 .
Kofi Annan has reminded us that the perpetrators of criminal acts must answer for their actions to the international community .
That is why we too must step up our efforts to create an international criminal court to try the perpetrators of such crimes .
In my opinion , it is necessary to support and give effect to the calls of various social groupings and movements for MONUC to be given more power and a higher profile .
It must fulfil its mandate by taking practical action , implementing peacekeeping measures in the territory , to ensure that there are no more massacres and to guarantee the security of the people , so that the situation in Ituri , where MONUC did nothing and was unable to act although informed of the potential danger of a massacre , is not repeated .
I believe we need the boldness and transparency of a common policy which denies support to regimes which promote war and investigates the allegations made in the UN report against multinational and European firms which are unlawfully exploiting the Congo 's wealth .
The report records both unlawful funding of the militia and unlawful exploitation of gold , diamonds , oil and coltan .
It is no coincidence that so much gold , more than the country 's mining capacity , is exported from Uganda , as are so many diamonds , which are not mined in Uganda at all .
I genuinely believe we need to act as quickly as possible to bring peace and development in Uganda : the people need it .
We must therefore launch a policy which is genuinely rigorous and transparent .
Mr President , this debate is prompted by the massacre in the East Congolese town of Bunia on 6 May .
Sadly , this massacre is only the most recent in a long series of massacres in the east of the country .
Beyond the Congo 's borders , too - in Burundi and Rwanda - we have witnessed African genocide on a massive scale .
Other major features are marauding militia who recruit child soldiers and devastate entire regions , and the ruthless exploitation of natural resources in the region , above all gold , uranium and , indeed , oil .
This exploitation is carried out either by troops invited into the country - including some from Zimbabwe , for example - but also by non-invited troops , for example , from Uganda , who seize the country 's wealth .
We must ask ourselves one question . Why are Europe and the world looking away ?
It cannot be because of the oil or gold or other natural resources .
In other regions of the world with plentiful natural resources , as in the Gulf , we have an interest in stability , regardless of how we might choose to achieve it .
Yet in Africa , we apparently prefer to leave almost everything in a semi-chaotic state in line with the concept of ' might is right ' .
What I want is for all of us , within the European Union , to put our heads together for once and think about how we deal with Africa .
Formal summits on Africa staged by individuals really are not enough .
It may be appropriate to ask how we facilitate development in Africa through market access within the WTO framework .
That is a debate which we should also engage in for once , and we should not only call for a robust mandate for the United Nations ; we should also bring ourselves to the process .
The resolution before us is almost a bit too restrained for my liking , for it makes very few demands of the Council or the Commission .
It simply says at one point that we welcome ECHO 's humanitarian role .
It is indeed to be welcomed , but I think this is really not enough under the circumstances .
If we call on the United Nations to do something and welcome the signing of an agreement in Pretoria in South Africa on 6 March , we ourselves must also send our own forces there in order to make our own contribution .
I call on the Council and the Commission to take this step .
Mr President , I thank you for these well-informed statements , which demonstrate the European Parliament 's commitment to protecting human rights and fighting to secure peace in the Congo .
Mr Khanbhai expressed very well what this is all about on the ground , and also the frustration that we all feel about not being able to move from words to deeds fast enough so as to be able to stop all the violence that is taking place .
The Commission is extremely concerned about the continuing violation of human rights and international humanitarian law in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , particularly in Ituri and the east of the country .
We welcome the attention Parliament is drawing to this situation in its resolution this afternoon .
It is clear that thousands have lost their lives in the past eight months in Bunia and the surrounding Ituri province in fierce inter-ethnic fighting .
Over the past few days , there have been reports that up to 30 000 people have gone into hiding following further executions and massacres in Bunia .
We share the concerns expressed by the United Nations Secretary-General about the danger that the situation might spin out of control .
The Commission supports the work of the Ituri Pacification Commission and has been actively trying to bring the parties together .
The withdrawal of foreign troops from the region is , in principle , to be welcomed , but it is clear that the recent withdrawal of Ugandan troops from the area of Bunia has led to a dangerous power vacuum for the moment .
The UN peacekeeping force in the Congo is gradually reinforcing its presence in Bunia , but it is clear that currently it has neither the mandate nor the military resources to provide security for the civilian population .
What security means and what it often takes to ensure security should not , as many of you have said , be underestimated .
We would welcome the deployment of additional peacekeeping troops in Ituri .
There are undoubtedly links between efforts to secure peace in the eastern Congo and the current efforts in Kinshasa to form a transitional government for a reunited and peaceful country .
Long-term peace and stability for eastern Congo will depend in large measure on the success of this transition .
The Commission , in its assistance programme , is fully involved in these efforts , whether through humanitarian or development funds .
It is essential for all parties to the conflict to protect human rights and to respect international humanitarian law in the areas under their control . It is also necessary to end the impunity of those responsible for violations of human rights and international humanitarian law , given that the Democratic Republic of Congo is a party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court .
Finally , the Commission appreciates the reference to ECHO 's work and will of course pursue its humanitarian efforts .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The next item is the joint debate on the following draft resolutions on Taiwan 's observer status at the 56th World Health Assembly :
B5-0240 / 2003 by Ole Andreasen , Bob van den Bos and Graham R. Watson , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on Taiwan 's observer status at the 56th World Health Assembly ;
B5-0245 / 2003 by Brigitte Langenhagen and Georg Jarzembowski , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on Taiwan 's observer status at the 56th World Health Assembly ;
B5-0248 / 2003 by Per Gahrton , Joost Lagendijk and Nelly Maes , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on Taiwan 's observer status at the 56th World Health Assembly ;
B5-0254 / 2003 by Margrietus J. van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Taiwan 's observer status at the 56th World Health Assembly ;
B5-0261 / 2003 by Gerard Collins , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on Taiwan 's observer status at the 56th World Health Assembly .
Mr President , I believe that especially in view of the spread of entirely new diseases and epidemics in East Asia - SARS is sadly only the tip of the iceberg - it is a matter of urgency that Taiwan , a highly industrialised state which is visited by many people and has great experience in politics and administration , should be integrated into the World Health Organisation , something that this House has demanded on various occasions .
I think it is very regrettable that this matter - which , in the age of globalisation and world travel , is important not only for Taiwan but for everyone - is not being pursued vigorously enough .
Of course , we know that Beijing is blocking this ; that stands to reason , but I do think it is very regrettable that whereas the Commission has taken , and continues to take , a clear stance here - and I thank Commissioner Wallström for the Commission 's exemplary commitment on this issue - the Council can only be described as faint-hearted .
On a serious issue such as health and epidemiology , this faint-heartedness on the part of the Council can cost lives .
I therefore appeal to the Council of the European Union , to the governments of our Member States , to act resolutely so that Taiwan can join the World Health Organisation at last , and to ensure that these artificial obstacles are overcome .
This is not a question of prestige ; people 's lives are at stake .
Mr President , I can only agree with the previous speaker .
I am convinced that increased representation for Taiwan and opportunities for it to participate in various ways in the UN and in the work of other international organisations would contribute to peace and security in the region .
The Commission and , in particular , the Member States must pronounce themselves emphatically in favour of such an arrangement .
The first opportunity to take action will be the impending meeting of the World Health Organisation in Geneva .
It would be unfair if Taiwan , which is one of the countries affected by SARS , were not to be able to make its voice heard and not to be represented in Geneva .
It is gratifying that the European Economic and Trade Office has been set up in Taiwan , something which I think indicates that the EU wants to see increased cooperation .
In this context , it is also important for the EU institutions and the Member States to declare themselves in favour of Taiwan 's needing to be able to make its voice heard in all the international forums .
Mr President , I join in the chorus .
We are very much in agreement in this House that the spread of the SARS virus has made it more crucial than ever to ensure that we have safeguards to combat epidemics and that these safeguards are as comprehensive as possible .
The SARS virus has also served to highlight the difficulties caused by non-country status , as in the case of Taiwan .
In the early stages of the outbreak of SARS in Asia , I understand that the Taiwanese authorities could get very little information from the Chinese , which allowed the virus to spread rapidly across the region .
For this reason the Taiwanese have no alternative but to ask the World Health Organisation for help .
In a crisis situation such as this , countries or regions in dangerous situations should not be barred from being helped by the international community .
Although Parliament has been right in consistently supporting a one-China policy , we must work to ensure that this commitment does not put people 's lives in danger because of bureaucratic wrangling .
A pragmatic approach is needed to these problems when new challenges present themselves .
We must change our institutions to deal with these new global realities , and this is one example why .
Therefore , in this resolution we call for observer status for Taiwan at the World Health Assembly to be held in Geneva later this month .
It may be that Taiwan will not be recognised as a country , that it cannot be given such a status .
However , even if this is the case , we must push for the increased involvement of Taiwan in the Assembly so that at least it has the chance to participate in discussions and in the taking of decisions that affect its own people .
Mr President , it remains to be seen how serious the growing threat of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome will become , but Taiwan has already demonstrated a willingness to respond expeditiously to the outbreak , in full cooperation with the WHO .
This contrasts favourably with the abysmal response of the authorities in Beijing , whose first response was to find refuge in denial , misinformation and obfuscation .
That response led quite rightly to the resignation of China 's health minister and to the open admission by the Chinese Government of the seriousness of the outbreak .
Nevertheless , Chinese television has so far found it impossible to ask the kind of searching questions which one would expect in a Western democracy .
Sadly , China remains a secretive , repressive , Communist state in spite of free market reforms .
Already there is talk of a new glasnost in China .
That change is to be welcomed .
The initial reaction of the people has been shock and disillusionment , but in time China will be stronger for its openness .
Greater honesty with its people and greater debate will help China realise its enormous potential .
An attempt to go back to the old ways would simply hinder that process .
China can also learn from Taiwan in cooperating fully with the WHO , whilst observer status in its assembly for Taiwan will be of great benefit not only to the organisation itself but also to China .
Cooperation is the politics of the future .
We should also reflect in Europe on the need to give powers to public health authorities to contain those with the disease , so that any mass outbreak in Europe can be effectively contained .
In that respect , I have to say with regret that the British Government appears to have followed the example of China 's former health minister by pretending there is no problem to deal with in our country .
We have a right to expect better than that from our elected representatives and their officials .
Mr President , the issue now under our consideration is actually both urgent and one of human rights , because no human right is more important than the right to health .
The attitude adopted by this United Nations body borders on the absurd , because this mission , which took place at the beginning of May , was only undertaken as a result of immense pressure by Taiwan .
This almost makes me want to ask the United Nations and its Health Organisation whether they think that the virus is aware of their positions on Taiwan 's presence or otherwise in the United Nations .
Only those who believe they can control this type of phenomenon with bureaucratic measures could adopt such a position .
I therefore wish to congratulate those who have proposed this initiative and I should like to associate myself with their concern that Taiwan should be granted this observer status as quickly as possible .
Mr President , the Commission in principle supports Taiwanese efforts to participate in the work of international bodies and organisations , provided that Taiwan 's participation adds value in terms of the objectives of the organisation in question .
However , such participation must be compatible with Taiwan 's status and the European Union 's one-China policy .
In the case of the World Health Organisation , our view is that the first criterion is met .
Taiwan has made considerable achievements in the field of public health and is increasingly engaged in international aid and health activities .
Moreover , the recent outbreak of SARS , also in Taiwan , shows that Taiwan needs direct channels of communication with , and assistance from , the World Health Organisation .
This is also in the interests of the wider international community , including China .
All affected areas need to be kept in the loop and the concerted efforts of all are needed to combat this deadly disease .
It should be possible to find a pragmatic formula for some sort of Taiwanese participation in the World Health Organisation which does not involve issues of statehood or sovereignty and is thus in line with our one-China policy .
There are precedents for the participation in the World Health Organisation of other non-state bodies or organisations and this shows that solutions can be found , even where WHO rules do not expressly make provision for this .
For Taiwan , one possibility could be participation via an NGO .
We are currently examining , together with Member States and other major partners , what sort of arrangement could be feasible .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates .
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on freedom of expression and religion in Vietnam :
B5-0239 / 2003 , by Bob van den Bos and Graham R. Watson , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on freedom of expression and religion in Vietnam ;
B5-0242 / 2003 , by Patricia McKenna , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on freedom of expression and religion in Vietnam ;
B5-0244 / 2003 , by Hartmut Nassauer , Hanja Maij-Weggen , Bernd Posselt and Thomas Mann , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on freedom of expression and religion in Vietnam ;
B5-0253 / 2003 , by Richard Corbett and Margrietus J. van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on freedom of expression and religion in Vietnam ;
B5-0255 / 2003 , by Bastiaan Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on freedom of expression and religion in Vietnam ;
B5-0256 / 2003 , by Jonas Sjöstedt , Luisa Morgantini and Marianne Eriksson , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on freedom of expression and religion in Vietnam .
Mr President , I believe that there are many of us who are deeply concerned about what is happening in Vietnam .
The European Parliament too has expressed its concern on previous occasions .
The tendency is to want to break people down and frighten them into silence .
There are regular and constant violations of the conventions on freedom of expression , religion and association signed by Vietnam .
The list of methods of oppression includes the draft law designed to abolish the right of small farmers to demonstrate peacefully in pursuit of their rights .
It is particularly serious when the laws are exploited to oppress people .
If Vietnam is to call itself a state governed by law , the laws must protect people 's right to express themselves and freely to practise their religion .
Vietnam must also stop detaining and harassing dissidents and journalists , and its prisoners of conscience must be released .
In this connection , I want especially to mention the UBCV .
One of this organisation 's leaders , Quang Do , has also been nominated for the Nobel Prize in 2003 .
I genuinely wish to assent to this resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the restrictions on freedom of opinion and religion in Vietnam have assumed alarming proportions .
Protestants , Buddhists and the members of the Hoa Hoa and Cao Dai groups are being persecuted , threatened and arrested for practising their faith openly .
Church dignitaries are being placed under house arrest for years at a time .
Information is being deliberately suppressed on a massive scale .
For over a year , there has been a directive expressly prohibiting citizens from receiving satellite television broadcasts , and the Ministry of Information is harassing the owners of Internet cafés to log the on-line activities of their customers .
The number of journalists and dissidents being intimidated and arrested is steadily mounting .
Vietnam has signed the 1996 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , which was sponsored by the United Nations .
Yet national decrees are being adopted to circumvent this voluntary commitment by the back door , enabling penalties to be imposed on anyone who allegedly poses a threat to national security .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats calls on the Vietnamese Government to fulfil its obligations under international law , and to tolerate and guarantee full freedom of belief and opinion at last .
Persecution , harassment and imprisonment of believers and regime critics must stop , and the free flow of information must finally be guaranteed .
When human rights are violated on a sustained basis , the sovereignty of the states simply remains on paper , further proof that such governments lack something that is essential to act on a truly sovereign basis .
Unless Parliament 's demands are met in the near future , there is only one option : that will be for the European Union to suspend its financial support to Vietnam .
I very much hope , Commissioner Wallström , that the Commission will endorse this position .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to address my opening words to those Members who were involved in tabling this resolution on Vietnam , representing the various political groups .
I believe that we now have a text that stands out for its rigour in condemning religious persecution and for its boldness in defending human rights in that country .
Secondly , I wish to offer a word of solidarity and of faith to the Buddhist leaders and those of other religious convictions who are fighting for their inalienable right to express themselves in complete freedom and independence from political power , and to the enormous number of victims of the repression and arbitrariness of the regime , including citizens who have expressed their political disagreement by peaceful means , sometimes only through email , as well as small farmers , indigenous Christian minorities and journalists .
Almost three decades have passed since the fall of Saigon and since the reasons which , according to some people , could justify limitations on human rights , freedom and democracy have no longer applied .
This is not how things have worked out , however , with the totalitarian regime that installed itself having survived even the fall of the Berlin Wall .
Democracy and human rights are on the agenda in every country in the world and must accordingly also be on the agenda in Indochina .
As suggested in the joint resolution that has been proposed , the recent meeting held between the Vietnamese prime minister and the leader of the unified church of Vietnam is a positive sign , must be put to good use and is a good reason for extending the cooperation agreement between the European Union and that country .
We must be clear , however , on the need for the human and democratic rights laid down in Article 1 of the agreement , which form the basis of the agreement , to be respected .
We will not accept a merely rhetorical interpretation of this article and we believe it represents real progress in these fields , without which the agreement cannot continue indefinitely .
In our view , the Commission must draw up an action plan and a precise and realistic timetable for the Vietnamese authorities to undertake urgent and fundamental reforms , release political prisoners , authorise freedom of worship and rescind recent initiatives that introduce further restrictions to freedom of information , such as access to satellite television .
We therefore hope that the Vietnamese authorities heed the call represented by this resolution and quickly provide signs that they are willing to remedy the current situation .
Unless they do , we in the European Parliament will be forced to draw the necessary conclusions .
Mr President , in the opinion of the Communist government in Vietnam , the situation in the fertile Central Highlands is increasingly getting out of hand .
After all , that is where the call for independence is louder .
The Vietnamese Government itself is to blame for this last-ditch , political cry for help on the part of the original inhabitants of the Central Highlands , namely ethnic minorities .
It is responsible for discrimination against indigenous peoples by the ethnic Vietnamese , the so-called Kinh .
It is also responsible for land robbery by the Kinh at the expense of the ethnic minorities .
In the Central Highlands , the Vietnamese Government is also adopting a repressive policy against officially unrecognised Protestant churches .
This mainly concerns indigenous peoples of the Bana , the Ede and the Zarai .
The security services are extremely active in those areas .
Soldiers are also billeted with the villagers .
I would therefore question what remains of personal freedom and of any religious freedom in the private sphere .
Not for nothing have the Vietnamese authorities stationed senior party members from Hanoi , outsiders in other words , in the three Central Highlands provinces .
I am certain that the European Union can do something about this oppressive , explosive situation .
First of all , the Union should couple stringent , political conditions to the large sums of money it injects into Vietnamese government projects .
In the final analysis , Hanoi has committed itself by international treaty to enforcement of the basic freedoms of expression , association and religion .
In addition , following the example of the Dutch Government , for example , the European Commission should , via co-financing organisations , support projects which truly benefit the oppressed ethnic minorities in the Central Highlands .
This is at present a major failing in European aid to Vietnam .
The Vietnamese Government refuses to put indigenous peoples from the Dac Lac , Gia Lai and Kon Tum provinces on an equal footing with the Kinh .
It does not take them seriously , in other words .
It is up to the European institutions to set an example which is worth imitating .
Finally , Council and Commission , in order to have any impact , the European Union should , however , insist upon the Vietnamese authorities ' opening up the Central Highlands to foreign observers .
Mr President , considering the suffering , the sacrifices and the dignity of the Vietnamese people in their fight for sovereignty and independence in the face of colonialism and US military intervention , which has destroyed life and nature for future generations with chemical and bacteriological weapons , they do not deserve a government which continues to oppress them and prevents freedom of expression and demonstration .
Of course , progress has been made towards political , economic and democratic openness , including the trade agreement with the United States , the release of prisoners , the announcement of free elections and the Internet . However , this facade of renewal conceals the tragic reality .
The 20 000 prisoners released were common criminals , while the political prisoners are still being detained .
The Internet , as other Members have reiterated , is actually used for control purposes and satellite broadcasting is banned . Freedom of religion , confirmed formally for both Buddhists and Montagnard Christians , is actually far from being implemented : religious leaders have been imprisoned , there are house arrests and the faithful are under strong pressure to forsake their religion .
People are not just being oppressed for their religious belief , however : the rule of law is being violated in the name of national security , a concept we are very familiar with by now .
With our joint resolution , we call upon the European Union to continue its work and to pressurise the Vietnamese Government to pursue dialogue with the religious groups , to put an end to all oppression , to release prisoners and to allow the practical development of political and humanitarian organisations and NGOs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is willing to support the Vietnamese people in progressing towards a society in which democracy and the rule of law are the core principles .
Vietnam has already made significant advances along this path which deserve to be recognised .
Nonetheless , there are still some very worrying developments .
The ASEAN delegation attended the AIPO General Assembly in Hanoi last year and was prepared to visit the Vietnamese authorities and parliamentary colleagues for talks .
However , when we were denied access to religious leaders , we felt we had no option but to cut short the visit .
That is precisely the point that we want to highlight .
There are worrying restrictions on human rights , especially religious freedom .
The issue of religious freedom has nothing to do with how Vietnam conducts matters of state .
It is wrong to seek to define the exercise of religious freedom as a threat to national security .
We are not interfering in Vietnam 's internal affairs .
Vietnam can decide for itself which path it wants to take .
That is not our responsibility .
However , there are fundamental and universal rights which are binding for all of us , and they include the right to practise a religion .
There are eminent representatives of Vietnam who , for example , have been here in Europe , in the European Union , and now occupy key positions in the Vietnamese parliament .
They know exactly what our positions are .
They know that we have no desire to interfere in Vietnam 's domestic decisions , and they know that we are prepared to provide help .
However , we must insist that political and religious prisoners are released .
That is what this House demands .
Mr President , Mr Nassauer is absolutely right .
There has been some progress , but quite frankly that progress is not enough .
We are talking about fundamental and universal human rights .
I stand here as an atheist , but defend the right to freedom of religion , freedom of belief , freedom of association and the freedom to exchange ideas .
What do we have to fear from people who have different ideas or different beliefs from us ?
We must call upon the Vietnamese Government to do what is absolutely right , which is to respect universal human rights and release prisoners of conscience , to stop detentions and to allow journalists to go about their business , which is to report and criticise .

Let me refer to what was said by my colleagues Mr Mann and Mr Casaca with reference to the cooperation agreements and our association agreements .
We have to enforce these human rights clauses otherwise we will never be taken seriously by the international community .
We must state clearly that these are our standards and our principles , and that they are non-negotiable .
Mr President , the Commission 's overall policy towards Vietnam is to encourage and support continued progress on human rights and democratisation and to raise concerns where abuses occur or where a deterioration in the situation becomes evident .
The Commission works closely with EU Member States in monitoring human rights developments in the country and participates in all démarches to the Government of Vietnam on human rights issues .
I can assure honourable Members that the Commission and EU Member States have repeatedly urged the government of Vietnam to strengthen its respect for political and religious freedoms and to further strengthen economic and social freedoms .
Article 1 of the European Community and Vietnam Cooperation Agreement of 1995 states that respect for human rights and democratic principles is the basis of our cooperation .
This reference has given the Commission increased possibilities to discuss human rights issues with Vietnam , for example in joint committee meetings held under the agreement .
With the aim of encouraging and supporting the continued commitment of the government of Vietnam to human rights issues , the Commission is currently considering proposing a further reinforcement of the relations in this field .
This could be done through the establishment of a mechanism for a structured human rights dialogue , taking account of the experience gained with dialogues that the EU has already established with other countries .
Let me recall that the Constitution of Vietnam guarantees freedom of belief and religion and that the Vietnamese Government officially recognises six religions .
The Constitution also specifies that it is forbidden to violate freedom of belief or religion or to take advantage of it , or to act against the laws or policies of the state .
This provision is attributed to the desire of the Vietnamese authorities to control the pace of change and to maintain cohesion in their society during the process of transition to a market economy .
However , it may also be used against non-approved religious groups which , according to the Vietnamese authorities , engage in political activities or are potential elements of disunity .
Reports of harassment of Christians in Vietnam , especially the Montagnards and Hmong Christians , have increased since the violent uprising in the Central Highlands in 2001 , in which some religious groups were reportedly implicated .
A number of so far unconfirmed reports since then have alleged repeated actions by local official forces aimed at forcing highlanders to renounce their faith .
Commission President Prodi and Commissioner Patten discussed the situation in the Central Highlands with Vietnam 's Prime Minister , Phan Van Khai , during his visit to the Commission last September .
They agreed that the Commission would explore , under its financial cooperation programme , specific activities involving , inter alia , ethnic minorities to reduce poverty in the Central Highlands and thus to deal with some of the root causes of problems in the area .
A preparatory mission of experts is currently in the field .
As Mr Dupuis has already mentioned , recent , promising , positive signals have been sent out by the Vietnamese Government regarding the still unrecognised Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam .
There has been a meeting between Prime Minister Phan Van Khai and the Supreme Patriarch , the Venerable Thich Huyen Quang .
A meeting between the Patriarch and the Venerable Thich Quang Do , another prominent leader of the Unified Buddhist Church , has also been authorised .
Although no change with regard to the church 's legal status has so far taken place , we believe that these events , as mentioned , are encouraging steps towards enhanced tolerance of religious freedom in Vietnam .
Let me conclude by emphasising that I am convinced that what is needed in Vietnam is continued and more rapid progress in the country 's reform programme so that the administration would learn to deal with a wider range of use and appreciate the value of accommodating dissent in the system of government .
I thank all honourable Members of the European Parliament fo