Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 28 November 1996 .
Tribute
Ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry to have to tell you that Alain Poher died this morning .
Alain Poher was a Member of this Parliament from the time when it was first created , in 1952 .
He went on to occupy various positions of office until the year 1978 .
Amongst other things he was the chairman of the Christian Democrat Group , and then from March 1966 until March 1969 he served as President of the European Parliament .
He then went on to preside over the fortunes of the French Senate .
Throughout his life , Alain Poher was one of the most enthusiastic promoters of the construction of Europe .
He was indefatigable in its defence , drawing political lessons from the catastrophic events of the Second World War .
On behalf of the European Parliament , and at a personal level too , I should like to express my sincere condolences to Alain Poher 's family and also to the authorities of the French Republic .
I should now like to ask you to show your respect by observing a minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , could I please have your attention for a moment .
Last Tuesday , my country was plunged into mourning following a dreadful , cowardly attack .
That attack left four people dead : a French citizen , a Canadian citizen , and two Moroccan students .
Once again , an act of barbarism has been committed on European soil .
I am reminding you of these facts because , implicitly , I want to prevent terrorism from becoming , as it were , trivialized .
Several European countries are steeped in blood as a result of terrorism : Spain , the United Kingdom , Ireland and France .
We must show clearly our determination to stamp out this evil .
In order to do this , we must increase coordination between European police forces and judicial systems , because our fellow citizens would never approve of a situation in which the abolition of borders resulted in an increase in acts of terrorism .
The House shares your abhorrence at the crime which has been committed in France , Mr Pasty , and joins you in opposing the trivialization of terrorism in any of the Member States of the European Union .
I expressed our sympathy and abhorrence at this attack to the French Government last week .
Mr President , on a point of order under Rule 19 ( 4 ) , I would ask for your urgent support for Mr Ken Wilkinson of Basildon which is in my constituency .
He is one of at least 72 British lorry drivers stranded in Salonika by the blockade mounted by Greek farmers .
I have been in negotiation with the Greek authorities and British consular officials throughout the weekend and welcome the fact that a ferry has been laid on to evacuate the stranded drivers starting tonight .
However , at the moment there is no access to that ferry and the danger is that the drivers will be moved to Athens but still be subject to the blockade .
I understand that if they do not move before Wednesday of this week , they will be unable to return home for Christmas .
Mr Wilkinson and his colleagues are running short of cash and fuel and are bitterly cold at night .
I am told the mood amongst other drivers is angry and that a violent confrontation cannot be ruled out .
Mr President , I am not asking you to comment on the details of the dispute but I am asking you to write to the Greek Government to request it to do everything possible to assist the lorry drivers innocently caught up in the blockade so that they may return home .
I understand the concern for a citizen from your constituency , Mr Howitt , and for all the lorry drivers who are affected .
At the same time , however , I admire your ingenious interpretation of the Rules of Procedure and Rule 19 .
I have the impression , ladies and gentlemen , that there are likely to be further contributions in a similar vein .
I shall not allow that to happen .
As is my duty , I shall of course now give the floor to those who have asked to raise points of order , but you should not think that I shall refrain from interrupting you .
We have had enough of this for today .
Mr Cabezón Alonso has the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , in the next few days , before the end of the year , the Guatemalan Government and the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Union will be signing a final peace agreement in that Central American country .
Just as this Parliament has noted infringements of human rights in Guatemala , I ask it now to send its congratulations on this peace agreement .
That was not a point of order !
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 5 December 1996 pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Tuesday :
The Group of the European Radical Alliance has requested the withdrawal of the reports by Mr Christodoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the financing of the enlargement of the Union , and by Mr Rehder , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the study on alternative strategies for the development of relations in the field of agriculture between the EU and the associated countries with a view to future accession of these countries .
I give the floor to Mrs Lalumière to explain this request .
Mr President , my group would like both Mr Christodoulou 's report and Mr Rehder 's report to be removed from the agenda , and for the same reason .
In effect , these two reports are concerned with the future enlargement of the European Union to include the countries of Central Europe , a subject which is of major importance .
These reports deal with certain points which , whilst important , are nevertheless of a somewhat technical nature .
I am thinking in particular of the report by Mr Christodoulou , which covers budgetary and accounting matters .
The image , or impression , given by these reports runs the risk of appearing very negative to the countries of Central Europe , particularly since in this instance the reports are being dealt with separately from other reports , in particular the general reports submitted by Mr Oostlander .
This is why we believe that it is not a good policy to deal with the Christodoulou and Rehder reports on Tuesday .
Even if it turns out that substantial amendments are proposed to these reports , the political message being sent to the countries of Central Europe will still run the risk of being a negative message .
This is why we think it reasonable to remove these reports from the agenda now , so that they can be re-examined later , within a wider political framework .
Mr President , if the ARE Group had not made this proposal , we in the Group Union for Europe would have done so .
We did not find the terms in which the discussion on this highly important report was conducted - particularly within the Committee on Agriculture - at all convincing .
Of course we are all keenly in favour of enlargement and integration , but because of the haste with which these two reports were put together , we think this may not allow us to achieve these objectives with sufficient knowledge of the facts .
In the case of the Committee on Agriculture , our colleague Mr Rehder , the rapporteur - demonstrating an excess of goodwill , perhaps , and in an effort to be too accommodating - has broadened the scope too much , to the point that he has lost sight of certain concrete parameters which , in our view , should form the basis of assessment for the purposes of enlargement .
We therefore believe that these two reports should be referred back to committee for more detailed and specific analysis .
The Union for Europe therefore supports the proposal to refer these reports back to committee and withdraw them from the agenda .
Mr President , I will refer basically to my own report .
It was debated repeatedly by the Committee on Budgets over a fairly long period of time , and there are two reasons why it should not be referred back .
The first is that this is necessarily an interim report , because a great deal of information is required to complete the picture and it will take a very long time for the Commission to prepare that information .
In other words , we are talking about years rather than months .
Because of this , a general framework must be worked out to show exactly what the problems are , to include a description of the policy to be pursued in the sensitive financial sector , and those matters cannot be put off because no decisions whatsoever can be taken without knowledge of the real facts and figures that constitute the financial consequences .
Besides , Mr President , I must comment that what Mrs Lalumière told us , namely that the issue could create negative impressions in the Central and Eastern European countries , is like burying one 's head , ostrich-like , in the sand .
What we are saying at this time is that we must describe things as they really are , so that those who take decisions will be aware of what is involved .
For that reason , this study must be examined now and not later .
Mr President , I can of course understand my fellow Members ' wish to have a meaningful debate .
What I fail to understand , however - because this question has already been under discussion for almost a year - is the fact that these colleagues have not spoken out before now in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development or here in the House .
As for the negative impression which has been referred to , there can be no question of creating such an impression when we are speaking of Eastern Europe in terms of partnership and friendships .
I believe that the report merits closer reading on this point .
In fact , I think that what is going on here - and the motion by Mr Santini and his colleagues bears me out - is an attempt to prevent any agricultural reform at all , in other words to block a sensible and balanced agricultural policy .
That is why I am in favour of proceeding in a cooperative way with the work that we have been doing up to now .
I now put to the vote the request for withdrawal of the report by Mr Christodoulou .
( Parliament rejected the request )
I now put to the vote the request for withdrawal of the report by Mr Rehder .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Mr President , I am glad that we are concerned about human rights .
Róisín McAliskey , a young Irish woman , was arrested some weeks ago and sent to England .
Since then she has been in at least four different prisons including an all-male prison , despite the fact that she is four months pregnant and not well .
She is suspected of a crime in Germany but has not been convicted .
The brutality with which she has been treated in the English prisons is outrageous and I ask you to intervene with the British Government so that something can be done .
Róisín McAliskey is the daughter of a former Westminster MP and this treatment of her is against all principles of human rights in the Council of Europe and the European Parliament .
I plead with you to intervene on her behalf so that she can be treated humanely and decently .
I am prepared to take action in any case which is presented to me .
However , you could have asked me this in writing .
You should not have turned it into an announcement in the sitting .
Prevention of drug dependence
The next item is the report ( A4-0398 / 96 ) by the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee ( C4-0575 / 96-94 / 0135 ( COD ) ) for a European Parliament and Council Decision on adopting a programme of Community action on the prevention of drug dependence within the framework of action in the field of public health ( 1996-2000 ) ( rapporteur : Mr Burtone ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the programme of Community action on the prevention of drug dependence is nearing its final stage .
At first reading - it must , quite frankly , be acknowledged - we were more ambitious ; now , however , partly as a result of the action of certain groups , the legislative process has in fact caused us to scale down the project as first conceived in committee and then in this Chamber .
Nevertheless , approval of the programme of action and the joint text which came out of it in the Conciliation Committee is still a decision with a high political , social and ethical profile .
Social Europe is now indeed emerging in full force . The desperate plight of so many young drug addicts who suffer side-effects from their drug dependence in both social and health terms is becoming a priority for the European Parliament and the other Institutions .
Europe is once again rejecting the short cut of drug legalization : this has been stated unequivocally in the committee responsible , in the Conciliation Committee and in this Chamber .
Europe has said ' no ' because accepting legalization means heading for defeat , throwing in the towel , in a sense contemplating State-sponsored drugs .
In doing this , the route Europe has chosen to take may be longer and more difficult , but it is also more exciting : to combat drugs is to reaffirm a European policy which aims to reduce demand for drugs in our Community .
To that end we commit ourselves to taking action on youth poverty .
But using what instruments ?
I said earlier that these had been scaled down , even though their positive aspects must be appreciated .
The educational and information campaigns under the programme which has been adopted are centred primarily on the family , but also on schools and leisure centres , with a view to implementing youth policies capable of saving future generations of young people completely .
Particular attention is paid to risk groups , those young people who live in the run-down suburbs of our cities and whose quality of life is not up to present-day standards .
We focus on adolescents who , more than any other group , run the risk of being overwhelmed by the new synthetic drugs .
On the basis of this robust initiative , Parliament is seeking to provide the existing structures with the means of delving more deeply into the questions , issues and problems which need to be identified and of developing new strategies to combat drug dependence .
The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction needs to be strengthened , made more effective and linked in a more organic way with non-governmental organizations and those who work at the frontiers of the drug problem and need advice and guidance to help them become more effective .
The programme also focuses on training , because work is crucial to reducing poverty among the young .
I have said that there are limitations and I should like now to list them all , clearly and with absolute candour .
Our action should also have been targeted at secondary and tertiary prevention , as Parliament has , on several occasions , said that it is right and proper to treat , rehabilitate and reintegrate young people if they are to escape from the drug culture .
But to do this we had still to provide a response in terms of primary prevention , because a young person who kicks the drug habit is the living proof that drugs can be beaten .
In conclusion , I should like to say , Mr President , that Parliament , which has already included the prevention programme in a stronger policy cracking down on the ' drugs mafias ' which feed off the tragedy of drug dependence , must give a broader response and look at the many organizations providing therapy and the voluntary groups which have already done such a lot of work in this area .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I should like to thank Mr Burtone for being so patient and to congratulate him on the result he has achieved .
The European Parliament has reached agreement with the Council and the Commission on an action programme on the prevention of drug dependence .
There were considerable differences of opinion even here in Parliament , and it has to be said that under the current conciliation procedure , a small minority which may have no knowledge of the issue at stake can impose its will on a much larger majority .
Nevertheless , most Member States are coming to realize that with drugs , combating demand is more important than combating supply .
Combating supply may well be justified from a legal or even moral standpoint , but it has little long-term effect .
Only 10 % of drugs are intercepted , and they remain widely available .
Let us start from this basis , and stop trying to pretend to ourselves that society will one day be free of drugs , much as we would like it to be .
If we face up to reality , we can develop much more efficient prevention and health policies .
The health situation in each country is what counts , and a country will not become healthier by imposing stiff penalties on cannabis users , or by making a great song and dance about closing its borders .
If we analyse each country 's results objectively , we can see that tough policies seldom produce tough results .
We are now in a position to make ECU 29 million available , so let us ensure that it is put to good use .
This action plan is rather more realistic and pragmatic than was originally proposed .
Drug addicts are now seen as people who are ill , rather than criminals ; projects are to be organized among drug users and on the streets ; there is to be dialogue with young people , and support for a policy of risk reduction for individuals and society as a whole .
All of these are to be welcomed .
But we should not delude ourselves that this is some kind of great leap forward .
The Heads of State and Government are about to meet in Dublin , and we hope that there will be good news for the millions of unemployed , for all those young people whose future prospects are currently so bleak , and for the children whose parents are out of work because our tax and social security rules have not been harmonized .
If Europe fails to make any progress here , then prevention plans like this one will really make very little difference .
Mr President , I should like to raise a point of order .
I listened to Mr Burtone very carefully : I respect his political opinions , but when , in his capacity as rapporteur in a conciliation procedure concerning an action programme for the prevention of drug addiction , he maintains that in this document Parliament is against legalization , I should like to ask him which recital or article his statements are based on .
Otherwise , I would ask him to withdraw them , at least as regards the text we are discussing .
Strictly speaking , that was not a point of order , Mr Dell 'Alba .
Without further criticism , I now give the floor to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Burtone on his report , which I have to say is a particularly fine piece of work .
We encountered a few problems during our discussions and in the vote at second reading .
I would point out - for the benefit of Mr De Coene - that when there was some question of extending the programme by adding a number of specific projects , which the PPE Group voted against at the time because we felt that it was not consistent with the legal basis , the Council went on to demonstrate that what you wanted to do was not possible , despite everything that was said about me in the Dutch press .
Next weekend the question of joint action is to be discussed at the Dublin summit , which is to examine how we can work together to tackle drug dependence in Europe .
I know that there are a number of Members here who think that the answer is to legalize everything .
Mr De Coene and a number of others have tabled a motion for a resolution to the effect that drugs must at least be freely available to users .
Mr De Coene has put his name to this .
I would never support this ' tough policy ' , to use his own words , and I will tell you why .
Thanks to such a policy - I do not know if you read the Dutch newspapers - the Jellinek Clinic , a very reputable institution , has found that 30 % of all 17 and 18 year-olds in the Netherlands today have already experimented with drugs .
Similar results have been obtained in research by the public health authority in the province of Groningen , which is typical of the country as a whole .
When I look at these results and think of the tolerant approach which allows soft drugs to be widely available , even for young children , I feel that instead of simply glorifying the policy that the Netherlands is pursuing , we should use this action programme as an opportunity to think long and hard about which is best : the tolerance which is practised in the Netherlands , or the repressive approach adopted by a number of other Member States .
There may yet be a middle way .
I would call on the Commission to use the comparative study of current legislation produced by the European Monitoring Centre in Lisbon and Mr Burtone 's action programme as the basis for examining what the policy implications are and how we can reproduce the good results achieved in the Netherlands , in terms of the number of drugs-related deaths and the number of cases of HIV infection , in other countries .
On the other hand , how can we reduce the side-effect that the Netherlands is suffering from - the fact that three times as many young people as four years ago are now trying drugs for the first time ?
I should like to know what people think about this .
I see from the nature of some of the comments which are being made that I need to draw your attention to the Rules of Procedure .
Personal statements - which are quite clearly what is involved here - can be made only at the end of the debate .
If you wish to make a personal statement , then you should inform me pursuant to Rule 108 .
That is the rule on the subject .
You will then have the opportunity of doing so at the end of the debate .
I think that Mr De Coene was contemplating a personal statement , and also Mr Burtone .
We shall take all these at the end of the debate , but I would ask you to look at the Rules of Procedure beforehand .
These are personal statements , and not contributions to the debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we need to invest heavily in prevention , information and education .
This is what emerges from the programme of Community action adopted in relation to prevention of drug dependence , which is designed to contribute to the fight against drug dependence , in particular by encouraging cooperation among the Member States , supporting their campaigns and promoting coordination of their policies and programmes .
The joint text agreed within the Conciliation Committee and so ably supported by Mr Burtone - whom I should like to compliment on the vast amount of excellent work he has done - outlines the measures that have to be taken .
These relate , firstly , to data , research and evaluation , in an effort to improve knowledge of drugs and drug dependence and their consequences , using , in particular , information supplied by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction in Lisbon . The second group of measures concern information , health education and training and are designed to help improve information , health education and training for the purpose of preventing drug dependence and the associated risks , in particular as regards young people in the relevant categories and particularly vulnerable groups , including drug addicts .
Other important aspects are : treating the addict as a person who is ill and not as a criminal ; prevention , which must cover all kinds of narcotics and psychotropic substances , including the new synthetic drugs ; and the need to mobilize all the sectors involved , supporting multidisciplinary cooperation between the public and private sectors , including NGOs .
Lastly , I think that the search for new coordinated strategies which are consistent with other Community programmes is of fundamental importance , with continuous assessment of results as they are achieved . This should help prevent the recurrence of very negative situations - as we have seen in Italy - such as the spread of AIDS , imprisonment , social marginalization and an increase in petty crime and prostitution .
We therefore need to take account of the complex nature of the drugs problem and of the risks associated with it , as well as the fundamental importance of a broad range of public health and social measures essential to the protection of health and quality of life .
Mr President , the Liberal Group also welcomes the results obtained in the conciliation committee , and we should like to congratulate Mr Burtone on his hard work .

However , we realize , as I hope Mrs Oomen does too , that this is not about combating drug trafficking , but about public health , and as I see it the whole question of drug dependence belongs fairly and squarely in the public health domain .
Drug addicts are primarily people with a health problem rather than criminals to be prosecuted , and the emphasis should therefore be on prevention and help rather than repression .
Repression , I think we should all agree , needs to be targeted instead on drug trafficking and organized crime .
I am therefore delighted that the final text produced by the committee offers scope for a pragmatic and humane approach which focuses on prevention and risk-limitation .
I also welcome the fact that the report recognizes the importance of cooperation with NGOs and social welfare organizations , since these are the bodies which know what the day-to-day problems are and can take action where it is needed .
Finally , the Public Health Council may finally be making some progress , but I regret to say that other measures are now rearing their ugly heads , such as the joint action under the third pillar recently proposed by the French , which is based entirely on repression and totally ignores the importance of a humane and pragmatic approach .
We hope that a solution can be found to this issue , on which opinions are still deeply divided between France and the Netherlands in particular , for the benefit of all drug addicts .
Mr President , on behalf of the Greens , I regret that the text approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection was scaled down during the conciliation process .
Once again we have seen differences in the positions of the Council and the European Parliament .
Nevertheless , it must be noted that some significant progress has been made as regards both the concept of prevention and the means of tackling the problem of drug dependence .
I refer in particular to the stress on the fact that the patient is not a criminal , that , in reality , the prison environment is often a place where the risk of drug dependence develops and that the programme must cover all types of drug , without distinction .
However , I should like to point out that alcohol is more dangerous than cannabis , which causes less damage and fewer social problems .
We also need to assess which strategies are capable of saving human lives ; in our view , for instance , examples of this are the controlled administration of drugs and , more generally , the decriminalization of drug use .
Cooperation with NGOs and dialogue with young people are also important .
For those reasons , I should like to thank those honourable Members who formed part of the Conciliation Committee for their work and to express the hope that this is the starting-point for a new policy on combating drug dependence .
Mr President , I should like to inform Mr Burtone of the disappointment felt by the radical antiprohibitionists in this Parliament .
We cannot , like him , congratulate ourselves on the fact that the conciliation position has already , between the first and second readings , weakened our position .
Between those two readings we have lost everything relating to policy on reducing risks .
We have lost everything relating to freedom in the provision of therapy for drug addicts , and we have also , above all , lost the overall negative verdict that had been given on the policy of suppression and prohibition .
At this point I cannot avoid drawing your attention to the fact that decades of prohibition have resulted in the everincreasing use of drugs , a constant improvement in the profits of organized crime , the growth of petty and more serious crimes linked to the need to finance the drug habit , and finally , on the pretext of prohibition , which involves secrecy , the spread of AIDS .
Those are the results of a policy of prohibition , and we have managed to lose them between the first and second readings .
That is the position we are in today .
We can share most of the excellent intentions of Mr Burtone , but I am afraid that they will remain mere empty words as long as we do not fundamentally question the logic of the prohibition policy .
Finally , Mr President , I should like in a moment to refer to the Rules of Procedure regarding the proposals made by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking here about a sum of around ECU 27 or 29 million - no one knows the exact figure , but it is , at any rate , more than BFR 1 billion .
This may seem like peanuts in European terms , but it is certainly not peanuts for the taxpayers who are expected to pay every penny of this and all the other billions our budget goes through .
And , quite honestly , I cannot say that I expect all this taxpayers ' money to be spent wisely and responsibly .
My main objection is that all the measures referred to in this report - which I regret to say offers no support for the principle of the traditional family unit and fails even to mention the unfortunate , but nevertheless clear link between drug trafficking and mass immigration - could actually be organized much more efficiently by the Member States .
The European Union does have a role to play in the fight against drugs , but not as some kind of large-scale needle exchange service .
On the contrary , it should be promoting cooperation between the various police forces against international drugs crime and imposing strict checks at our internal and external borders .
But as we know , the European Union is unable or unwilling to play this role , and is even doing the opposite .
Checks at the internal borders are being abolished and those that remain are condemned by the Euro-fanatics as some sort of crime against humanity .
I would also point out that the Netherlands is shortly to take over the presidency of the Union , and everyone knows the sinister meaning which the word ' coffee-shop ' now has in that country .
So I am very sceptical , to put it mildly , about these results from the Conciliation Committee , and I think we should reject the report as it now stands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as competition intensifies and , at the same time , young people perceive that they have less and less chance of sharing in society 's prosperity , they try to escape from the pressures which they face as individuals by taking drugs .
Drugs become a comfort and a means of escape from reality .
The Irish presidency has made drugs policy in the EU a priority .
I welcome the action programme and the specific recommendations .
Increasingly , what we are seeing , as opposed to heroin users , are people with multiple drug addictions .
This means that different kinds of help must be provided for them .
But it also means that cooperation between everyone involved in caring for drug addicts is essential .
It is also important to provide comprehensive information , particularly in our schools .
Dialogue with children at risk , and their parents - especially as early as the pre-school years - is a very important aspect of prevention .
Drug abuse , drug dealing and the associated crime to which it leads have a destructive effect on society .
The European Union must therefore continue to concern itself with combating these problems .
There must be room for an open debate on drugs as part of federal and national politics , without any taboos .
We must encourage the harmonization of legislation in the Member States .
The Dutch presidency is facing intense pressure from many EU countries , and I hope that the Netherlands , with its policy of tolerance , will be prepared to endorse more stringent interpretations in the area of drugs policy .
As a practising pharmacist , I oppose any attempt to make hashish available over the chemist 's counter .
To do so would be to put drugs on a par with medicinal products , and I believe that would be extremely dangerous .
As far as I am concerned , there can be no question about the illegality of drugs .
The primary concern of any drugs policy must be to help those who are addicted - to offer therapy .
But prevention , using new methods and approaches , is and remains our first task .
This makes demands on all those who hold positions of responsibility in society , especially in the areas of education and child care .
Living out an example is the most effective method of prevention .
Mr President , in conjunction with the other speakers , I wish to congratulate Mr Burtone on the tremendous work he has done on this report .
However , there are some basic differences of opinion which must be emphasized , the importance of which should not be underestimated .
First of all , the only way we are going to solve the whole question of drug addiction and the health problems it poses is by reducing demand totally .
How best can we achieve those aims ?
The best and most strategic way is by educating people with regard to the dangers and risks of drug use .
I hope that all Member States would start at the very earliest stages - maybe when children are eight or nine years of age - and give them more education at school , to tell them of the dangers there are out there .
Nor can we underestimate the fundamental role of the family as educators .
Parents and guardians must be given access to information in order to be able to recognize the danger signs , and also to be able to tell their own children what they should be doing .
Finally , we should never underestimate the role of individual responsibility .
Where I have a fundamental problem with this report is in its classification of all addicts as people who are ill rather than criminals .
It is generally known that in addition to using criminality to feed their own habit , addicts actually partake in illegal and criminal acts as well .
Their addiction cannot be used to exonerate them from responsibility for those criminal acts .
Mr President , the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission have at last reached a degree of understanding which has resulted in approval of the programme of Community action on drug dependence .
Although , in our view , families and schools have a priority role to play , based on an effective campaign of prevention , the programme must be capable of encompassing all drugs , whether soft or hard , and broadening its scope to cover more risk groups .
Against the background of this debate , we have the recent outburst from the leader of the governing coalition in Italy who , perhaps trying to hold out too leafy an olive branch , spoke of liberalizing hallucinogenic drugs .
I should like to say that , if such issues as legalization of drugs , homosexuality and its legal status , genetic engineering and abortion have provoked a clash in today 's society , this is certainly not a clash between freedom on the one hand and obscurantism on the other , but between two different perceptions of freedom and society .
Freedom does not mean that anyone can do anything they like , it is not the result of ethical indifference ; on the contrary , it is the consequence of religion and moral conscience .
It is therefore not just a matter of individual will .
How do we answer the following questions ?
Is it good to have a society where narcotic substances , including heroin , are in free , more or less legalized , circulation ?
Is it right to consent to State-sponsored ' trips ' ?
Is it positive thing to increase young people 's awareness ?
These questions need to be debated at a cultural level and cannot be used as or turned into mere political propaganda .
Mr President , the joint text of the Council and Parliament decision has been finalized .
The rapporteur has worked very hard and a compromise has been reached .
The politically sensitive amendments designed to impose a permissive drugs policy or a policy of damage-limitation on the Member States have been toned down , I am glad to say .
We in the Netherlands now have considerable experience of such a policy , and though the percentage of hard drug users in the Netherlands is not high in international terms , that is not to say that a liberal policy is the right one .
When we talk about the percentage of drug addicts in the population , there are countless social factors involved , not just the question of how easy it is to obtain soft drugs .
The text adopted by the Conciliation Committee still contains a number of sensitive points , such as the needle exchange projects and the use of methadone substitution therapy .
These could form part of an integral approach to addiction , provided they are strictly regulated .

Fortunately , they are only mentioned in connection with evaluation studies rather than as specific policy measures , so we feel we can still support them , and they also fall within the scope provided for by Article 129 of the Treaty .
The increase in the number of projects in the annex and the broad definition given to the term ' prevention ' have made the programme very extensive , and the limited funding available for the programme leaves the Member States with no choice but to pick and choose among the projects listed .
Each Member State must now fix its own priorities , and this could easily undermine the effectiveness of the entire programme , which would be a great pity .
On behalf of my colleagues and myself , I should like to support the position of the Conciliation Committee .
We believe , however , that certain matters have been mentioned which merit further discussion .
For example , we would agree with our colleagues in the Green Group in the European Parliament that the extent of alcohol addiction is widely underestimated .
It is actually the case in some countries that young people can buy an alcoholic drink more cheaply than a non-alcoholic one .
Another problem is the definition of drug addicts as patients .
Much as this should be encouraged , there is also a need here to work out new methods that will allow these patients to be treated .
In our experience , the methods which medicine currently has to offer are not capable of bringing an addict back to health .
The definition alone will not enable us to provide appropriate treatment for the patients - as opposed to criminals - whom we now have to deal with .
We also foresee a difficulty in delegating the provision of information to schools and universities , and in the growing problem of social stratification in Europe .
We know from experience that people in the higher social strata have access to better schools , whereas the schools which poorer people attend are not so good .
In the schools that are attended by the poorer sections of the population , it is often quite impossible to practise prevention or to make documentation and information available .
Finally , there is also the question of closer cooperation with the countries where drugs are produced .
Merely sending money to these countries will not suffice .
Programmes for helping them to make the transition to other products will have to be considered .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , drugs are a serious concern to all of us European citizens .
The talks , discussions and exchanges which have accompanied the long process of adopting this programme have been fruitful and have allowed us to make positive improvements to the Community machinery for the prevention of drug dependence .
We are convinced that the programme is credible and takes account of the different approaches adopted in the various Member States .
It is not our aim to align ourselves with one side or the other , ideologically or morally , or to define a single approach as to what is meant by drugs and prevention of drug dependence and what policies should be adopted in this area .
Our purpose is rather to stress the complexity of the problems of drug abuse and to allow professional , scientific and technical discussion to take place on the various ways and means of tackling the problem .
On behalf of the Commission and my colleague , Commissioner Flynn , I should like to thank the European Parliament for the support it has given this programme and , in particular , Mr Burtone , the rapporteur , for his work on this matter .
I should also like to add a few words about the conciliation procedure .
Once again , all the Institutions have played a full part in dealing with particularly important issues .
The Commission would like to mention two points in particular : the first relates to the participation of the various institutions and organizations working to reduce demand for drugs , which could take part in the programme 's activities .
I would stress that , under Article 5 ( 2 ) ( f ) of the Decision , the Commission will propose cooperation methods for the implementation of the programme involving public and private bodies and non-governmental organizations , including voluntary organizations and community groups involved in therapy or social welfare .
As regards the other programmes in the public health sector , the Commission will naturally favour cooperation among working groups from various Member States , with particular regard to the activities of the European networks assisting the public in drug prevention .
The second point I should like to stress , Mr President , relates to communicating information on the implementation of the programme to the European Parliament .
The interinstitutional modus vivendi as regards measures for the implementation of acts adopted according to the procedure laid down in Article 189b of the EC Treaty , as in the case of this programme , forms the basis for providing Parliament with the information required .
Moreover , as regards the terms of Article 5 ( 4 ) of the Decision , which provides that the Commission is to communicate to the committee established under that article all decisions adopted in relation to individual projects , the Commission undertakes to communicate this information to the European Parliament annually .
Mr President , there is something I should like to point out here , since Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has twice now claimed in this debate that I have put my name to a motion for a resolution on legalizing drugs .
I know which resolution she means , but I would point out that I have not signed it , and I would ask people to check their facts before they refer to me by name in this way .
Mr President , I should like to make a brief statement in order to fulfil a personal , but also an institutional , duty and because I wish to conduct myself properly towards the European Parliament - something I have always done while acting as rapporteur .
I venture to point out to my colleague , Mr Dell 'Alba , that had he paid more attention to what I said , he would not have said something that could become a source of controversy and maybe already has .
This evening , in this very Chamber , I referred to a process , to a debate , to decisions made by the House in the recent past .
Conscientious Member that he is , Mr Dell 'Alba will surely recall that , by means of an amendment , some honourable Members tabled a proposal to legalize certain drugs - a proposal that was rejected by a vote of this House in no uncertain terms .
I would add that all of this cannot be included in the report simply because the amendment I have mentioned was rejected .
I leave you to draw your own conclusions .
Mr President , Mr De Coene denies having signed a proposal for a recommendation which I myself have signed .
This is the proposal referred to by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , and I should like to bring it up again now .
I refer to our Rules of Procedure , and in particular Rule 46 , which allows a certain number of Members to sign proposals for recommendations , which are then referred to the committee responsible , without the House being informed about them .
For the time being , however , the proposal for a recommendation in question is an official document of the European Parliament , which is in unrestricted circulation within the European Parliament , and I cannot accept , either , that Mrs Oomen-Ruijten should caricature the position of those who have signed that proposal for a recommendation , by saying that we wanted to establish a liberal position that would allow drug users to have a free choice among all the drugs available .
That is not true .
As far as I am concerned , the liberalization of drug use and the current suppression of drug use in my country constitute two dogmatic positions that are perfectly symmetrical .
The position that I am defending is one of pragmatic reasoning , and consists of controlled legalization and freedom to prescribe therapy .
Mr President , I should just like to draw your attention to one particular point , which is a personal one .
I hope that it was due to an interpreting error , at least into French , that I heard Mrs Oomen-Ruijten say that the position defended by her colleagues was stupid , because I do think that we should have the courtesy to avoid describing in such a way the various positions that Members defend , even though I admit that one could say a lot about the relevance , or even the intelligence , of some of them .
We shall have to discuss this proposal for a recommendation , and so I hope that until then Mrs Oomen-Ruijten will keep her arguments to a minimum , and we shall deal with them in full .
Mr President , to Mr Hory , who is a true liberal , I would say that his policy is bound to mean that many young children will start taking drugs , and I am not in favour of that .


I apologize to Mr De Coene for mentioning him by name , though I have to say that this simply makes us even , because he wrongly mentioned my name in a number of Dutch newspaper articles . Nevertheless , I offer my apologies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at noon .
Labelling and presentation of foodstuffs
The next item is the report ( A4-0406 / 96 ) by the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council Decision amending Directive 79 / 112 / EEC on the labelling , presentation and advertising of foodstuffs ( C4-0590 / 95-00 / 0380 ( COD ) ( rapporteur : Mr Schnellhardt ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the conciliation procedure on the directive amending Directive 79 / 112 / EEC on the labelling of foodstuffs was concluded , following trialogue meetings , on 16 October , and that was the end of the process .
In all , five of Parliament 's amendments were at odds with the Council 's position , and therefore had to be discussed .
As far as Parliament is concerned and , I hope , as far as consumers and food producers are concerned , the outcome is very satisfactory .
Let me mention briefly the individual amendments .
In the case of Amendment No 18 , Parliament 's main proposals were accepted without difficulty ; it was only where the sales name of the producer country was used that the Council wished to have additional descriptive information included in direct proximity to the sales name .
The European Parliament delegation could not understand this requirement .
The solution that was reached does not conflict with the European Court of Justice judgment in the ' sauce béarnaise ' case , but allows the possibility of including further information .
However , such information will only be permitted where the other provisions of the directive are not sufficient to provide consumers with correct information .
Among the other provisions is Article 6 , on the listing of ingredients .
This meets the concern of the European Parliament that a consumer buying products with the manufacturer 's label should be given an adequate degree of security by having a broad range of information , without at the same time permitting a mass of confusing , onesided detail which has no place in the recognized labelling system .
I also believe that leaving out confusing information is a better option than resorting to the prohibition of manufacturers ' labels .
There was an equally consumer-friendly outcome in the case of Amendment No 5 .
The article in question , Article 6 , allows a number of derogations from the requirement to list ingredients .
Whereas the Council wished the decisions concerning derogations to be taken under the comitology procedure , Parliament managed to have its view accepted that provision for derogations should be made in the directive itself .
While there was little debate about Amendment No 7 - the Council and Parliament reached agreement on the wording tabled by Parliament at first reading - Amendment No 8 served to protect people who have an allergic reaction to gluten .
In order to make the necessary information available to people in this category , Parliament asked that the listing of the ingredient ' starch ' should include an indication of whether the starch was of plant or animal origin .
As a result of the trialogue procedure , the directive has been amended so that a designation of origin must be included in the case of starch or modified starch if these ingredients contain gluten .
The negotiations on Amendment No 10 were somewhat more difficult .
In fact , Parliament did not wish to allow any derogations from the requirement to indicate quantities when the ingredients in question appeared in the sales name or as a picture on the label .
However , we are very pleased with the outcome , since a provision has been added to the effect that such indications are required when they play a decisive role in determining the choice of foodstuff and informing the consumer - in cases such as that of the famous salami pizza therefore - but need not be included , for example , in the case of malt whisky , where it is less important to know how much malt the whisky contains .
I would have been concluding my remarks at this point , had I not received a fax at the weekend from an association of European wine producers , telling me how to approach this directive and what to say about it .
Let me therefore take a moment to clarify the position , since this decision of the Conciliation Committee is still being linked with the labelling of alcoholic beverages .
There is no such link .
After the second reading , Commissioner Bangemann said quite specifically that he was prepared to bring forward a proposal on the labelling of alcoholic beverages .
He has therefore taken Parliament 's wishes into account and embarked on the normal institutional procedure , whereby if a directive is substantially amended , the amended version will be resubmitted to Parliament .
That is the implication of his statement , and in the course of the Conciliation Committee procedure , Commissioner Bangemann confirmed in writing that he would do this at a later date .
The present outcome has therefore no connection with the proposals that the Commission is to make at a later stage .
Overall , I regard the outcome as a satisfactory one for consumers , producers and the House - and I also believe that the Council will have no difficulty in accepting it .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his achievement .
My experience , which is rather like his , of the conciliation procedures employed by this Parliament is varied .
Sometimes they make progress , sometimes they become obscured in trivialities .
In this case we have made progress and I would like to pay tribute here to Mr Schnellhardt who has been the long-time rapporteur on this directive and also to Mr Imbeni , the chairman of the Conciliation Committee , and all those who took part .
I endorse everything that Mr Schnellhardt has said about the value for consumers of the forms of labelling that are now designated clearly and without any fuss .
I think it is of value .
I think it is of particular value to people who suffer from gluten allergies : they will now have a warning specifically made clear in the labelling they receive .
I want to come now to the point with which my colleague Mr Schnellhardt concluded .
That is the issue of alcoholic labelling .
The original text which was presented by the Commission contained a reference to the labelling of alcoholic beverages .
Now we are all aware in this Chamber of the pressures that are brought to bear on the Commission , the Council and on Members of this Parliament wherever the matter of alcoholic products is concerned .
Suddenly they have become not merely another consumer item but a wonderful cultural experience .
Speaking as one who has the largest brewing group in the United Kingdom in his constituency , I would be the last person to question the enormous value of alcohol taken in moderation .
But I must say that I believe it should be properly labelled like any other foodstuff .
It has its risks and it has its dangers , like any other foodstuff or any other drink .
By the time the common position emerged from the Council , the section on alcoholic beverages had been mysteriously separated from the text and at second reading we were therefore waiting for a proposal to emerge from the Council .
However , it then became clear that a proposal might be coming from the Commission , and Commissioner Bangemann wrote to our chairman Mr Collins on 31 October saying that the Commission is now in a position to commit itself to submitting , as soon as possible , a new proposal for a directive on the labelling of alcoholic beverages .
Now where is it ?
I understand Commissioner Monti is going to reply today .
I think it would be of great service to the House if he could indicate the state of this proposal at the moment .
Does it still carry the endorsement of the Commission as a whole and when are we going to see it ?
With that one caveat I heartily commend the directive and all those who have worked on it and indeed those who will benefit from it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , food labels are very useful things and we need to be very careful about what we do with them .
They are useful in that they give consumers the chance to make a rational choice from a wide range of products on offer , without interfering with the internal market .
But there is no point in providing information on food labels if consumers cannot read them because they are in a language they do not know .
The 1978 labelling directive simply required the information on the label to be given in a language which the consumer understood .
However , the two Peters judgments handed down in the meantime have led to certain doubts , and we are now in the difficult situation of having to assess each case individually .
Anyone who has followed the twists and turns of the Peters case knows what I mean .
I am pleased to see that we have managed to convince the other institutions that we need better guarantees , and that the Member States now specifically have the scope to require one or more languages to be used .
The new labelling directive that we are to approve tomorrow combines the principles of the internal market with those of consumer protection .
The conciliation process took a long time , but it was worth it , and I should like to thank and congratulate everyone involved for working so well together , particularly the rapporteur , Mr Schnellhardt .
Clear progress has been made on the issue of sales names .
The 1978 directive was vague and ambiguous , and therefore difficult to reconcile with the principles of the internal market .
I only hope now that the Commission will bear in mind the ' sauce béarnaise ' judgment when it performs its role as guardian of the Treaties on this issue .
The quantitative listing of ingredients is another example of more balanced information which I wholeheartedly support , and I also think it was the right decision to include the labelling of products involving genetic modification under the special regulation on novel foods .
All that remains are alcoholic drinks and nutritional information .
We shall have to take a decision soon on the question of nutritional information , and we need to ask ourselves whether this serves any purpose if consumers are not sufficiently familiar with nutritional science .
Consumers must certainly take responsibility themselves if they are worried about proper nutrition , but they also need a certain level of knowledge to be able to do so .
Education on over-nutrition is , to my mind , one aspect of consumer protection that has been little in evidence up to now .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether he agrees that it is high time to make greater use of the Commission 's powers in the field of prevention in public health , to provide information for consumers in places other than on labels , and to encourage the provision of appropriate consumer information on nutrition .
Mr President , if you come and stand here in my place , you will see that you cannot see the monitor to know when it is your turn .
I have suggested three or four times now that we should have another monitor over here , but it seems that this is not possible .
If you cannot afford it , I have an old one at home that I could bring with me .
Coming back to the issue at hand , I really must congratulate Mr Schnellhardt on his report and on the compromise which has been reached .
It has taken so long to deal with the subject that it almost became his life 's work .
But the compromise is a good one , and I also think that improving the labelling of foodstuffs is a logical consequence of the internal market .
If we cannot harmonize the composition of foodstuffs , then it must at least be possible for consumers to be well-informed about the ingredients they may contain .
And this is where I think this compromise has really hit the mark .
I shall not go into the three aspects on which Parliament 's arguments won the day , since every speaker has already talked about them in detail .
But I would like to join others in stressing how much responsibility now lies with the Commission , and I would ask Commissioner Bangemann , represented here by Commissioner Monti , to keep the promise that he made during the preparatory work and the conciliation procedure to come up with a new proposal on the labelling of alcoholic beverages as quickly as possible .
Could I ask Commissioner Monti to confirm this in his answer to the House ?
We will see what we can do about the monitor , Mr Eisma .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since 1992 an enormous amount of work has been done on amending the directive that we are discussing this evening .
We must give due recognition to the work that has been carried out by successive rapporteurs , whether by Mrs Langenhagen , for the first reading , or by Mr Schnellhardt , for the second .
Their work has made it possible for Parliament , in effect , to give its opinion twice .
In the present session the task before us is to vote on the draft joint decision by Parliament and the Council , as approved by the Conciliation Committee .
I personally , together with my group , am all in favour of voting to adopt this text , and the reason for my speaking refers to something else .
Arising out of this agreement , a political compromise has made the final approval of the joint draft of the European Parliament subject to the submission by the Commission of a new proposal relating specifically to alcoholic beverages .
I wonder , therefore , why this connection has been made .
Why , at the conciliation meeting , did Parliament 's delegation state a position that was different from the one adopted by Parliament following the two debates , during which all the parties gave their opinions on the problem of labelling alcoholic beverages , in other words the debate in October 1993 , on the Langenhagen report , and the one in October 1995 , on the Schnellhardt report ?
We do not understand why Parliament 's position , which it voted in favour of at the October 1995 part-session , should now be called into question again for the sake of a new compromise which no longer constitutes the expression of a decision by Parliament .
So far , no response has been given to the demands made on this subject by me and by several of my colleagues .
Can this House accept that now , at this final stage in the discussion , a point should be added , on which it has already expressed its opinion , and which has been accepted by the institutions , the Council of Ministers and the Commission ?
I recommend , therefore , that while we adopt the joint draft that has been submitted to us , we refuse to take back our decision and we reject any request for the submission of a supplementary text .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the House is considering , with a view to its final adoption , the joint text produced by the conciliation procedure concerning amendments to Directive 79 / 112 / EEC relating to the labelling of foodstuffs .
I should like to thank Parliament 's delegation , which participated very effectively in the effort to achieve a compromise through the conciliation procedure .
In particular , I wish to thank Mr Schnellhardt , the rapporteur , and Mr Collins , chairman of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
The Commission is pleased to be able to accept the current compromise text .
This long-awaited amendment to Directive 79 / 112 / EEC will make it possible both significantly to improve information to consumers and to strengthen the free movement of foodstuffs in the internal market .
The search for ways of providing the consumer with adequate information must , however , be continued beyond today 's agreement , and I think that honourable Members ' contributions to this debate have suggested some interesting ways forward .
Like Parliament , the Commission considers that a solution needs to be found quickly , in the near future , to the problem raised by the listing of ingredients of alcoholic beverages .
When the common position was adopted by the Council , the Commission agreed that this point , which formed part of its initial proposal , should be separated out from the rest in order not to jeopardize the amendment as such .
Given that it is currently impossible to find a compromise solution with the Member States and to take account of certain criticism made of the original proposal , the Commission undertakes to forward to Parliament and the Council , as soon as possible , a new proposal for a directive amending Directive 79 / 112 / EEC regulating the labelling of ingredients of alcoholic beverages .
Lastly , partly in response to specific requests , I can confirm that the Commission should , as announced , be adopting the new proposal shortly , and it will be forwarded to Parliament and the Council early in 1997 .
Parliament will thus have the opportunity to express its opinion on this important matter at first reading .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Customs 2000
The next item is the report ( A4-0390 / 96 ) on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council adopting an action programme for customs in the Community ( Customs 2000 ) - ( C4-0598 / 96-95 / 0087 ( COD ) ( rapporteur : Mr von Wogau ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the text before us concerning a decision on an action programme for customs in the Community represents a satisfactory compromise .
Thanks to intensive preparation , we managed to achieve a result that was acceptable to all sides at the first meeting of the Conciliation Committee .
Although our requests were not fully met in every case , for the most part we are entitled to be satisfied .
The primary purpose of the Customs 2000 action programme is to achieve a uniform level of protection at all the external frontiers of the Union .
The aim is to make the customs procedures and controls more efficient .
This is crucially important if the internal market is to function smoothly .
Another important aim is to protect the Community 's financial interests .
The programme provides for a budget of ECU 50 million for the period from 1996 to 2000 .
The main aim of the amendments tabled by the European Parliament was to enhance as much as possible the Community aspect of customs cooperation , the quality of controls and the computerization of the systems .
However , joint protection of the external frontiers must imply the opening of the internal borders .
That is why I attached particular importance to the amendment which calls for the internal market to be further developed into a genuine European home market .
Completing the European home market is a top priority .
Such a market will see the disappearance of all the differences which still exist in many areas between the home markets of Member States and obstruct the free movement of persons , goods , services and capital .
I should also like to highlight some other elements of the action programme which we supported in particular .
One such point was the wearing of the European 12-star symbol on customs officials ' uniforms , which is now provided for in Article 2 .
The idea is to make it clear to everyone involved that the customs officials belong to the Community .
The campaign against fraud is , of course , a particularly crucial area .
We have been arguing for the rapid computerization of customs services and Article 8 , for example , now includes the objective of computerizing the Community transit procedure by 1998 .
In Article 9 , the Commission undertakes to explore , in partnership with the Member States where appropriate , the scope for extending computerization so as to facilitate exchanges of information between customs officials and administrations .
It is in the area of intra-Community transit that this is particularly significant , because we continue to hear of lorryloads of cigarettes arriving in the Community , then suddenly disappearing .
Some people are making large profits here , but others - like the forwarding agents involved , who bear the liability - are suffering heavy losses .
I should like to mention one final point .
This concerns the joint training of customs officials , on which we made various proposals .
One of these was for the creation of a European Customs Academy .
In recital 11 , the Commission is instructed to explore the feasibility of such an academy .
In a statement annexed to the proposal , the Commission undertakes to examine the possibility of developing long-term exchanges of national customs officials .
We also made a range of further proposals for improving the action programme .
I am sure that other speakers will discuss these .
And on that note , I should like to thank the other members of the delegation , especially the chairman , Mrs Fontaine , and Mrs Wemheuer , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control , for their excellent cooperation .
I would urge you to adopt the text that has been approved by the Conciliation Committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have an internal market , we have a European customs tariff , and the customs duties that we levy are the European Union 's own revenue .
All this belongs to the Community .
But then we have 15 different national customs administrations whose job it is to ensure that the whole thing functions .
The members of my group - and we are not the only ones - regard that as an anachronism .
We are , however , realistic enough not to think that introducing a single customs administration is a possibility .
That is quite clear .
But we did wish to see the joint system reinforced to some extent .
We had hoped for an action programme which indicated practical steps towards better cooperation between the customs administrations .
Simply on the basis of this text as it appears on the page , I could not recommend , on behalf of my group , that we should support the programme .
However , I shall be guided not by the text on the page , nor by the attitude of the Council - which has given me very little encouragement - but by the spirit of the Commission .
We encountered tremendous support there for our requirements and concerns - particularly from Commissioner Monti and DG XXI - even in those cases where our view did not prevail .
It is this , above all , which has persuaded me to express support - on behalf of my group as well as for myself - for the compromise that has been reached .
I believe that what we have achieved in the discussions on this programme , as well as in the debate in the Committee of Inquiry into the Community Transit System , is more important than the text on the page : it is more important to bring a problem to people 's attention and , rather than simply stating baldly that something has to be done , to bring about a genuine change of awareness .
Bearing that in mind , we shall also be following closely the implementation of the action programme which we are about to approve .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me , as a co-chairman of the delegation , to speak briefly in this debate , in order to emphasize the finally positive - and I would even say , in many respects , exemplary - nature of this conciliation procedure .
Here and there - and I would say more there than here , in other words , more at the Council than in Parliament - various voices are sometimes heard denigrating , to some extent , the procedure for implementing the codecision procedure decided on in the Maastricht Treaty , on the grounds that it is too cumbersome , or too complicated .
This is true , and we are all in a position to know that it is indeed very cumbersome and very complicated , but everyone knows that these are faults that can quite well be remedied within the context of the Inter-governmental Conference , and we must take care to ensure that we do not - to use the well-known expression - throw the baby out with the bath water .
Following these first two years of experience , if we look at the matter objectively we are obliged to concede that considerable progress has been made by the European legislative .
My only regret is that our fellow-citizens are not sufficiently aware of the fact .
In the conciliation position that we are looking at today , the one relating to the Customs 2000 programme , things have not been easy , because right at the outset the Council substantially reduced the scale of the programme .
The committee chiefly responsible , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , as well as the other committees that were consulted , especially the Committee on Budgetary Control , have worked very hard .
They have carried out an extraordinary task , and I should like to thank , in particular , and most sincerely , the two rapporteurs , Karl von Wogau and Mrs Wemheuer , because it is to a large extent to them that we are indebted for the result .
Our priorities were inspired by two requirements , the requirement for communitization and the requirement for quality .
With these two objectives in mind , we were able to find acceptable compromises on many of the points which the European Parliament was concerned about and which Karl von Wogau has just reminded us of , because the institutions finally agreed to consider the other side 's point of view and to take the necessary steps to enable the agreement to be finalized .
This is precisely what the authors of the Maastricht Treaty had in mind when they created the codecision procedure .
In this respect - and this point has already been emphasized - the cooperation of Mr Monti was extremely valuable , and I too would like to offer him my thanks .
Everyone , Commissioner , was aware of the importance of your contribution , and of the importance of the Commission 's statement on the mobility of customs officers , which - most opportunely - accompanies the joint conciliation draft .
More generally , I have the feeling that , in the conciliation procedure , the Commission is now fulfilling the role that might have been expected of it , i.e. that of a mediator who smooths the path of conciliation .
I only hope that when they come to implement the programme 's measures - and we shall be watching them very closely , as Mrs Wemheuer has quite rightly stated - the Member States show a greater awareness of the boost that these measures will give to the promoting of the European spirit .
I really believe , Mr President , that it is thanks to programmes such as Customs 2000 that the awareness of a real European identity will begin to take shape in the minds of our citizens .
Mr President , I can only confirm what my colleague , Mrs Fontaine , has said about the Conciliation Committee on the ' Customs 2000 ' programme , in which Parliament reached an understanding , with the most helpful cooperation of Commissioner Monti , enabling the best possible result to be achieved on this important project .
Parliament wanted above all to ensure the smooth functioning of the single market by creating homogeneous conditions at external frontiers so as to create a genuine internal market or , as the Commissioner likes to describe it , a home market .
Among the issues we raised were mobility of customs officials , exchange of information and experience , the wearing of the European twelve-star symbol on customs officers ' uniforms , ease of recognition by end-users , improvement of controls , computerization of services - partly with a view to combating fraud - and , lastly , improving customs training by setting up a customs academy of some kind .
Parliament 's delegation centred its strategy on key points which had been raised by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Parliament 's approach was to enhance as much as possible the Community aspect of customs cooperation , the quality of controls and , as I have already mentioned , the essential computerization of systems .
The Commissioner was extremely accommodating on these points , and this made it possible to draw up a final programme to which we attach considerable importance and in which we have great faith , such that , if only on the basis of Parliament 's internal customs arrangements , European citizens will feel that they are part of a great common home .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the text of the proposal for a Decision of Parliament and the Council adopting an action programme for customs in the Community - ' Customs 2000 ' - today submitted to you to consider as part of the final phase of the co-decision procedure , is the text which was drawn up in the course of a meeting of the Conciliation Committee on 10 October .
This joint text is a compromise between the positions of the House and those of the Council .
Like any compromise , it represents the meeting-point between sometimes diverging positions .
In the view of the Commission , it is a good compromise , as what we have here is both a constitutive instrument and an effective working instrument .
I therefore hope that the House will adopt it in the course of this part-session and I should like sincerely to congratulate Mr von Wogau , the rapporteur , and Mr Wemheuer , the co-rapporteur , on their perseverance and hard work .
May I also congratulate Mrs Fontaine who co-chaired the Conciliation Committee with the efficiency for which she is known .
I called it a constitutive instrument , and so it is , in that it translates into a legal decision a firm commitment to strengthen cooperation , within a Community framework , among the customs authorities of the Member States and between them and the Commission , enabling our customs authorities to guarantee effective protection of the financial interests of the Union and provide international commercial operators with a similarly high quality service at any point in the customs territory of the Community .
To achieve this objective , we have to do more than simply harmonize the rules , as has already been done by adopting the Community Customs Code , to secure harmonization of working methods and achieve a uniform level of quality in the implementation of customs procedures and controls .
I also called it an effective working instrument , and so it is , I believe , in that it provides the essential Community legal , organizational and financial framework for putting this measure into effect in the interest of the best possible management of the single market .
In this spirit , the Commission aims to make ' Customs 2000 ' a preferred instrument for the effective implementation of the reform of transit which , as you know , it intends undertaking in the near future .
The text before you contains various improvements sought by the European Parliament .
Let me draw attention to four crucial points : the acknowledgment of the need to complete the internal market with a view to achieving , in future , a genuine - I can only use the original term , Mr von Wogau - Heimatmarkt ; the desire for the Community 's twelve-star symbol to be worn on customs officers ' uniforms ; the need to define common criteria at Community level to guide the operations of the customs services ; and , lastly , the clear commitment by the Member States to provide the programme with the financial resources necessary for its implementation and , in particular , to complete computerization of transit by 1998 at the latest .
The Commission , for its part , will make sure it uses the legal and financial basis that it has been given to the best possible advantage , in order to achieve the objectives assigned to it by the joint Decision of Parliament and the Council .
The statement which the Commission included in the report on the Decision - designed to promote the development of long-term exchanges of officials - is the first example of this .
The assessment reports which will be forwarded to you will enable you to judge how seriously this commitment is being taken .
Lastly , I am grateful for the kind words that have been said about the Commission .
I am pleased to say that this is an important event in terms of the substance of the single market , its identity and , as has been stressed , the effectiveness of institutional mechanisms which , albeit complex , have shown that , when used properly , they can give good results .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Constitutional status of political parties
The next item is the report ( A4-0342 / 96 ) by Mr Tsatsos , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the constitutional status of the European political parties .
Mr President , wherever public authority is exercised , there too legitimation and control are required .
That is a prerequisite and an imperative for democracy .
However , while the exercise of public authority used to be a monopoly of the national state , in the context of our progress towards European union an unprecedented agency of public authority has been created , namely the European Union .
However , neither the legitimation nor the control of the new European authority should be the job of European citizens in isolation .
Citizens act effectively , mainly through political parties . It is parties that are the appropriate organizational forms for the expression of collective will and for the embodiment of that will in the institutions .
National parties are and will remain the main agencies for the legitimation and control of those who represent the Member States in the Union 's bodies .
In parallel , however , the European political process recognises European political parties .
These are essential for the process of integration itself , for the legitimation of the Union 's constitutional bodies and for the transparency of political practices .
Article 138a of the Treaty is a historic point of departure since it validates European political parties as an institution of the Union 's established order and a definitive factor both for the further progress of European integration and for its reliance on the trust of Europe 's citizens .
Of course , European political parties already exist , but they are at the first stage of their development and they are rather like umbrella associations .
The future will bring out new organizational forms of parties that will be able to cope with future political developments . They are therefore institutions in the process of historical development .
Our debate is taking place at a time when the significance of parties and more generally , politics , is being called into question . However , such questioning is ultimately a questioning of Democracy itself .
The time has come to react against this , and that is what my report attempts to do .
The report aspires to be the second major step along the path laid open by those who framed Article 138a .
That article , however , must be implemented still further .
It would make an important contribution towards credibility and the securing of legitimacy if that further implementation were based on two authorizing orders , as additions to Article 138a , for the adoption of a regulatory framework for the legal status , rights and obligations of European political parties , and a corresponding framework for their economics .
I will deal with those two subjects separately :
First , regarding the constitutional aspect , it is fundamental to an understanding of the measures proposed in my report , to see them as principles defining a framework - and I repeat the word - a framework .
Secondly , the draft decision proposes the adoption of a number of characteristics that must coincide in any political union if it is to be capable of fulfilling the mission described by Article 138a and thereby justify its status as a European party .
With these conceptual characteristics we are not attempting to define what a party is , precisely so that what happens to be true today will not stand in the way of future developments .
The clarification we seek serves the aim of securing legitimacy and transparency .
That is exactly why the draft decision specifies that the political association should be active in at least one-third of the Member States .
That is why we speak of the purpose of the political association , which must be to participate in the European Parliament .
And finally , that is why it is stressed that the political party is not an extension of the parliamentary groups but an autonomous political body that operates close to the citizens , close to the grass roots .
The draft decision mentions the rights of European citizens .
This should not be misunderstood .
For example , the right of parties to receive equal treatment is not essentially a right that the party claims for its own sake , but indirectly , though quite clearly , a right due to the citizens .
It is they who must be enabled to develop their role through the political parties , under conditions of equality .
Finally , the draft decision also speaks of the obligations of parties .
This too should not be off-putting .
For example , when we require parties to have a programme and an organizational statute accessible to public opinion , but especially when we require them to be democratically organized , we are doing no more than to safeguard the political rights of our citizens .
And now , I come to the burning issue of the finances of European political parties . The provision of funding by parliamentary groups to the parties is a process that cannot continue .
Such economic support should only be permitted for party activities directly related to Parliament and the parliamentary group . However , there is no legal base for such funding to be provided for other party activities unrelated either to Parliament or the parliamentary group .
That is why the draft decision includes a call from Parliament to the Union 's legislature to establish an act embodying the following principles : that there should be a clear legal base ; that there should at last be absolute transparency concerning all sources of finance ; that the funding system should not preclude the foundation of new parties ; and finally , that fair criteria should be laid down .
The decision I am proposing is not , of course , the future act itself .
It merely outlines directions , draws attention to sensitive areas , establishes frameworks , and underlines the role that Parliament should aspire to for itself .
Looking towards future developments but without pre-empting them on the basis of experience to date , the European Parliament should defend a policy to secure development of the institution of the European party , despite the many attacks to which that institution is subject .
We would like the Intergovernmental Conference to adopt our ideas and proposals .
We call for dialogue with the European Commission concerning the next steps , and this , regardless of what the IGC decides .
The way towards the creation of European political parties must remain open .
Whoever denies it will be answerable to history .
There is no point in trying to guess today what the IGC is likely to decide .
We , as Members of the European Parliament , have the historic duty to insist , as the mandate of our peoples , that this is needed for the sake of Democracy .
It is that historic duty with which my report is concerned .

Mr President , Mr Tsatsos ' report is an important one , and comes , as the rapporteur himself pointed out , at a difficult time of crisis in the relationship between the European Institutions and the citizens of Europe . It is only right , therefore , that an effort should be made to develop the political links in this relationship that needs much to be revived .
The role of the European political parties could naturally form a very important part of this process and also make a positive contribution towards citizenship .
It goes without saying that no-one is thinking of building the parties from the top down , and anyone who knows anything at all about history will be well aware of how complicated and difficult the process of party-formation is .
It is therefore clear that the European political parties will properly emerge only when we have a European civil society ; but it is vitally important that a constitutional framework for the European parties , their role and their functions , should be drawn up as of now .
As the rapporteur has just said , the report calls for a framework regulation on the legal status of the European political parties and a regulation on their financial circumstances , linking them to possible implementation of the objective of Article 138a of the Treaty , which certainly provides an excellent basis - albeit one that will have to be extended in future .
I should like to make a final point regarding party financing , a fundamental issue which the rapporteur discussed at some length , and the need for which is rightly mentioned in the report .
We know that this is a very delicate matter which provokes a degree of hostility among the general public .
But we must tackle it because democracy and politics have to be paid for .
The real problem lies elsewhere : it is one of transparency and openness and not shelving the whole issue ; indeed , were we to do so , we would undoubtedly be heading for a crisis of democracy .
I think that the report attempts to provide a positive response to this problem .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is exactly five years to the day since the Maastricht European Council took the decision to recognize the European political parties .
Since then , however , nothing has happened apart from this report by Mr Tsatsos , on which I warmly congratulate him , and a few efforts by those currently in positions of responsibility in the existing European parties .
No actual measures have been taken .
The Commission and the Council have remained silent , despite the political will - and I remain convinced that the political will on 9 December 1991 was strong , I felt it - which was expressed by the Heads of State and Government who met that day in Maastricht .
Along with the other group leaders , I have today received Parliament 's legal recommendations , which indicate that we cannot take any legislative decision on recognition for the European political parties except under Article 235a of the Treaty , which requires unanimity in the Council of Ministers .
So neither Parliament nor the European Union has any powers to regulate the constitutional position of the European political parties .
A number of objections have been raised and people are very suspicious , claiming that we just want a large amount of money to organize election campaigns for the European political parties , but that is not our intention .
We are not asking for more money .
The fact is that the current European political parties are far too dependent on the parliamentary groups , and this is not a healthy state of affairs .
What we are asking for today is a transparent funding system - not more money , but a transparent , public funding system with open accounting and controls .
Mr Tsatsos has stated quite plainly in his report that we must draw a distinction between the parliamentary groups here in the House and the European political parties .
The parties have their own role to play in society , providing information , organizing public debate and , above all , organizing political education at European level .
If they are to be able to perform this constitutional task , the parties must meet certain fundamental criteria .
Mr Tsatsos lists them : they must have an organizational statute and a basic political programme which are freely accessible to the citizens of Europe .
They must respect the fundamental principles of the Union Treaty : democracy and respect for human rights and the rule of law .
Their internal political decision-making must be democratic , and all the citizens of the European Union must be able to express their political will in this process .
That is why the PPE Group is very much in favour of allowing individual membership , and we have tabled an amendment to this effect .
But we also think that decisions in the European parties must be taken by majority voting .
Both of these - individual membership and majority decision-making - have already been introduced in the European People 's Party .
There are now a number of decisions to be taken .
Having read the legal recommendations this afternoon - I received them this afternoon , but they are dated 27 November - I am now more convinced than ever that a second paragraph needs to be added to Article 138a of the Treaty , as Mr Tsatsos and a number of governments have proposed , specifying that legislation may be adopted in accordance with the codecision procedure .
I am quite sure that we shall not get anywhere if we do what is proposed in paragraph 2 of the resolution .
If we really wish to make progress , we must take account of the decisions reached at the Intergovernmental Conference in Amsterdam .
Speaking for our group , I shall be taking the necessary steps to try to persuade the government leaders from our political family to introduce the new paragraph , otherwise we shall never get anywhere .
But it is to Mr Tsatsos ' credit that , five years on , he has finally managed to bring the debate back on course .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Tsatsos report on the constitutional status of European political parties does not deserve my group 's approval , as we already made clear in the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
From a political viewpoint , the reasons for our disagreement are mainly focused on the principle that it is vital neither to dilute nor to diminish the responsibility of the Member States in the construction of Europe .
Members of the European Parliament are representatives of each Member State of the European Union and , within that institution , join the political groups on the basis of partisan affinities .
These groups have come to function as political parties on a European scale , and have even been able to include regional members , some of them elected by regional parties .
But there is no legal basis for establishing a constitutional status for European political parties , since if it did exist and function that could even create disputes and uneasiness in the various Member States and possibly come up against insuperable hurdles in the constitutional field .
Practice to date has a number of years behind it at the European Parliament , although certain aspects of it could admittedly be improved . It seems to be the wisest approach and so far there have been no major controversies .
Participation , after all , by Members from different countries in these political groups , set up within the European Parliament , has been carried out with considerable freedom of expression , enabling Members to speak out against the majority view of a given group , something that would prove difficult in a structure and practice of a unified European political party , which would undoubtedly imply far greater strictness and the requirement of rigid obedience to a party line . It would bring with it all the formality of party principles and political discipline .
It is far easier to achieve greater proximity between electors and their elected representatives , an important cause of this parliament , when candidates stand for national or regional party lists than it would be if ever they stood for European political parties .
Another major reason for which we disagree with this idea is related with another issue raised in the Tsatsos report , that of Community funding , which must be transparent and non-discriminatory .
Furthermore , to oblige Members of the European Parliament , the elected representatives of their countries and the members of exclusively national parties , for the purpose of receiving Community funding to join groups that do not respect the causes for which they were elected would be an act of violence and a contradiction that Europe , the pioneering defender of democracy , should never and will never defend . If ever it opted for such an approach it would definitely regret it one day .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Tsatsos not only on producing such a thorough report , but also for being so receptive to the arguments and amendments put forward by his colleagues in the committee .
My group will be voting in favour of the resolution , for two reasons .
Firstly , we think it is a good idea that the European political parties should be given a stronger constitutional position than they have enjoyed up to now , and that their position should be firmly anchored in the Treaty .
We also think it is extremely desirable to establish a clear and unassailable legal basis for the Community funding provided for the parties .
I would point out here , to make our position quite plain , that the ELDR Group is by no means in favour of increasing the subsidies provided , but would like to see greater openness , transparency and legal certainty .
Finally , I would ask the House to support three amendments that we have retabled .
The first concerns what we see as the vital need for a balance between subsidies and own resources .
The second , which has also been signed by Members from other groups , concerns individual membership , and the third is on the need to adopt a uniform electoral system based on proportional representation , and a uniform statute for all Members of the European Parliament .
Finally , I hope that the seeds sown by the Tsatsos report will produce a flourishing political life in Europe .
Mr President , in my Group there is a difference of opinion about this report , which will be voiced at today 's sitting .
Our Group is international , with ideological roots , and is not answerable to an existing European party ; in terms of programme and policy , it is a left-leaning compromise , a confederal Group in which the decisions of national parties , and their ability to transfer their views to the House , are fully respected .
Bearing all this in mind , I am going to give the opinion of those of us who are in favour of including the development of Article 138a in the Intergovernmental Conference .
If we believe that there is a European society and European democratic institutions , if there is a European democratic fabric , if we want citizenship to have constitutional status in the framework within which we are working , if there is an expression of views in a European Parliament , then it seems reasonable to recognize the presence of those European political parties which already exist and any which aim to do so - on the basis of equal opportunities and in the knowledge that , at all events , the formation of the European political will via these parties complements the formation of that political will in the national parties and the Member States .
We therefore agree that the Intergovernmental Conference should discuss the matter and that it should be the subject of European Union legislation : the framework regulation which has already been mentioned , to give the European political parties that constitutional and legal status , and a regulation to ensure transparency and control in respect of financing .
Mr Tsatsos ' report is so flexible that it explicitly acknowledges that such European political parties , however set up and bearing in mind the multinational nature of whatever form they may think appropriate , may object to the existence of programmes and actions with a European dimension .
It is therefore an approach which we have to approve at this important moment in the political construction of Europe , in which citizens must give their views , take part , and be able to shape the political will in its European dimension .
Mr President , it is traditional in the House to thank and congratulate the rapporteur .
I regard that as a fine custom .
The only problem is that it then becomes difficult to compliment a rapporteur in a special and personal way for a special report .
That is what I should like to do in this case .
I had been expecting a technocratic report on the formation and financing of parties , and find instead a report that situates itself within a constitutional debate and asks the crucial question : the question of sovereign power in the process of European integration , the question of citizenship , and thus of how to legitimize European integration .
I regard that as a key question .
Parliament is now at last resuming a role in the constitutional debate .
That is why I congratulate the rapporteur .
And that is why we shall vote in favour of the report .
The Greens regard the process of creating a constitution in the EU as the greatest political challenge , and we are very sorry that the Intergovernmental Conference is taking no initiatives along these lines .
This brings me to a possible objection which has already been mentioned : precisely because the report has such a fundamental constitutional ambition , we believe that it is in fact necessary to seek an amendment to the Treaty , and not to remain outside the Intergovernmental Conference .
Another objection - which has also been mentioned already - concerns the question of individual membership .
Particularly because European integration today is caught between a resurgence of nationalism on the one hand and the emergence of a supranational technocracy on the other , individual membership is a very important symbol of the formation of the European citizenship that I referred to .
I also believe that it should be possible to hold membership outside the EU , because Europe reaches beyond the EU and this would be a way of demonstrating our openness and the invitation that we extend to the rest of Europe .
Otherwise , we are very grateful for the report , and I should like once again to express my appreciation for the fact that , after years in which the constitutional debate had been abandoned and failed to move forward , this discussion has now been started .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , without political parties there can be no democracy .
Up to now , despite Article 138a of the Treaty , in reality parties exist only at the level of the Member States .
At European or international level , they are merely confederations of national parties .
The only exception is the groups within the European Parliament , and they , of course , are something entirely different .
However , these groups include only elected members .
There was therefore something missing at Union level .
This gap has now been filled to perfection by the excellent report by Mr Tsatsos on the constitutional status of European political parties .
It is indeed time that we had European political parties that are recognized as such by the public and by our institutions .
They will generate greater clarity in our debates , and greater transparency in the way in which political life is funded .
However , we must take care not to impose limits that are too restrictive with regard to the number of nationalities needed in order to form such parties , because otherwise we shall run the risk of destroying some of their dynamism .
Yet if this democratic structure is to be perfect , there are three aspects which will have to be supplemented .
First of all , this House must adopt a parliamentarian 's statute .
Secondly , the uniform electoral system that Parliament adopted in 1993 must be implemented .
Thirdly , it must be possible for people to have individual membership of the European parties , if we do not want the present system of umbrella organizations for national parties to continue .
It is only by adopting these measures that the Union will experience democratic political life that is worthy of Europe and of its citizens .
Mr President , the proposal to establish a status for European political parties appears to us to be without any legal basis and without any fundamental justification .
This is the position that we have defended within the Committee on Institutional Affairs , and we should like to thank the rapporteur for having quoted our arguments in the body of his report .
As far as the legal basis of this project is concerned , we cannot find one either in Article 138a of the Treaty , which was evidently not intended to set up parties that are ' specialized ' in European affairs , or in Article 142 , which merely enshrines the right of this House to organize its work , or in Article 235 , which obviously could never be used to revise the Treaty .
Should this situation be remedied at the Inter-governmental Conference or at any other time ?
We think not .
The question , in fact , is one of how to form political will at European level .
The rapporteur seems to prefer the directly expressed voice of 380 million citizens , in the context of , if not a European state , then at least an entity that is ' constitutional ' in nature , to use a term that is used on several occasions in the report , in a somewhat provocative manner , admittedly , but fortunately without any legal impact .
We , on the other hand , believe that there is no such thing as a European people .
In order to avoid confusion , and to prevent undemocratic methods of government , political life in Europe should be organized first and foremost in groups at national level , and those groups should then participate in the operation of the European institutions , via their representatives .
This is why we do not think it advisable to amend the Treaty in order to establish a status for European political parties or , even worse , to finance those artificial parties from Community funds .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , democracy is based on the approval of the people from day to day .
In particular , democracy organizes itself in the process of opinion-forming through political parties .
This European-style political model has developed in all the Member States of the EU .
But there has been scarcely any development of genuinely European party structures .
What is the situation today ?
Firstly , the EU is like a Ferris wheel : on the one hand it is in the ascendant , as reflected in the number of countries that are seeking membership ; but at the same time , on the other hand , it is going down , as reflected by the increase in nationalistic tendencies .
European parties must provide answers through a type of politics that is original to Europe and not merely based on the lowest common national denominator .
The whole - that is the European parties - must be greater than the sum of the parts .
Secondly , since 1994 there has been EU electoral legislation for the European Parliament , and since 1995 for local elections .
We must build upon that civic foundation .
I would ask , for example , what chance Greek , Spanish , Portuguese or Italian nationals have of being selected by German parties as candidates for election to municipal and local councils ?
The answer in many cases would be : a slim one .
I would ask how European party membership works , for example , if a French Socialist Party member from Lille moves to Germany ?
Does he automatically become a member of the SPD ?
The answer is : normally not , because there are no rules for such a situation .
In making these points , I am being consciously self-critical .
We in the social democratic parties need to start moving , and the same goes for Christian Democrats , Liberals and Greens .
We all need to become more open and to dismantle the structures we have inherited .
The fact is that European parties will not create themselves .
They will only come into being if we wish to see them do so , and if we develop programmes and push ahead with the day-to-day work .
The report by our colleague , Dimitri Tsatsos , is an excellent platform from which to start .
Mr President , the rapporteur and other speakers have expressed two concepts :
The first , was to characterize Article 138 as something historic .
In our view it is an article which , from first to last , is unclear - and deliberately so - in order to conceal ulterior motives .
The second concept was that coincidentally , we are debating this issue at a time when the parties are in crisis .
But the question is : is the crisis of the parties due to a lack of European parties , or is it due to the fact that the parties are involved and entangled with major economic interests and under the thrall of those interests , which they serve ?
There is no time to go into that further .
The third thing I want to say , Mr President , is that the analysis presented by the report with its splendid constitutional , democratic and liberal expressions , is full of ' oughts ' and ' ought-nots ' , about how parties should be founded , how they should operate and what prerequisites they should satisfy .
All these are added constraints which make it more difficult to found parties freely according to the wishes of the citizens , instead of making it easier .
And there is a suspect point concerning the funding of parties .
Consider Parliament 's present composition and the previous one .
One or two groups , one or two parties will take the lion 's share of the funding , to the cost of the other , smaller ones .
Mr President , for those and many other reasons I have no time to go into , we will not back the report .
And I say this with regret , because Mr Tsatsos is an eminent academic , teacher , constitutional expert , and a good friend .
But friendlier still is the truth which proclaims that this report and its ulterior aims do not help the situation , the interests of our peoples , especially when the decisions of those parties are to be developed by majorities and when certain majority decisions will be tyrannically imposed .
Mr President , the Greek proposal to the Intergovernmental Conference contains a request that Article 138a be expanded and that a framework regulation on the legal status of European political parties be written into the Treaty as well as a regulation on the financial position of European political parties .
This requirement has been analysed and clearly formulated by Mr Tsatsos in his report .
Unfortunately , neither I nor many others in the Green group can see any pertinent reason or any legal basis for amending the Treaty in this respect .
Even the Conference of Presidents , where as I understand it the issue was raised , has been unable to see any need to amend the current regulations .
If , in the future , citizens of Europe acquire a strong identity and view themselves as one nation , then there may be a requirement for European political parties .
But this must be a request from the people , political parties must be established from below as a result of popular demand and not in any other way .
This situation currently does not exist , but we do have cooperation between parties in Europe , our own Green federation is an example .
Article 137 is based on the fact that Members of the European Parliament are representatives of their own respective countries .
Consequently , Mr President , public funds from the EU 's budget cannot be used to support National Political Parties or European Political Parties .
I think this House should be grateful to Mr Tsatsos for having successfully performed such a difficult task , ably piloting through this tricky issue that involves so many unresolved problems .
He has , more especially , managed to reconcile the requirements , or rather the expectations , of those who see the European parties as the summation - or a kind of forum - of national parties and others , such as myself , active in a party that seeks to be transnational , who take the view that European parties must be something quite different and distinct from the perceived need - though this is a perfectly respectable view - for the positions of the national parties to be harmonized and coordinated .

I think Mr Tsatsos has done an interesting piece of work , and we shall see how it fares at the Intergovernmental Conference .
We are , of course , in favour of the opportunities for direct membership and , as regards financing , all credit to Mr Tsatsos for having refrained from stating outright whether or not financing is necessary and having simply defined the legal framework .
Within that framework , my group would ask for the parties to be provided with services rather than funds , not least because financing of that kind is prohibited under the legislation of some Member States .
Mr President , I wish to add my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Tsatsos , particularly on the way he has been able to incorporate the suggestions of his fellow MEPs from all parties .
This has been possible because if we discuss policy items there will be great differences amongst us - rightly so in a democracy - but if we discuss the process and the framework by which those policies can be openly decided I hope we can get an agreement .
Someone has just referred to Mr Tsatsos 's report as a minor miracle in that respect and I support that view .
There is a danger in a democracy that when it has been around for a long time people will take it for granted .
In established democracies it is very easy for decisions to become remote and become the property of a political elite .
The bigger the area in which democratic decisions have to be made , the easier it is to slip into remoteness .
Democracy at local and international levels counts for nothing if we cannot achieve democracy at European level and ultimately , Mr Tsatsos , I presume the challenge will be at world level .
Political parties are the only vehicle I am aware of which can make that connection , that bridge , between the citizen and the decision that has been made .
I commend the report particularly for not falling into the trap of favouring existing parties .
It would be very easy for people in this House to just favour the status quo . It is actually healthier for democracy if we encourage the development of new political movements. should we ourselves fail to represent the aspirations of the citizens .
Finally , I would expect that it may take some time for some people to understand and implement the principles set out in this report , but they will .
These principles will also be a beacon to people in other parts of the world who want to take the first step on that long , democratic road .
Mr President , this report addresses an issue which really does not lie within the formal competence of this Parliament .
The nature of a political party and its formation is not an issue for authorities .
Parties are either extensions of , or appendages to , government bodies .
Parties are created and given life by the people .
The formation of transnational parties is not an issue which concerns Parliament but a matter to be decided entirely by the members of those parties .
The notion of a European party is still totally alien .
In the first place , the National parties , both Conservative and Socialist are so totally different internally that there is currently no basis for joint organisation .
Secondly , in current circumstances , such a move would be a step backwards for democratic development .
It would lead to the creation of a superbody , above the free national parties and such a shift of power away from its popular base must be resisted .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Tsatsos for his excellent report .
It is true that the formation of European political parties is of central constitutional importance for the European Union and for democracy in the Union .
No democracy can thrive without lively intellectual debate , no democracy can thrive without political alternatives , and no democracy can thrive without the media .
All of this applies equally to European democracy .
There can be no European democracy without European parties and communication at a European level .
Anything else is inconceivable .
This means that the question of political parties in Europe is , at the same time , a question of the role of the European Parliament .
Without these essential prerequisites for a genuinely thriving democracy , the rights of the European Parliament must remain limited .
And I would say to Mr Berthu that a single European people is not one of the essential prerequisites for European democracy .
Do the Belgians have one people , or the Swiss or the Spanish ?
And do the Belgians and the Swiss and the Spanish not live in democracies ?
Of course they do , and they are able to do so .
Obviously , legislation is no substitute for the political will of the parties .
Who then is preventing the parties from going further than they have to date ?
Who stands in their way ?
Sometimes they seem to me like hounds that have to be carried to the hunt .
Legislation will get us nowhere if there is not the political will to organize a European democracy .
A community that wishes to regard itself as a European Union must be capable of assuming its political identity .
So far it has failed on that count , but I think that this excellent report by Mr Tsatsos may be a first step in the process .
Mr President , as the elected representative of a national party , I am involved in the work of the Party of European Socialists because I take the view that parliamentary life needs the European political dimension in the same way as a fish needs water .
I do not feel that the existence of a European party is contradictory to the existence of a national party , and I believe the existence of a European party to be the necessary extension of national parties when it comes to European issues .
This is why I welcome the report by Mr Tsatsos as an importance policy document in the run-up to the Inter-governmental Conference .
The problem , Mr President , is obviously the question of how these European parties should be connected .
I believe that it would be relatively easy to establish connections between parliamentary groups in the European Parliament on the one hand and European parties on the other .
We want to have transparency in relations between the parliamentary groups and the European parties , in both decision-making structures and financial structures , and I agree with Mr Martens that the European parties do not need any additional financing .
They simply need more transparency .
The problem arises at the level of the connection between the party machines and the public .
At that point , the European parties are essentially machines .
They have structures , and at this point I should like to correct Mr Martens when he claims that nothing has happened since 1992 .
The Party of European Socialists has adopted statutes , and has formed a union of parties , a Party of European Socialists .
I also agree with Mr Rothley when he says that there is nothing to stop the European parties or the national parties from continuing to carry out their own initiatives with regard to European awareness .
In my own party , the Luxembourg Socialist Party , - and I give this as an example , Mr President , because I think it is an interesting one - we give every socialist who is not from Luxembourg but who comes to Luxembourg the right to be a member of the Socialist Party , without any charge , without any additional subscription .
This is a right that we provide and I believe that there are many initiatives that could be taken along these lines , by the national parties , in order to develop European awareness .
Mr Schäfer has quoted other examples .
I therefore believe that the Tsatsos report is an essential report for the subsequent development of European parties , something that we are wholeheartedly in favour of .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament 's motion for a resolution highlights the importance of the European political parties which are to be developed , spurred on by Europe 's political forces , and assume their own institutional status in the Treaty .
I heartily congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Tsatsos .
The Commission wholeheartedly supports Parliament 's flexible approach and wishes to emphasize the constitutional role that the European political parties have to play within the context of European democracy .
There can be no democracy without a party system .
A genuine European political area will be able to be developed only if it is accompanied by a European party system to complement the national party system , allowing European citizenship to develop alongside national citizenship .
In a community founded on the rule of law , such as the European Union , the time has come to reflect on how to define the European parties , what functions to attribute to them , what kind of legal recognition to grant them , how to define their rights and their possible spheres of action and how to resolve the delicate issue of funding .
There is no question that the constitutional value of the European political parties needs to be recognized and developed .
Their right freely to establish themselves and their general political freedom to take action - to which the resolution refers - need to be reaffirmed as fundamental constitutional principles in the European constitutional context .
European political parties can make a key contribution to the development of a political and democratic Europe and can help the European Institutions meet the challenges that European issues and , above all , the future geography of Europe , are going to pose .
The contribution to be made by the Member States and the decisions to be taken by them in the course of the Intergovernmental Conference are crucial here and Parliament itself refers - most opportunely - to the proposals submitted to the IGC .
In particular , the question of how the political parties are to be financed remains fundamental .
It is absolutely essential that we devise machinery which allows for clear and transparent party funding subject to effective monitoring and which , at the same time , enables the political parties to contribute to developing a European awareness and to give expression to the political will of Europe 's citizens .
In the current climate , characterized - as a number of honourable Members have mentioned - by a growing distrust of politics on the part of citizens , it is essential that the duties of the European political parties , as provided for in the Treaty on European Union , be more rigorously defined .
We are not talking about choosing between a national and a European party model , between defending national political identities and opening up to Europe , but about identifying forms of co-existence which allow European politics to develop in line with fundamental democratic principles and the principle of subsidiarity .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Participation in the institutional system
The next item is the report ( A4-0338 / 96 ) by Mr Herzog , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on the participation of citizens and social players in the European Union 's institutional system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the level of participation by citizens and social players in the European institutional system is currently very low .
We want to increase it considerably .
Participation means more than just being represented ; it means being able to debate political options , to be consulted , and to intervene personally .
Of course , one important step towards democratization was taken with the emergence of the European Parliament , elected by universal suffrage and having powers of codecision .
However , that is by no means enough , as is shown by the public 's loss of confidence in the Union , and even by the loss of any sense of the construction of Europe .
Although it is up to each nation to redefine an optimistic outlook , the Union must help them by itself taking significant steps towards shared social objectives , a common development project and fraternal solidarity .
This is the way to motivate people to participate , and in return it will also help to forge links and implement projects .
With this in mind , the report proposes a public debate on the Union 's policies , to be initiated by the European Parliament which , by bringing together rulers , elected representatives and social players , would put them in a position where they could hold joint discussions .
The report also asks the European institutions to undertake to work , together with players from civil society , towards drawing up social rights , to set out clear employment objectives , and to introduce cohesion between economic and financial policies with these objectives in mind , providing itself with the necessary tools to ensure that there is control and cooperation , so that competition does not mean the ruin of the social models .
The European Parliament and the social players should have extensive consultative powers on the subject of economic and monetary union , whereas at the moment they are excluded from that process .
I can even envisage that a codecision procedure between Parliament and the Council will be needed on a number of options relating to monetary union .
However , we have not yet reached that stage .
One important proposal in the report is that there should be a special annual session of the European Parliament , preceded by a conference involving representatives of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , in order to debate economic policy options .
Public information , consultation and initiative on the issues at stake in Europe must become a part of everyday life .
Everyone must be able to decide for themselves , by having several sources of information available and by being able to discuss issues with other people .
In order to do this , they must have access to a service providing information of general interest , and this service must be as decentralized as possible .
For the purposes of achieving such a service , I propose that there should be coresponsibility between Member States and the Union .
One absolute priority is to assess the Union 's policies .
One cannot ignore the fact that we , the Members of this Parliament , just like the citizens that we represent , are extremely dependent on bodies of experts .
At the present time , these are totally monopolized by the executive powers .
My report proposes that the elected representatives should have the power to organize this assessment , having joint responsibility for it together with the Commission , and consulting , in particular , the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions and the various sectoral committees .
The report gives them a major role in passing on information and in mobilizing and consulting individual citizens , local and regional authorities and social players , in the places where they live and work .
I have put forward several proposals on how to bring elected representatives and citizens closer together and how to increase greatly the powers of the trades unions and associations , without which there would not be any Community democracy .
Today , we are now able to take a step towards a political union that is based on a real , joint power held by Europeans .
The Union will never be strong if it remains a condominium of Member States , even if the Council votes on a majority basis .
This report has to a large extent been drawn up in consultation with players in civil society , and it has been the subject of many lively discussions within the Committee on Institutional Affairs .
I should like to thank my colleagues , and I should also like to thank them for having proposed that the terms and options relating to this resolution be negotiated in a positive spirit .
Many of my colleagues , who set great store by the power of representation , were afraid that too much consultation would make it difficult for decisions to be taken .
Many of them are afraid of anything that might compromise the completion of monetary union .
While it is true to say that I , personally , am in favour of making the switch to the euro conditional upon the implementation of new economic policy options and the formation of a common economic power , that is not the subject of this report , which , on the contrary - and I will repeat this - is firmly in favour of debating economic policy options .
Finally , those who stick strictly to national sovereignty and , on the other side , those who have an essentially ' suprastate ' conception of federal power , may have been somewhat worried by my proposals .
What I have in mind is a federation , not by means of a power exerted over nations , but by means of a strong link between them and the common institutions .
Without compromising the essential concept , I have made two major concessions in order to achieve a large measure of agreement .
I will just mention them briefly because my time is nearly up .
My colleagues will know what I am referring to .
I have not made any reference to national players , and I have not insisted that all my proposals be inserted into the Treaty .
Everyone will be aware , for all that , of the importance of the political undertaking that the European Parliament would be making if it adopted this text , an obligation which is what Parliament itself wanted , starting with the annual conference .
This is , in effect , a new pathway that we are able to open up .
It is a hand held out to our fellow citizens .
Their direct participation in the life of the Union is a long-term project , and I believe that it has now been given - and not before time - the necessary stimulus .
Mr President , Philippe Herzog never speaks in a loud voice , and yet his ideas , generally speaking , go right to the heart of the matter , and I can tell you that in the Committee on Institutional Affairs he has rather rocked the boat .
Having said that , the constructive attitude that Philippe Herzog has displayed in the discussions that we have had with him has led us to conclude that his report is excellent , and we hope that tomorrow the resolution will be adopted by a very large majority .
' The citizen lies at the heart of the European project . '
When quoting this principle , it is essential to avoid falling into one of two traps .
The first of these is the alibi .
It is true that when someone says we must consult the citizens , or let the citizens participate , he is often doing it in order to endorse a withdrawal from the European idea , and a withdrawal from the ideas that we are putting forward here , in the European Parliament .
The second trap that one may fall into is the panacea .
Just because we have consulted the citizens and asked for their opinion , that does not necessarily mean that we have got a good European project .
I believe that Philippe Herzog has managed to avoid both of these traps .
The policy also means proposing a real project to our citizens , and we have done this in the form of the project for social and political union .
Finally , we are in favour not only of information , consultation , concerted action and assessment , but also the idea of bringing this democracy to life by allowing real European forces to emerge .
What I mean is that we should talk to real European trades unions which , being at the heart of the social dialogue , would not be merely a façade , a residual power , but would be real players in the economic and social life of Europe .
I would also like to mention the European associations .
It is time that we had a legal framework in order to make the idea of European citizenship a convincing one to the players concerned .
Johanna Maij-Weggen and I have opened up this possibility , by organizing public meetings .
We are also aware that these public meetings , and the moves proposed by Philippe Herzog , will be meaningful only if we are sitting face to face with real European associations , whose existence we can support by listening to them , by holding dialogues with them , and by sharing our debates with them .
Mr President , the Herzog report on the increased role that citizens and their social organizations should play in the work of the European Union comes just at the time when the Irish presidency has put forward the first outlines of the new Treaty , which we are to discuss in detail on Wednesday .
This new draft also states that the Union must provide a better response to the demands of its citizens and should display the necessary openness and transparency .
Citizens must be able to play a part in the European Union not just through the European Parliament , but also through their social organizations .
In the Christian Democratic movement which I represent , we call this the role of the civil society , which acts as a kind of cement in society in general .
The Herzog report rightly stresses that in recent years , the European Union has placed far too much emphasis on the internal market and economic and monetary policy , and far too little on employment and social issues .
I would refer here to the report by Mrs Dury and myself which made the same point , and in this context it is encouraging to see that the Irish presidency has put forward no less than 60 proposals to strengthen the position of social policy and employment policy in the Treaty .
There are three proposals in the Herzog report which I should like to comment on briefly .
Firstly , there is the idea of giving social dialogue a more established position in the work of the institutions .
What he proposes is to organize an annual debate on socio-economic policy and employment which would be just as important as the agriculture and budget debates that we currently hold once a year .
The debate would be preceded by consultations with the social organizations such as the Economic and Social Committee and other social players .
We welcome this idea , and I would point out , as Mrs Dury has done , that there was a similar procedure before the report for the IGC was drawn up , when we held talks with a great many social organizations .
There is another idea that is worth mentioning here .
Our debates are often based on ideological views and differences , but it might be preferable to establish a neutral basis in the form of more accurate evaluations of European policy which could be produced by a kind of scientific council on government policy .
We have this in the Netherlands , and it certainly provides a very good factual basis for political debates .
A third idea he puts forward is for the development of citizens ' associations at European level , which I would wholeheartedly support .
It is very much in keeping with the ideas that Mr Tsatsos presented .
The Herzog report has turned out to be an important one .
We initially had a number of objections , but thanks to Mr Herzog 's spirit of cooperation and the fact that we have been able to propose a number of compromise amendments , my group is now in a position to support it .
It is an interesting document which I hope will be successfully put into practice .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Herzog , who has shown a strong determination to retain the cohesion that is necessary to his report while at the same time remaining open to the amendments proposed by other groups .
The initial text gave rise to a certain number of question marks .
As far as the social chapter is concerned , it became apparent that two precautions would be necessary .
The first of these , according to the rapporteur , was to restore equilibrium , in the field of employment and social policy , to a European policy that may appear to concentrate too much on monetary issues .
I say ' may appear ' because it seems to me that not enough importance has been accorded to the structural funds policies , not to mention the implementation of the White Paper , knowing , as we do , what is likely to happen to that in the various Member States .
The second precaution is that we must not delude Europeans with false promises about the possibilities for creating jobs at European level .
We must not forget that this policy remains the responsibility of the Member States , even though Europe does have a responsibility to provide information and co-operation .
In the same way , it seemed important to us to make a clear distinction between the public-awareness measures carried out by the European Parliament and those carried out by the national parliaments , and not to confuse the two different types of measure .
Information is obviously important , but the areas of responsibility must remain properly defined , and I think that this is one of the conditions that will have to be met in order to ensure that relations between the two institutions remain harmonious .
We have also been careful not to burden the Treaty with a series of obligations .
You , Mr Herzog , have taken this into account .
The idea of organizing an annual conference to report on the economic situation and the employment situation was something that Parliament had expressed a desire for , and I am sure that the majority of Members will be in favour of such an assessment .
We agree to the compromise amendment to paragraph 33 .
You prefer a more flexible formula rather than the uniform procedures that we wanted to retain .
You have added to your text the idea of a common status for European elected representatives .
We withdraw Amendment No 11 to paragraph 23 .
I should also like to thank you , Mr Herzog , for the very interesting discussions that we have had , and I wish you every success with your report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the construction of a citizens ' Europe is one of our prime objectives , Mr Herzog 's report on the participation of citizens and social players in the European Union 's institutional system undoubtedly represents an important contribution towards that objective .
Although there are various reasons for the credibility crisis which our democratic system is undergoing , we believe a primary cause to be the excessive concentration of powers in the hands of Government institutions and experts , to the detriment of those who speak on behalf of civil society .
The construction of the European Union has been going ahead without the active participation of the citizens , and this must be put right quickly if we wish to avoid the risk of failing in our aims .
The document presented today by Mr Herzog on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs does not take refuge behind grandiose declarations of principles concerning participation , but introduces a radical change of concept , accompanied by specific proposals .
The rapporteur has wisely focused his report on public discussion of European Union policies , on the basis of two instruments : universal access to quality information , and the establishment of consultation .
Discussion of political options is a fundamental right , but nowadays it is in practice extremely difficult to exercise that right .
The report 's proposal that an annual conference on European policies should be institutionalized in the form of a public dialogue between elected representatives and executive authorities , with representatives of the social players , would help to fill this gap .
As regards information , the attention drawn by the rapporteur to its principal dimension , policy assessment , is important .
Mr Herzog also rightly raises the matter of consultation , and proposes that the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee should be the driving force at grass root and so strengthen the role of these institutions .
We consider that approval of this report will be an important step in the process of constructing a citizens ' Europe , and our Group therefore supports it and will vote for it .
Mr President , the Greens agree in the main with Mr Herzog 's report on the participation of citizens and social players in the Union , its systems and the Intergovernmental Conference .
I think that Mr Herzog has made a good attempt to structure the problem of the democratic deficit and the lack of openness and transparency .
However , we would have liked to have seen a clearer and more detailed formulation of how citizens are to participate and how consultation on the development of the Union is to come about , on issues concerned with the transition into a superstate and on Europol for example .
How are citizens to become involved in these issues ?
One of the best means of involvement available , apart from dialogue with the people , is to give them real influence through referenda , a point , which I feel ought to have been mentioned .
I am directly opposed to the points in the proposal concerned with improving the supply of information on European integration by means of conventions between the media , the Community , and Member States : the media must remain totally without ties , conventions and agreements , otherwise they will lose their integrity .
But , Mr President , I must say that I am also extremely disappointed at the proposal for a review of the Treaty which has been presented as it does not include any mention of the principles of publishing information , and of openness and transparency .
This move is totally in the wrong direction and I hope that Mr Herzog 's report can be amended slightly in this respect .
Mr President , this excellent motion for a resolution by our colleague , Mr Herzog , has the merit of inciting a debate on the practical ways of bringing about citizen participation , as well as that of organizations and social players , in the process of European construction .
This is an excellent merit . However , I think that the report is even worthier because it confirms that the process of European construction must be a process with aims and goals shared by society , benefitting from the complicity of citizens and various social organizations .
More than a criticism , this means defending the urgent need to overcome the method that has prevailed so far of making Europe on the basis of creating factual situations , the famous factual solidarities , and in the consensus of a clear , militant vanguard involved in internationalizing the economy , society and political power .
This method has produced excellent results . Therefore , we have achieved a high level of integration .
But the current crisis in the process of integration shows that the method has had its day .
The proposals made by Mr Herzog are intended , at European Union level , to respond to the political crisis and the crisis of representativeness which for various reasons are affecting the various democratic systems .
In the case of the European Union , the crisis is growing worse , widening the enormous gap between it and its citizens .
That is why it is so important , without calling into question the primacy of universal suffrage , which I wish to enhance on the contrary , to combine the strengthening of representative democracy with participatory democracy in order to overcome the democratic deficit .
It is important to combine the European , national and regional levels of participation and democratize European participatory institutions far more , such as the Economic and Social Committee , and promote participation by social players , yes , the social players , at national level , to fill in the deficit of effective links on the basis of European organizations like the ECOSOC .
For the same reasons a fillip must be given to the participation of social associations and non-trade union NGOs .
One of the glaring areas where influence over controls and appraisal by citizens and NGOs is lacking is in the definition of the main thrust of macroeconomic policies , the social effects of which are felt by ordinary people , very often negative effects .
I think that for that reason our debate is not essentially one of form . It must also be a debate about the content of European economic and social policies .
To improve citizen participation those citizens must identify with policy and that policy must be overhauled in order to meet the needs and fundamental aspirations of the ordinary people .
Mr President , in preparation for the Intergovernmental Conference , the European Parliament and its Committee on Institutional Affairs held a number of public hearings .
Mrs Dury and Mrs Maij-Weggen have already suggested that we should do this kind of thing more often , because we need the support of the public to develop and consolidate Europe further , and Europe also has much to offer to the public .
Those hearings were , as I have indicated , very productive .
And as many as possible of the concerns which people brought to Brussels were to be included in the Dury / Maij-Weggen report , and consequently in the deliberations of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The idea of integrating those who are involved in Europe more closely into the European process is therefore a very positive one .
However , those hearings also showed up some flaws that were and still are present in the idea .
For one thing they demonstrated , or helped us to recognize , that it is primarily groups which are already very well organized that will make use of the further opportunity offered by this type of public hearing to come to Brussels for such discussions .
In many cases , the people who are really at the grassroots are not given a voice in the way that we would wish .
Furthermore , while events organized by institutions in Brussels are important and essential , we do already have a great many instruments .
In the light of this , much of what has been proposed , not least in this report , seems almost to be on rather a small scale .
I should like to highlight two proposals in this context .
One was raised by the Committee on Regional Policy , namely that we should not allow ourselves to be carried away , but should be serious about subsidiarity and recognize competences , first and foremost , where they exist on the ground .
The second proposal , put forward by the Committee on Culture , was that people should be involved at the point where they are first confronted with Europe as an issue - and that means in schools and in the educational process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission warmly congratulates Mr Herzog , the rapporteur , and the Committee on Institutional Affairs , on their excellent work which has brought to the centre of the political debate the highly important question of the active participation of citizens and other social players in the construction of Europe .
The Commission wholeheartedly agrees with the emphasis placed by Parliament on the role of civil society in shaping a genuine European consciousness .
The process of Community integration is now half a century old , and in that half century it has allowed the countries of the Community to achieve an extraordinary degree of economic and social progress .
We have , however , to concede that , at this time , European public opinion is affected by a latent , generalized distrust of all things institutional .
Europe must , then , draw closer to its citizens : a true democratic project can be achieved only if citizens are directly involved in all the Union 's policies , and is based on the development of democratic control , with the European Parliament being the natural seat of that control .
Indeed , the mechanisms for monitoring and assessing European policies - which need , of course , to be strengthened - already exist , and the best example we have is the relationship of trust that exists between the Commission and Parliament .
The development of a European political area requires Europe 's citizens to be better informed , greater transparency of the Institutions and a more extensive social dialogue .
One of the central problems of European society , as we well know , is the concern surrounding the future of our social model .
The Commission considers that only if there is detailed dialogue with all social players , at European as well as national and local level , will it be possible to identify the solutions we need .
Social dialogue , including at sectoral and local level , is , moreover , at the root of the confidence pact for employment devised by President Santer and the Commission .
The Commission is fully aware of the importance of expanding the dialogue with civil society .
I should like to remind you that , by providing information , the campaigns recently launched by the European Parliament and the Commission , as part of the PRINCE programme - the ' Citizens of Europe ' , ' Let 's build Europe together ' and ' Single Currency ' campaigns - are designed to promote both general and specific awareness of the opportunities offered and the progress achieved and currently under way in Europe .
If citizens are to be brought closer to Europe , Europe must come to grips with issues which citizens hold dear ; but if citizens are not to see Europe as something they have to endure , if we are to build a Europe with and for citizens , we have to encourage them to be politically and socially involved , using all the means at our disposal .
The conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference , the introduction of the single currency , the opportunities afforded by the single market and the prospect of enlargement : these are the challenges which we must meet and which call for consensus and the involvement of citizens who are fully aware of what is at stake - well-informed , active participants in the construction of Europe .
Thank you for your attention , and I again congratulate the rapporteur .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.15 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , there is a blatant inaccuracy and , if you will , an injustice .
Mr Howitt states that fellow-countrymen of his , lorry drivers , are being prevented from returning home - especially now as Christmas is approaching - by the tractors of farmers who , in their struggle for survival , have blocked off a number of roads .
The truth is that whenever those drivers want to get by , they are let through , and not only this , but because there is some disturbance and difficulty about feeding them , special meals are prepared for them so that they can leave and return to their countries as calmly and quietly as possible .
I therefore ask for correction of that unjust comment against farmers who have been literally struggling for their livelihoods for the last ten days .
The order of business makes no allowance for debate on that subject .
Mr President , in connection with what Mr Howitt said yesterday regarding the case in Greece , I can confirm that it is not only English drivers who are hostages in this Greek game .
There are also Danish drivers who have been ' imprisoned ' and who are receiving unbelievably bad treatment .
I would therefore ask you , as a Greek and as a Parliamentary President , to write a letter to the Greek government and demand that citizens of the Union be treated properly .
Mr Blak , I do not think we can talk about the farmers ' demonstrations in Greece , which are of course creating various problems that affect both Greek and foreign drivers .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Decision on urgency
Mr President , the Council also submitted this request for urgent procedure concerning mutual assistance between the administrative authorities of the Member States at the November part-session .
At that time , we rejected it .
No new element has emerged since then .
Nor have we heard anything from the Council .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has therefore decided to reject the request for urgent procedure once again .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , the Committee on Fisheries has decided to accept the Council 's request for urgent procedure .
Mr President , as rapporteur I would like to put the following viewpoint , which coincides with that of the Commission : in the first place , I believe that a proposal for a Council Regulation laying down technical measures must satisfy certain minimum basic requirements , a broad scientific foundation , wide agreement and acceptance , dialogue with the sector and the recognition and support of interested sectors .
This is how I started to work , but the response of the chairman of our committee to this method of operation , which was certainly the right one , was to apply Article 146 ( 4 ) to me and impose a deadline for presentation of the report .
In addition , the Council of Ministers has been urging us on and applying pressure by submitting a first , and now a second , request for urgent procedure .
My response - so that I should not be held responsible for any delay - was to submit a full and wide-ranging report , and that of the Committee on Fisheries - likewise so that it should not be held responsible for the Council 's inability to take a decision - was to vote to reject the Commission 's proposal .
This Parliament should know that we are now agreed on the urgent procedure , but we are agreed on it in order to reject the Commission 's proposal .
This is a way of working hard and fast but in a destructive manner .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Yes , Mr President , we rejected this request for urgent procedure .
We shall deal with this under the usual procedure at the January partsession .
The Committee on Agriculture is therefore opposed to this request for urgent procedure .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
Mr President , I should firstly like to say something to the Commission and the Council .
I welcome the fact , moreover , that the President of the Commission is present .
Recently , we have been working more and more often under increasingly difficult conditions , and the Commission and Council 's consultation times have been getting increasingly short .
In the case of the preparations for the Dublin summit , it even went so far that we were not consulted until the day that we had to vote in committee .
It is not normally possible to work under such conditions .
The same applies to the present case .
Once again , we were consulted extremely late , and we had to deliver an opinion in the utmost haste yesterday evening .
I wish to say that in the future , we shall no longer be prepared to work in such a way , and that next year , we shall no longer be accepting such requests for urgent procedure .
Since it is a question of the alcohol regime in the Scandinavian countries , however , this being an exceptionally important matter in which specific regional factors are involved , and since a legal loophole will arise if we fail to take a decision during this part-session , I am in favour of approving this request for urgent procedure .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
As you said , Mr President , the report was adopted unanimously yesterday evening .
The Committee on Agriculture therefore supports this request for urgent procedure .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Commission 's 1997 work programme and previous year 's legislative programme
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the Commission 's programme of work for 1997 and evaluation of the legislative programme for the previous year .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , following on from our first debate in October , we are now concluding this procedure with a joint motion for a resolution supported by an overwhelming majority in this House .
Pursuant to our new Rule 49 , this resolution constitutes Parliament 's contribution to the work programme for 1997 .
Over and above the differences between the various political groups , this text reveals very broad political agreement on the essential aspects of European policy , whether with regard to employment and growth , a citizens ' Europe , the environment , or external affairs .
In view of this broad consensus , it is important for the Council to give its backing to this programme , which should be a genuine contract of government between the three main institutions .
On behalf of my group , I should like to express our approval of the Commission 's planned new legislative proposals .
However , we hope that they will be submitted at an adequate rate .
This year , by the end of November , Parliament had received only five of the 19 proposals announced .
We also endorse the main substance of the political observations made by the President of the Commission in this debate , and we are committed to supporting the Commission whenever it endeavours to take Europe forward in a practical way .
In this respect , we should like the Commission to be a little bolder on occasion , in the face of the frequently vacillating - or indeed inconsistent - national governments .
You will not be surprised to hear me vigorously reaffirm that our absolutely top priority is combating unemployment .
Europe must play a role in this context , through all the policies that it pursues .
The European Parliament endorses the confidence pact for employment and supports the President of the Commission in the face of the Council 's reluctance .
We join him in condemning the inconsistency of the Council , which forgets the grand declarations that it makes at the six-monthly European summits as soon as the Finance Ministers meet in the grey of a Brussels Monday .
This undermines Europe 's credibility and does it great harm .
The Socialist Group wishes to see the Union adopt a determined political approach to tackling unemployment , whilst both respecting the market 's economic and financial laws and making a clear commitment to the European social model .
As far as the macroeconomic approach which is essential to combating unemployment is concerned , this must be based on monetary and budgetary policies .
The fundamental aim must be , on the one hand , to make possible substantial public investment which is capable of boosting economic activity and , on the other , to fund effective policies on employment .
The Socialist Group believes that a less restrictive monetary policy , which leaves the political authorities room for manoeuvre , in view of the urgent need to combat unemployment , must form part of the modern political arsenal .
It has tabled an amendment to this effect to the joint motion for a resolution , and it would like to secure a broad consensus on this point .
Furthermore , we are calling on the Commission to submit specific proposals on the subject of taxation as a whole .
There are too many inconsistencies from one Member State to another for the internal market to be able to develop .
Faced with the impossibility of introducing the harmonization of direct or indirect taxation , however , the Commission is advocating more consensual methods , such as the establishment of a code of conduct between the Member States , or coordination rather than harmonization .
This is an interesting , more pragmatic approach which deserves to be explored , since no Member State wishes to see fiscal dumping develop or labour being excessively burdened in relation to environmental or capital taxation .
It is essential to supplement this move towards coordination by taking account of welfare costs .
Member States which have set up effective social protection systems which safeguard social cohesion will not allow them to be undermined by social dumping .
In accordance with our Rules of Procedure , this resolution will be forwarded to the national parliaments and to all the institutions which are involved in the European legislative process .
I would call on the Council , the national parliaments , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions to respond to the efforts made by the Commission and the European Parliament to ensure transparency and clarity .
Only in this way can Europe provide itself with effective and transparent - and therefore credible - policies which are in our citizens ' interest .
Mr President , President Santer , ladies and gentlemen , back in October 's debate on the Commission 's annual programme for 1997 , we raised a number of issues of method and timing : these concerned the procedure and schedule for the presentation to the House of the annual budget , the programme of work and the legislative programme of the Commission .
Since that time , the European Parliament has amended its Rules of Procedure so as to provide a better definition of Parliament 's role in the process of drawing up the legislative programme , taking account , what is more , of the fact that the Commission is established as a result of a vote investing it by the European Parliament .
We therefore consider this debate , in which we are both evaluating implementation of the 1996 programme and approving the main lines of the 1997 legislative programme , to be extremely important .
It will be more important still if it helps consolidate the close relationship between Parliament and the Commission . That relationship should increasingly resemble the kind of relationship that exists between parliament and the executive , and a fundamental requirement for this is that we should share the same political will , ensure that information is rapidly provided , implementation is swift and that Parliament is able to exercise its supervisory powers transparently and with ease , as provided for by the code of conduct adopted on 15 March 1995 .
This is a relationship that Parliament wants to see strengthened .
If we are unable to be absolutely satisfied with the implementation of the Commission programme for 1996 , the main area of concern has to be this relationship , particularly as regards a number of problems of timing and scheduling we encountered in reviewing dossiers sent by the Commission to Parliament .
Since it provides an opportunity for further reflection , this debate too ought perhaps to be subject to further assessment of a regulatory nature because the House itself ought better to prepare - and not just through the procedure for reaching agreement between the political groups - its resolution approving the Commission 's legislative programme , if it wants to see the Commission acquire a stronger institutional profile .
Turning to the substance of the programme , in the time that remains to me , I shall focus on just one issue , given that other honourable Members will subsequently be taking up other points .
That issue is , plainly and quite naturally , the visibility of the Union to the outside world , to quote President Santer .
As time passes , this issue becomes increasingly more serious and increasingly difficult to resolve .
Events follow swiftly on one another and , gradually , as this happens , Europe 's role seems to become increasingly marginal .
During this sitting , we shall also be discussing the situation in Serbia .
It sometimes look as if the Dayton accords will end up being a kind of alibi for Europe , inasmuch as we take the view that a strong commitment to civilian reconstruction , particularly of the democracies within Europe , although necessary , is not our prime task .
Here too , we are asking the Commission to be bold and positive in taking an initiative .
Mr President , even if formally unexceptionable , within this Parliament , the interinstitutional declaration on democracy , transparency and subsidiarity is becoming very much open to criticism in terms of its ability to translate fine words into deeds .
The programme for 1996 has been implemented to a very limited degree only if you bear in mind that by the end of November the European Parliament had received just five of the 19 legislative proposals announced by the Commission .
How can we think of constructing the new Europe if , in most sectors , the Commission seems to be abandoning its own institutional role as the driving force for action by the Union , and it is plain that the Council does not have a consistent political strategy , as it blocks the various sectors involved in the legislative programme , the budget and the legal bases ?
We have to make an effort to implement and complete the 1997 legislative programme ; we need to fight unemployment through a range of effective policies able to promote the competitiveness of industry in the Union , regional , transport and environmental policy , a real effort to complete the internal market and identify an investment policy apt to stimulate economic activity ; we need to fight fraud ; the Commission must put a stop to shortcomings or abuses on the part of a Member State by suspending payments , recovering sums illegally obtained and imposing the requisite penalties .
We have to have the courage to look again at the question of waste , to review the agreements concluded with third countries which do not contain specific rules and guarantees on democracy and respect for human rights ; we must support a proposal for a directive on waste management plans and domestic waste in particular ; we must encourage the fight against rampant organized crime , reinforce cooperation between the Member States and promote international organizational initiatives .
Mr President , I believe that the political groups are more or less in agreement in delivering a negative verdict on the manner in which the Commission carried out its programme for 1996 .
Unfortunately , this consensus does not exist in respect of the evaluation of the programme for 1997 .
With regard to the programme for 1996 , it is also necessary to underline the Commission 's total lack of determination vis-à-vis the Council .
The blocking of a whole series of decisions within the Council poses an enormous problem for Parliament : 168 dossiers awaiting a final decision - that is a great many ; a further 83 awaiting a common position - and no Commission initiatives in this respect .
In our view , that is unacceptable .
With regard to the programme for 1997 , it must be said that the Commission is proposing a very low profile for the European Union in relation to the issues at stake , which are clear to all our citizens - whether as regards employment policy , the environment , citizenship or the role which the Union must play on the world stage .
Yesterday , an international conference bringing together the various signatory states to the statutes of the World Trade Organization began in Singapore .
The Commission has been given an ambitious mandate , but I have doubts as to the results that it will achieve .
I do not have much faith in the Commission 's determination in this respect .
For all these reasons , our group considers that the joint motion for a resolution which has been signed by a number of groups is characterized by weakness .
You cannot criticize what has been done , deplore what has not been done , and then approve the Commission programme .
That is quite unacceptable .
This is why we do not subscribe to this text , and we have tabled our own , far stronger motion for a resolution .
Mr President , Mr Santer , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I can only endorse what Mr Lannoye and other colleagues have just said .
We note a great many shortcomings in the implementation of the 1996 programme and , like others , we are unable to endorse the resolution which the large political groups wish to see adopted , which restricts itself to approving the outline of the Commission 's programme and supporting that institution in its role as a driving force .
And this is precisely the point , Mr Santer , that I wish to draw to your attention .
To judge by the work programme which you have presented , I believe that the Commission is seriously failing in its role as a driving force .
It is not with six or seven pages of good intentions - skipping over everything that is not working , failing to state clearly that , with regard to the confidence pact , for example , the Council does not support you , and that in many other areas , the European project has reached a serious deadlock - it is not by avoiding these issues and refusing to put them on the table for discussion , by renouncing , in fact , your role as a driving force , that you will take the process of European integration forward .
You rightly say that we must make progress with the major dossiers .
But it is you who must provide the necessary impetus .
If you fail to do so , you will perhaps secure a resolution which says ' All is well , your ladyship ' , but that is not what will take Europe forward - and the consequences will be very serious for the future of this European Union , in which we all believe so strongly .
This is why we refused to support the text that will be put to the vote tomorrow - simply in order to give you the opportunity to do better , to do more , and to give the Commission back its rightful role .
We hope to see you return one day with a work programme other than this one which , in our view , is inadequate and falls well short of our expectations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the Commission 's work programme , we always find the same generalities about the European Union 's objectives : promoting the creation of jobs ; preserving the European model of society ; strengthening Europe 's presence on the international stage ; preparing for the challenges of the future - as if ritual incantations could turn hopes into reality .
You would think that you were in France , where a television appearance by the President of the Republic is supposed , by the power of the word alone , to change an economic disaster into prosperity , an unpopular government into a model of efficiency , and a party made rotten by the corruption of its leaders into a movement of the future celebrating its twentieth anniversary .
Let us consider those celebrated objectives .
In 1992 , when there was a need to persuade France to vote in favour of the Maastricht Treaty , Jacques Delors predicted that the European Union would generate ten million jobs , just as it was predicted that the creation of the single market would bring prosperity .
Unfortunately , reality rarely corresponds to the wishes of those in power .
Today , there are officially 22 million unemployed people in Europe , as a result of unrestrained free trade with the rest of the world and the forced march towards a monetary utopia .
Indeed , you regard the euro as the principal weapon for combating unemployment .
In France , thankfully , the debate has just been reopened , thanks to the remarks - for once - of Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
A large number of Members of Parliament applauded him when he criticized current policy .
The media are increasingly critical of your plans .
Suddenly , the general public - which you view with such scorn , except when it is a question of indoctrinating it - is beginning to wonder .
The fact that Mr Chirac rushed to renew his allegiance to Chancellor Kohl and reassure him that France would not leave the straight and narrow path of the euro-mark changes nothing .
The introduction of the single currency will not guarantee prosperity , jobs or even economic strength .
Wealth can create a strong currency . A currency cannot create wealth .
Thus you are destroying each day a little more of the model of society that you claim to defend .
Under the guise of harmonization , you will destroy social security .
Under the guise of improving competitiveness , you will call into question the protection of workers and the labour regulations of the different Member States .
On the pretext of the need for competition , you are destroying public services .
In fact , the dogma of global free trade is forcing you to reduce wages and social protection to third world levels , as is tirelessly demonstrated by Maurice Allais , my country 's economics Nobel laureate .
We do not want a Europe which sacrifices people and social progress to the economy and the financial appetites of a handful of multinationals !
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , 1997 is a critical juncture in terms of setting the future guidelines for cohesion and the regional policy of the EU .
On behalf of my group I would like to make a few brief points on this area .
In the light of all the problems we have had with ineffective implementation , I would like to see the Commission work more strongly on publicizing best practice - good models of using funds effectively .
In terms of the cohesion report , I would like to point to the need for an ongoing evaluation of how other Community policies are supporting the objective of economic and social cohesion .
It is clear that in some of our areas and weak regions where structural funds come into play , they are at risk of being cancelled out , for example , by CAP , where it acts as a regressive factor .
We need to begin to audit these policies to make sure we are in line with our own objectives within the Treaty .
We now need to work in earnest to begin the programme of reform for 1999 .
I want to thank the Commission for its efforts to meet the deadline for the cohesion report , but I regret that we have not yet had the communication on urban policy which was due to come forward in 1996 , and we would like to see that at the beginning of 1997 .
What I do believe is lacking is effective coordination in the execution of programme policies .
I would like to see a more concerted effort by the Commission directorates to work closely at all levels , not only between Commissioners but also between policy directorates , to take up the challenges of EMU , enlargement and the future reform of the structural funds .
An internal coordinated approach has to begin in 1997 .
Commission directorates must not shy away from a critical appraisal of their own policies and programmes , because only then can we get the right policies and programmes to secure the confidence of our citizens in the long term and after the reform of the funds in 1999 .
I also believe that the Commission must not shy away from playing its role as a full partner merely because some Member States are claiming the monopoly on subsidiarity .
The Commission is not a clearing house for policies and the Commission must take forward our structural fund programmes ; it must also take forward the territorial and local employment pacts and give direction in this area through concrete actions and coordination activities .
I also believe we now need a full communication on the impact of EMU on regional policies , particularly in the light of the Council 's decision on the budget , to cut structural fund payments and to create a false relationship between structural funds , deficit criteria and economic convergence .
I would like to see a communication in 1997 to allow Parliament to take decisions in this vital area of policy .
Mr President , I would like to explain briefly our position regarding the implementation of the 1996 legislative programme and the Commission 's work programme for the year 1997 ; we attach particular importance to the institutional declaration on democracy , transparency and subsidiarity made by this European Parliament and adopted as their own by the Council and the Commission .
We believe , Mr President , that the legislative programme is an indispensable interinstitutional instrument for planning and coordinating Union activities in a transparent manner , and we therefore seek , Mr Santer , an effort in the right direction to achieve these objectives .
We think it essential that the Council should involve itself more closely in the process of programming legislation .
Without closer cooperation between Commission and Council we believe that the result would not be satisfactory .
This is what happened , in part , in 1996 , when there were some gaps , which I shall briefly point out , in the interinstitutional programme we are now assessing .
We particularly deplore the fact that , of the 19 legislative proposals announced , only a few reached us .
We agree with the general outlines for implementation of the work programme for 1997 .
We would like to highlight the institutional role assigned to the Commission as engine of the Union 's actions ; we would like to draw particular attention to the role of the Commission , which is to table new proposals for legislation presented to Parliament under Article 138b of the Treaty ; we believe that there might be far fewer requests from the Council for urgent procedure if the programme planning which we are now debating were improved .
This would enable Parliament to study the proposals more closely .
As for the priorities proposed by Parliament , we believe , on the basis of the position expressed by our Group , that for 1997 they should be set under three major headings : one , employment , growth and greater cohesion ; two , the citizens ' Europe ; and three - of particular importance at the moment - a stronger Union presence in the world .
I would like to say a few words about each of these broad categories .
Regarding employment , growth and greater cohesion , we reaffirm that Parliament 's main objective is still to fight unemployment .
We believe that the structural policies must be extended in order to enhance the effectiveness of the drive for greater cohesion , as regards both regional development and research , transport , the environment , industry and the single market .
In particular , we ask the Commission to table a communication on research and employment , which was initially planned for 1996 but could not be carried out .
Finally , under this heading , we also ask the Commission to produce a report for discussion in this Parliament on the financing of infrastructures in Europe , particularly in the context of the ' stability pact ' .
Mr President , I am going to try to reflect my group 's views on a Citizen 's Europe and in particular to single out elements of the EPP motion for a resolution on 1996 and 1997 .
President Santer knows full well that we are more than ready to support most aspects of his work and we appreciate the great efforts he is making to put order into the work of the Commission .
We are living in a period when all of us are involved in this great venture , both at European level and in Member States , and we need to implement to the full the legislation we have adopted here in this House and by the Council .
That said , in the words of our own resolution , we consider that the Commission has been too passive in the field of justice and home affairs and we regret in particular that not one of the proposals in the Commission 's 1996 work programme has apparently been forwarded to Parliament .
Let me single out - but in no particular order - a few of the subjects that we , the EPP Group , have addressed in recent months .
Firstly , there is the field of asylum policy .
One fully appreciates that many Member States wish to hold the reins themselves .
But there is no getting away from the fact that we are finding it extremely difficult within Europe to discriminate between the political and economic refugees .
In one Member State , for instance , there are some 60 , 000 people from outside the Union applying for asylum each year whose applications are still pending and of those - or at least those who have been admitted in the past - maybe only 5 or 10 % , possibly as high as 13 % , are finally admitted .
Whether one agrees or not with the criteria adopted , the fact is that Europe is a Mecca for at least tens of thousands of people , and their hopes and aspirations may well conflict with the needs of our own populations .
Then again , turning to our resolution once more , we have failed to promote harmonization in the use of lists of safe third countries of origin and lists of safe third countries , and it is at least questionable whether Member States are acting in their mutual interest .
I turn now to a further issue and that is the whole question of child abuse and child abduction , to which we are giving great thought .
My colleague Mary Banotti - but not only her - is doing great work in this area .
Child abuse is an issue which has been swept under the carpet , as we know all too well , for perhaps not only a decade but for a whole century - it is that serious .
I do not refer , you understand , to one single Member State - far from it .
But while it may be the prime responsibility of Member States , is there no contribution that we can make here at European level ?
The horrors of the situation speak for themselves and call for some concerted action .
Again , as regards child abduction , all of us who have constituencies - as in the UK - are likely to have to face the anguish of one or other parent trying to retrieve their child from another country , sometimes against near impossible odds .
That , surely , is a field for closer cooperation .
I leave the issue there .
There are so many other issues which one could discuss but I look forward very much to hearing the President 's response .
Mr President , the work programme lists four quite acceptable priorities .
The most important , which is actually mentioned in the introduction to the programme and which I should like to examine in my speech , is to demonstrate that the Union is there to serve all its citizens and that it is an appropriate body to do so .
In this context , the Commission should be supported in its endeavours to secure a European confidence pact .
It would send out a powerful signal to the people of Europe if all those responsible - the Council , the Commission , Parliament and the social partners - committed themselves to achieving the main aims of this pact , and in my opinion the Council is mainly to blame for the lack of progress here , as well as for the fact that the foundations of EMU and of the Union as a whole are now crumbling .
It does not seem to appreciate that every time it blocks Community initiatives such as the confidence pact or incentive programmes for financial or short-sighted national reasons , it is also undermining its most important policy instrument : the Union itself .
I hope that 1997 will bring a breakthrough , and not just at the IGC .
1997 should also be the year when an even balance is finally achieved between a macroeconomic policy focusing on stability and growth and an employment policy focusing on creating jobs . Work on this should start very soon - this weekend , in fact .
The stability pact agreements should prove useful here and should enable the Member States to invest in employment .
Particular attention needs to be given to the 18 million - or in actual fact 30 million - who are out of work .
Too many instruments are currently only reaching those already in work , and I fear that this is where the Commission 's focus lies and that too little attention is given to the enormous numbers in the margins who , it is all too often assumed , will somehow automatically find jobs .
Special attention needs to be given to young people here , and I would call on the social partners to assume their share of responsibility at national level by ensuring that training is provided for young people leaving full-time education .
Special attention should also be given to the Member States ' failure to use funds which could pay for education and training .
Their readiness to accept this and to allow the money to be used for other purposes should be condemned .
The extent to which the Member States invest in education and training should , to my mind , be one of the main indicators for assessing how the Essen agreements are being implemented .
It should also be one of the main ways of targeting the Structural Funds more specifically on employment .
It is quite ridiculous that the Member States should always be getting more money to build motorways and so on , while at the same time claiming that they cannot afford to invest in education .
I would urge the Commission to put forward some specific proposals in 1997 , once the report on the future of social protection has been dealt with .
In particular , I welcome the Commission 's plans to focus on the role that social policy can play in establishing economic priorities , which is also to be one of the main themes of the Dutch presidency .
I support the Commission on this , but otherwise I would point out that the work programme does not actually contain any new proposals at all , and is only acceptable provided that the report is followed up with some sound and practical ideas and that active steps are taken to make use of the legacy of previous years .

I would just make one point here : everyone is talking about reduced mobility , but most of the problems stem from the fact that the social protection provided for people working in other countries is completely inadequate . I would therefore urge , finally , that the proposals which the Commission is shortly to submit should be actively taken forward .
Mr President , I have four comments to make about the Commission 's work programme .
I said last time that I found it fairly unambitious and in need of greater impetus , and I will give you four examples of what I mean .
First of all , telecommunications .
We all know that telecommunications , the media , and information and communications technologies are all converging , and I think it is vitally important for the Commission to try to establish some kind of balance in this whole area , because now that we are going to have television without frontiers , and we have to decide what to do about the new providers of services and the question of licences , we do not really know how to set about it all .
I also think that we need a general framework to bring together all the various subjects which now exist in the telecommunications sector .
Funding for a universal service is covered in the interconnection directive , but the definition of universal service is contained in the voice telephony ONP directive .
This is just one example of why we need some kind of framework .
My second example is research and development .
The Council is causing great difficulties about providing extra funding for the fourth framework programme , and the European Parliament has said on a number of occasions that it wishes the funding to be provided .
It is clearly one of the most important instruments in terms of employment in the Union , and this is why I think it is also extremely important for the Commission to issue a communication on the relationship between employment and R & D in the European Union very soon .
Then we can convince the governments during the preparations for the fifth framework programme that the money has to be found .
The third point is taxation , which is an area that is greatly undervalued .
I would suggest that without further harmonization in this field , we are going to encounter major problems with the operation of the monetary union .
These have been greatly underestimated .
The various profit calculation systems used in the Member States will present considerable difficulties for EMU .
The Dutch presidency is trying to ensure that taxation is high on the agenda and is looking at VAT , amongst other things . It wants to go back to an energy tax and to introduce rules on the transfer of companies ' royalties .
I would urge the Commission to use the development of the euro as an opportunity to put taxation high on the political agenda .
The final example is energy .
We are all still at risk from unsafe nuclear power stations .
The Commission 's White Paper on energy policy has been adopted , and Parliament has also adopted a resolution stating that the Commission must play a leading role in ensuring that we finally have an action programme to tackle all these unsafe power stations .
I would once again call on the Commission and in particular President Santer to take a firm grip on this whole issue as a matter of urgency .
It would be extremely welcome if the Commission could play a coordinating role here , because this is an area that people need to feel is in safe hands .
Mr President , when presenting the Commission 's work programme for 1997 at the October part-session , Mr Santer named as the first of four priorities : ' fostering growth and employment ' .
He is undoubtedly right in this respect , since the fact that there are 18 million people out of work is a problem that threatens the social cohesion of the individual Member States and the European Union as a whole .
The Union as such is faced with a challenge , although the main responsibility for employment policy lies with the Member States - and , in this context , above all with the two sides of industry .
Europe 's employment strategies have so far met with only modest success .
The Member States do not give adequate support to the endeavours of the Commission and Parliament on this front .
A proposal from the Committee on Budgets could enable the first steps towards the realization of the trans-European networks to be taken .
Under that proposal , funding for a number of the projects would be transferred from category 3 to category 4 of the budget .
I welcome the fact that , in 1997 , the Commission intends to promote the measures set out in the confidence pact concerning the reform of employment systems , the adjustment of structural policy and the conclusion of territorial employment pacts .
Monetary union will be a means of bringing about increased employment . 1997 will be a key year in its achievement , in which it will become clear which Member States can participate .
In this context , adhering to the timetable is just as important as fulfilling the criteria of a sound economic and monetary policy .
Only that will create jobs in the long term .
Furthermore , the Commission has announced that , in 1997 , it will free from the ice of the European legislative process a number of the proposals which are blocked in the Council .
I would mention just the proposal for a Statute for the European Company .
According to the calculations of the Chiampi Group on the promotion of Europe 's competitiveness , the lack of such a statute is costing European industry around ECU 30 billion every year .
In this context , the PPE Group indicates in its motion for a resolution that the rights of participation and codetermination of workers in all companies under European law must be established by mutual agreement of the two sides of industry .
I am hoping for further clarification of the social dimension of the European Union from the conference of Heads of State or Government by the middle of next year , for example through the incorporation of the social protocol into the EU Treaty , the addition of a new employment chapter - whereby I am not , however , reckoning on additional powers for the Community - and the inclusion of a general ban on discrimination and thus provision for the equal treatment of women . Here too , the Commission can make an important contribution through its work in 1997 .
Mr President , 1997 will be a critical year for the European Union .
Currently , all attention and the whole of the debate is focused on the single currency .
If that objective , albeit a useful and important one , continues to be the only - or at least the main - policy , the European Union will get off to a bad start : it will emerge with an imbalance in powers , tilted in favour of the central banks and some governments , and with Europe 's citizens left at a distance , because the single currency , although important , does not exactly quicken the pulse of citizens and has , in fact , from the outset been perceived as the cause of certain restrictions .
For those reasons , we have , as a matter of urgency , to be resolute and achieve a better balance in the process , by building on , giving greater prominence to and focusing on another axis on which Europe needs to evolve : development , employment , economic and social cohesion and solidarity towards the more vulnerable regions and sectors of society .
This should be the main concern of the European Parliament and the Commission ; it needs to be made coherent - and not just in words .
Let us be honest : the confidence pact that you , President Santer , have proposed , and the regional pacts for employment alongside it , are likely to meet the same fate as Jacques Delors ' White Paper .
We have to make sure that they are not just quoted , cited as pieces of literature and stored in libraries but are put into practice and become real priorities .
We have to be clear on this point : let us remember that in recent years , even if the distances separating the Member States have in part been reduced , the differences and disparities between the more vulnerable and the stronger regions have actually become greater , and we have seen more marginalization .
That means that cohesion has still to be a concern for all of us .
Not only the Structural Funds , but all of the Union 's policies - agricultural and research policy , the trans-European Networks and transport - as well as national policies must be directed more towards that goal .
We must insist on that approach and be consistent .
And the European Parliament itself must be consistent : for example , at first reading on the budget , when it failed to achieve the majority needed to reject the cuts proposed by the Council , and first and foremost those on the Structural Funds , this was - in my view - a political error , specifically because , as far as the budget goes , its hands were tied in relation to the Council and , to some extent , it accepted the negative message emanating from the Council , namely that this was not the time for development , employment and economic and social cohesion .
Well , we have to make clear that in 1997 these will be the main issues and we shall have to shift the balance between policies accordingly !
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in terms of the Community 's structural policies , the Commission is attaching great importance to 1997 .
It is doing so , firstly , because a mid-term review of the Objective I programmes will be carried out next year and , secondly , because an adjustment of these policies will be proposed as part of the programme planning for the Objective II areas for the new period 1997 to 1999 .
We hope that , in the process , the wide variety of regional experiences gained with the Structural Funds will be utilized and disseminated .
These experiences are both positive and negative - for example , with regard to the disbursement of funds , because the delays in this respect , whether caused on the ground or by the Commission , are very difficult to explain to the various beneficiaries . But the regions also have experiences regarding efficiency in general .
This relates to both the substance of the development programmes and the streamlining and simplification of procedures and administrative methods .
However , an important element is missing from the Commission 's work programme , namely the announcement of a report in 1999 on the forthcoming revision of the Structural Funds during the next planning period from 2000 to 2005 , although the debate on this is currently well under way .
Associations , organizations and a number of regions have already adopted a position .
In 1997 , Mr Santer , we are hoping - alongside the Commission 's usual oral statements - for some suitably clear indications of your institution 's thinking .
In my view , the present cohesion report only hints at - and can only hint at - meeting this requirement .
Consideration must be given to the future of the Structural Funds , in good time and without ideological restrictions . The manner in which the European Parliament participates in this process must be different , in other words more effective than was the case for the previous period , so as to ensure that the Structural Funds do not , for reasons of time , once again have to be rushed through , as occurred in 1993 .
Indeed , the evaluation of the programmes and the establishment of the allocation criteria are important tasks - not least of Parliament and in particular its Committee on Regional Policy .
After all , this area accounts for no less than one third of the total Community budget .
I would urge you to include this important point in your work programme for 1997 , Mr President of the Commission , so that your thinking can be discussed and thereby influence the joint decision-making in good time .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , there is no one in the House , I believe , who does not regret that your various efforts to do more for employment in Europe have so far either failed or not received the appropriate backing - and we support you in this respect .
Employment policy is surely linked to liberalization policy , though , and the Commission is the standard-bearer of liberalization in Europe , not without good reason .
In my view , therefore , in all our very proper moves towards liberalization , we need to take account of the possible problems or negative consequences to which these moves may give rise .
New jobs will undoubtedly be created , but jobs will also be destroyed .
I come from a small country - but one which is very closely integrated into Europe - where this is perhaps more clearly evident than in many larger countries .
Consequently , it is absolutely vital for the Commission to include the social dialogue - the dialogue with the workforce , with those affected - in all its deliberations , and to make this dialogue a key element of its liberalization and modernization strategy .
We discussed this recently in relation to the white paper on railways , and I welcome the fact that Commissioner Kinnock has promised that such a dialogue will take place .
The same will be necessary with regard to postal services , even if the final decision on this subject has been postponed .
Naturally , there is a great deal of apprehension in this context , and it is important for the Commission and the European Union as a whole to affirm that this modernization process will , as far as possible , be carried out with the agreement of and not in opposition to the workforce in the establishments concerned .
In 1997 , even more so than in previous years , the social dialogue must be an essential element of the Commission 's work .
I should now like to refer to a second , completely different issue .
Like the European Parliament , the Commission is focusing increasingly on the question of human rights in its consideration of foreign policy and policy on external trade .
In this sense , the Union 's stance regarding the human rights situation in Turkey will be an important issue in 1997 .
Many of us take the view that the Commission 's response to Parliament 's efforts to bring increased pressure to bear on Turkey has been far from satisfactory .
However the details may now be settled , Mr President , I urge you to pay particular attention to ensuring that we are not led up the garden path .
We can only meet Turkey 's legitimate wishes if those in power in that country pay greater respect to human rights and implement those rights point by point - in practice , as well as in law .
Mr President , I am convinced that this subject , frequently viewed as a marginal part of the debate , could be in fact be further developed because it is a source of major conflict between both the countries of the European Union and between those countries and non-Member States .
The issue of fisheries is so contentious that , in the view of some reliable international commentators , it may become a source of international conflict , as illustrated by the dispute between Canada and Spain .
We therefore need a proposal from the Commission that measures up to the gravity of the situation .
The plans drawn up hitherto by the European Union have on occasion been flimsy and sometimes bureaucratic and difficult to apply .
The result has been to undermine the credibility of the Union in this sector .
In my view , we are also seeing what is now patently unlawful conduct not only in the large-scale but also in small-scale fisheries .
The crisis in the sector is also tending to result in an increase in the misuse of vessels , which are being used for other activities also .
You will perhaps be aware that fishing vessels are being used for drug-trafficking , the arms trade , the transport of illegal immigrants and the dumping of toxic and dangerous waste .
And so there has to be far-reaching change ; we need to preserve the biological and environmental balance and , at the same time , take responsibility for the conservation of stocks and for the social issues underlying the crisis in the sector .
In recent years , numbers working in the fisheries sector have fallen dramatically and not even the possibility of reintegrating them into related activities would appear to provide a satisfactory solution .
We have therefore to promote the revival of fisheries on the basis of sustainable fishing ; reform of the common fisheries policy is now , Mr President , a question that has to be tackled .
It is not enough simply to encourage aquaculture , to provide for programmes - already in fact discussed by the House - we have also to set ourselves a more positive and a tougher goal .
We need to promote special programmes which will enable fishermen 's associations to be genuinely involved - for they should feel responsible for resource management - and allow the regional authorities to participate fully .
Very often , the common fisheries policy is perceived as a bureaucratic policy that has no link with the regional authorities or local fishermen .
In this sector , it is now crucially important that we put into effect the principle of subsidiarity , a principle that is very often paraded in front of us but not in practice applied , provoking a great deal of distrust .
We need also to turn our minds to a concept of integrated development for fishing : in the same way as the concept of rural development has been evolved for agriculture , we should devise a concept of marine activity which includes fishing .
We need to encourage other forms of income for fishermen ; we consider it appropriate that there should also be a form of set-aside to allow biological resources to recover and that we have to make fishermen the guardians of the seas .
I have simply tried here to make a number of suggestions to the Commission and a contribution to the discussions it will be holding with the House .
Mr President , today we are continuing the debate which began in October on the Commission 's programme of work for 1997 .
And we are taking this opportunity to evaluate the legislative programme for 1996 .
To begin with , I should like to thank all those speakers who referred to the broad consensus of the political groups in favour of the course of action adopted by the Commission .
I also wish to thank all those whose observations on the Commission 's work programme were far more critical .
Those criticisms were made in a constructive spirit , and naturally the Commission will take the greatest possible account of them , in so far as they fall within the scope of the work programme and the policies that Parliament has approved .
Having read again the speeches made in October and listened to a number of honourable Members speak this morning , however , I think that it would perhaps be useful to look once more at the course of action taken by the Commission , in order to remind ourselves of the guidelines it has adopted , taking into account , of course , the European Council 's decisions at the Edinburgh summit and the interinstitutional agreement between Parliament , the Council and the Commission concerning the procedures for implementing the work programme , as well as the principle of subsidiarity .
This is the context in which the Commission 's work programmes for 1996 and 1997 should be evaluated and assessed .
In this sense , I would remind the House that the Commission 's initiatives are essentially based on two main requirements .
Firstly , all new legislative proposals must meet the criteria of rigour , clarity and transparency .
Secondly , the principles of revising existing legislation and making legislative texts more accessible must be applied .
In this respect , the Commission has developed a new simplification procedure , which has been put in place in the field of the internal market under an acronym with which you will be familiar : ' SLIM ' .
These measures as a whole - which I shall not elaborate on at present - are the reflection of a new legislative culture , which we also described in the document entitled ' Legislating better in 1995 ' .
In this context , it is worth pointing out that the Commission 's legislative proposals fundamentally comply with the principle of subsidiarity .
The Commission therefore assesses the appropriateness of its actions firstly in terms of their necessity - can the objectives be achieved satisfactorily by the Member States ? - and , secondly , in terms of their effectiveness - would the objectives be better achieved at Community level ?
Furthermore , I would underline the fact that our proposals , as we perceive them , must take greater account of the objectives being pursued .
In other words , the principle of proportionality remains an essential criterion of the Community 's legislative action .
We intend to give effect to this principle , through the framework directive programmes , by establishing common minimum measures on the lines of those laid down for the guarantee fund for consumer goods , the taxation of heavy goods vehicles , takeover bids , and so on .
Another matter which must be mentioned , and which has perhaps been the object of excessive criticism - not today , but in the previous debate - is the use of green and white papers .
We do not draw up green papers for the fun of it !
They are designed to broaden the consultation process in order to include all interested parties : parliamentary opinion , of course , but also the parties affected - the citizens , that is - with a view to drawing conclusions which will subsequently be translated into action plans , directives , regulations and legislative acts .
We have thus published 13 green papers , and I would stress how useful they are .
I shall give just one example which , I believe , is particularly significant .
When we published the Green Paper on monetary union and the single currency , in May 1995 , it enabled us to launch a major debate on that subject .
If you read that green paper again , you will see that it contains all the proposals which were presented to Parliament and the Council from 16 October onwards , and which currently form the basis of our discussions .
I could give other examples of the consultation of interested parties - notably as regards the ' motor oil ' programme - which demonstrate the usefulness of green papers and their effectiveness in the realization of particular programmes .
In this spirit , I believe that we must welcome the broad consultation of citizens and interested parties which green papers make possible .
I believe that this is essential to democracy , as this is practised in the European institutions , and that we should not underestimate the impact of green and white papers on our citizens .
A further example - and one which has just been mentioned by a number of speakers - is provided by the report on taxation in the Union .
Everyone knows that proposals on taxation and the harmonization of taxation are generally blocked at some stage in the Council .
We sought to reopen the debate by means of a report drawn up on the initiative of Commissioner Monti , with a view to examining the problem of taxation in its entirety and all its complexity .
It is a question not only of direct taxation , but also of indirect taxation and the problems relating to fiscal dumping .
I believe that green papers represent a good means of drawing the attention of an informed public to the complexity of a particular issue and gradually reaching adequate solutions .
I continue to believe that it is through the publication of green papers and reports , through the broader consultation of all citizens , that we shall succeed in interesting the parties concerned in the measures taken at Community level , at the level of the European Union .
Furthermore , Mr President , I am pleased to note that a number of speakers referred to the priorities that we have established .
I wish to thank them .
The priorities set out in our work programme - and which I shall not go over again - can be summarized as follows : fostering growth and employment and preparing for the euro ; actively promoting the European model of society ; enhancing Europe 's presence on the international stage ; and preparing for the future by drawing up Agenda 2000 .
These , then , are the priorities that must concern us - not only during 1997 , but throughout the present Commission 's mandate , which expires on 6 January 2000 .
In other words , I am sure that , throughout this mandate , we shall be faced with problems relating to those priorities .
The greatest problem - as I have said before on many occasions , and as will be said again tomorrow in the debate on the Dublin summit - is unemployment .
The problem of unemployment is , in my view , fundamental .
Of course , I am the first to recognize that social and economic policies remain the responsibility of the Member States , and that all the Member States are making great efforts to resolve the problems connected with unemployment , to combat unemployment , to create jobs for young people , and so on .
Nevertheless , I continue to believe - I repeat - that a Europe of 15 Member States , endowed with a single market of 370 million consumers , cannot remain uninvolved in issues of national concern .
By pursuing convergent policies at the level of the Fifteen , we shall , I hope , give a multiplier effect , added value , to the efforts of the Member States .
That is the aim of the confidence pact which I launched before Parliament on 31 January this year .
Its object is not to replace the powers and responsibilities of the Member States - the Member States must continue to perform their duties at national level - but to give added value to the Member States ' efforts , and to meet the concerns of our citizens , at all levels and in all Member States .
Given that we wish to build a Europe which is close to its citizens , the latter will fail to understand why we do not concern ourselves with their immediate problems .
And it is the problem of unemployment - over and above our citizens ' daily concerns - which is undermining our democratic societies .
All the more reason , therefore , for us to tackle this scourge of modern society .
I am well aware that jobs cannot be decreed from Strasbourg or Brussels , but I am convinced that by means of a collective and progressive approach which mobilizes all economic and industrial operators , as well as the two sides of industry - employers and workers - we shall gradually find solutions to the problem of structural unemployment .
It is for this reason that I am committed to the confidence pact , and that , like many of you here , I shall not allow myself to be diverted from the course we have taken , since I believe that we have a contribution to make in this respect .
We must carry out a practical , effective , resolute and determined plan of action .
Similarly - and I shall say this again before the House tomorrow , in the presence of the President-in-Office of the Council - I am expecting a clear and unequivocal message in favour of combating unemployment to emerge from the Dublin summit .
All other talk about a citizens ' Europe will be in vain , all other declarations will be futile , if we do not implement practical measures to which our citizens can relate .
I therefore share the concern of all those Members who stressed this aspect of our work , which will remain a priority throughout the present Commission 's mandate and until its very end .
I give you that pledge .
A number of other points were made , particularly with regard to monetary union .
I am not among those who believe that monetary union and employment are mutually exclusive .
I have never seen monetary union as an end in itself , but as the instrument of a policy of economic and social development .
We need only look at those Member States which are making drastic budget cuts in order to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria , but which are at the same time increasing employment , whilst complying with the government deficit criteria .
I need only mention Ireland , the Netherlands and Denmark , which are the most notable examples , and which are clearly demonstrating that the efforts to achieve sound public finances do not hinder employment - quite the opposite .
It is by establishing monetary union that we shall encourage the investment that will create future jobs .
This makes clear the fact that we must fight on two fronts : on the one hand , achieving monetary union ; and , on the other , creating new jobs , exploiting the full potential of the single market and developing a macroeconomic strategy .
I am pleased to note that , in an event unique in the European Union 's history , the two sides of industry have together addressed a joint report to the Dublin European Council , in which they declare their support for the strategy that we have developed for the achievement of monetary union .
This means that the unions and the employers ' associations agree with monetary union and the euro .
But they also support our idea of an action plan in favour of employment , which gave rise to the confidence pact .
There is also a need to encourage small and medium-sized enterprises .
This has not been referred to this morning , in the context of the internal market , but I welcome the fact that the proposals for promoting small and medium-sized enterprises set out in our overall programme have met with agreement in the European Council and - for once - are being translated into specific funding by the Council of Ministers . This funding is not , perhaps , as substantial as we would have wished , but a least a specific measure has been adopted in this context .
It should be realized that it is small and medium-sized enterprises - of which there are 18 million in the European Union - which create new jobs .
Consequently , there is a need to adopt a new approach to encouraging these firms .
A number of other matters have been raised .
I referred to the question of taxation , and a number of Members spoke on this subject .
The question of taxation must be considered in all its complexity .
As I said , we cannot allow an area of fiscal dumping to be created within the internal market .
That would be as damaging to the internal market as social dumping .
I am seeking to combat fiscal dumping and social dumping simultaneously .
That is why I sometimes encounter problems with the leaders of certain Member States .
Having said that , Members are right to stress the principles that must guide us in the future if we wish to take maximum advantage of the internal market , the possibilities of which , both economic and political , we have not yet fully explored .
We shall not solve all the problems overnight , but I am attaching a great deal of importance to this in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference , and in the context of the framing of a common foreign and security policy worthy of the name , one which enables the European Union to play its rightful political role on the international stage .
A number of speakers correctly emphasized this point .
In this context , there is also a need to be vigilant with regard to human rights .
This is one of the fundamental principles of all our actions , both inside and outside the European Union .
No trade , cooperation or aid agreement is concluded without the incorporation of a formal human rights clause .
You are right to stress the need to apply and evaluate this clause in relation to a number of countries . I am the first to acknowledge that .
The Treaty has other structural shortcomings which the Intergovernmental Conference must rectify , notably regarding the third pillar .
Parliament is right to be concerned at the inadequacy of our actions under the third pillar , especially - as Members have stressed - as regards the sexual exploitation of children , the fight against organized crime , and the free movement of persons .
It is true that , in this respect , Europe does not project the best possible image of itself to third countries or its own citizens .
Moreover , given that we wish to build a Europe which is close to its citizens , these are precisely the problems to which our citizens are most sensitive : they are being made to feel insecure by the rise of organized crime , as well as by other phenomena which , in some Member States , are going so far as to undermine the foundations of our democratic institutions - such as the sexual exploitation of children .
Real national upheavals are occurring in some Member States .
We must provide an appropriate , positive and effective response to these problems .
I am the first to regret the fact that the Treaty does not yet provide for the effective instruments that are required .
I believe that if we genuinely wish to create an area of freedom and security in Europe , we must have the necessary means at our disposal .
I am pleased to see from the Irish presidency 's draft treaty that , in the Intergovernmental Conference , the vast majority of Member States have fully recognized these problems .
They have put forward appropriate proposals aimed at remedying this state of affairs .
The House will always find me at its side when it comes to taking measures in these fields , within the scope of the powers and responsibilities conferred on us by the Treaties .
In another sense , we must prepare for the future - in other words , the year 2000 .
And the year 2000 is not a mythical year for the Commission : it is a year towards which we must strive , and for which we must prepare .
In this respect , the Commission is committed to meeting the challenge of enlargement in political terms , as well as to meeting the challenge of reorganizing and restructuring a number of the Community 's financial and structural policies in response to the prospect of enlargement .
In the context of the enlargement strategy set out at the Madrid summit , the Commission is committed - and it is currently working on this - to submitting to the Council , following the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference - i.e. in the middle of next year - the financial package known as ' Agenda 2000 ' .
This package addresses the whole range of problems - both those connected with enlargement and those connected with the financial perspectives after 1999 - whilst taking into account the financial implications of the common agricultural policy and the reorganization and restructuring of the Structural Funds , as well as all the other related issues .
This comprehensive package will be submitted to the Council of Ministers , but not before Thursday .
I do not wish to overload the work of the Intergovernmental Conference at present , but after the conclusion of the IGC , this comprehensive package of preparations for the challenges of the year 2000 will be forwarded to both the Council and Parliament .
Members have also referred to a number of other problems , notably as regards health protection .
Naturally , public health requirements and related issues are one of the Commission 's main concerns , and they underlie a number of other policies , such as the common agricultural policy .
Indeed , questions such as the mad cow crisis , the problem of genetically modified maize and the fight against tobacco addiction are all issues which relate to health policy .
Obviously , I am unable to respond to all your proposals individually , but I should like to draw your attention to something which - I shall say not offended , as I am never offended - but slightly irritated me a short while ago , when the Commission 's role as the guardian of the Treaties was called into question .
I can assure you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that I firmly believe that it is the Commission 's fundamental task to act as the guardian of the Treaties .
I have demonstrated this on many occasions , and you can bear witness to that .
Whenever a Member State has acted as if the Treaties did not apply to it , I have always protested and responded in accordance with the Commission 's prerogatives .
At the Intergovernmental Conference , and acting within the scope of the Commission 's powers and responsibilities , I shall campaign vigorously to ensure that the Commission 's prerogatives as conceived within the interinstitutional balance , which was one of Jean Monnet 's key creations , continue to be safeguarded .
This is therefore a reproach that I shall never accept , and the House will forgive me if I have responded more clearly and directly to that criticism .
I have endeavoured to respond to a number of the speeches made by honourable Members , some of whom expressed support for the Commission 's work programme , while others criticized it , although in a constructive spirit .
The House may rest assured that the Commission will take account of Parliament 's proposals , so that together we can try to steer Europe towards the year 2000 .
Similarly , I would expect that , following the Dublin summit at the end of this week , a clear message will be sent out that , despite everything , Europe is moving forward , that it is dynamic and that it knows how to stand up for itself .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Communities ' draft general budget for 1997
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-404 / 96 by Mr Brinkhorst , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft budget of the European Union for the 1997 financial year Section III - Commission as modified by the Council ( C4-0600 / 96 ) ; -A4-0403 / 96 , by Mr Fabra Valles , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the modifications made by the Council to Parliament 's amendments to Section I - European Parliament , Ombudsman annex Section II - Council Section IV - Court of Justice Section V - Court of Auditors Section VI - Economic and Social Committee - Committee of the Regions of the draft budget of the European Union for the 1997 financial year ( C4-0600 / 96 ) .I give the floor to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
Mr President , I wish to move the inadmissibility of this debate on the second reading of the budget .
Indeed , underlying this second reading is Parliament 's concern not to fall in line with the arguments of the Council , which is rightly being guided by the need to make savings in the Community budget .
To this end , the Committee on Budgets is proposing an amendment which goes to the very heart of this second reading : Amendment No 4521 , which seeks to transfer the financing of part of the Structural Funds - of the order of ECU 100 million - from category 3 to category 4 .
This amendment is inadmissible , Mr President , and as such makes the whole of this second reading debate inadmissible . And it is inadmissible because it seeks to change the legal bases .
With regard to the legal aspect , the explanatory statement indicates that the line in question has an appropriate legal base .
It is also stated that this line already establishes a link between the Structural Funds and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , with legal bases allowing for this link to be extended to include the trans-European networks .
This assertion is completely groundless ; it is not a legal justification .
The decision that was referred to yesterday in the Committee on Budgets - European Parliament and Council Decision No 1692 of 23 July 1996 - did not have the aim of , nor could have had the effect of , changing the legal base .
Everyone knows , moreover , that when we talk about trans-European networks , we are not referring to those which fall within the scope of cross-border cooperation .
If we approve the budget with this amendment , the Commission will be entirely at liberty not to implement the budget in the form in which we adopt it .
It comes down , therefore , to an empty statement , just a ruse .
Consequently , I would urge the House to support this motion of inadmissibility .
Mr President , what Mr Fabre-Aubrespy has just said does not correspond in any way to yesterday 's vote in the Committee on Budgets .
Firstly , this question has nothing to do with appropriations for the Structural Funds .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy was certainly present , but if he had been listening , he would know that we were not discussing the transfer of Structural Fund appropriations to other categories , but the allocation - through a comprehensive amendment by the rapporteur - of the resources saved in category 4 at the first reading of the 1997 budget , which had been placed in a global reserve in that category .
We can argue against the political desirability of this , but we should not do so by means of technicalities which do not apply .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's remarks have absolutely no basis in fact , therefore , and I would ask you to reject his motion and begin the debate on the second reading of the budget .
Dear colleagues , the question raised by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy is irrelevant in my view .
It suggests that the budget is not admissible on the basis of the supposed inadmissibility of an amendment .
Yet , pursuant to Rule 125 ( 3 ) , it is for the president to decide whether amendments are admissible or not . This decision must be taken , if there is a request , when the vote is taken and not now .
As far as the presidency is concerned , we can perfectly well proceed with the debate .
As for the question raised by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , there is no discussion , in terms of Article 128 , about whether I should give the floor to the first speaker inscribed , Mr Brinkhorst , the rapporteur .
Mr President , we are about to start the final debate on the 1997 budget and so in a certain sense it is time for stocktaking .
The 1997 budget can be characterized by a number of paradoxes and contrasts in the financial , budgetary and institutional sphere .
In the first place , from the very beginning , in its resolution on the guidelines , the European Parliament was aware of the special character of the 1997 budget year and the need for a rigorous budget .
We have followed this up .
We have shown great self-discipline and I should like to pay tribute here to all my colleagues on the committees who have contributed so much and who have made real sacrifices because real priorities had to be weighed against each other .
Nevertheless , we have now delivered a draft budget which - assuming it is adopted on Thursday - has no precedent because it will be the first budget since 1979 which is below the Commission 's preliminary draft estimates .
The curious point is the contrast with the Council .
While Parliament has made real savings in its priorities , the Council has made only apparent savings in the area for which it is responsible .
The ECU 1 billion for agriculture clearly in no way represents a real saving .
In past years , because of over-estimates by the Commission and the Council , there have been considerable returns to the Ministers of Finance and the ECU 1 billion in regional fund payments in a situation where we have underspent something like ECU 25 billion cannot be said to be a real saving .
That is the first paradox .
The second one is linked with the priorities .
The Council and the European Council have repeatedly established priorities but words are always stronger than actions .
On research and development , trans-European networks and Northern Ireland , the European Council has repeatedly said that we must increase the amounts but when it comes to it the money is not there .
In contrast to this , it is Parliament which has financed priorities set by the Council .
I recall a debate with our colleagues on Northern Ireland when if it had not been for Parliament restoring funding and taking it from its own area , we would not have been able to finance the three priorities mentioned .
There is an important third paradox - the institutional one .
Right from the beginning , because we were in favour of a rigorous debate and a rigorous budget , Parliament was entitled to expect a dialogue with the Budget Council .
But during this last year nothing of the kind has occurred .
The Council often reminds me of the three monkeys - hearing nothing , saying nothing and seeing nothing .
Even on 19 November it was not possible to make any progress on any of the significant institutional points which have characterized this budget , namely the legal base , the fisheries agreement and some small changes of category within the various financial areas .
It is only by exercising extreme pressure that in the end we have been able to achieve something on fisheries .
The Budget Council is not a real Council and in the motion for a resolution we ask the President of Parliament , together with the President of the Commission - and I welcome the presence of President Santer here today - to take up this point with the President of Ecofin .
If we are to make any progress , particularly with regard to the Intergovernmental Conference and the need to overcome the democratic deficit , we must have a different interlocutor from the current one .
So paragraph 14 of the motion for a resolution says that the Budget Council cannot be considered a reliable and effective interlocutor for Parliament .
In a sense this is saying that we are at the end of the road as far as the Budget Council is concerned .
I shall turn very briefly to some of the specific points .
I call on the Commission to implement some new budget lines within the 1997 legislative programme .
I listened with interest to President Santer when he said that the third pillar had priority and I hope he will read paragraph 20 of the motion for a resolution carefully .
We have used the reserve in a number of areas .
As far as MEDA is concerned , we have not used it not to penalize or to damage the MEDA countries but to make it very clear that Parliament is serious when it talks about the resolution of 19 September concerning Turkey .
The proposal is to put ECU 100m in reserve for specific actions concerning Turkey .
Unfortunately President 's Santer 's reply to President Hänsch 's letter in no way convinced the Committee on Budgets of the justice of this .
We regret it but we believe it is the way it should be done .
We will vote extra money for research and development for which there is a small reserve .
We need to talk to the Commission about the Committee on Energy , Research and Technology 's priorities .
Non-nuclear energy is an important point .
Finally , we must have a new dialogue on agriculture for next year .
We have started this with our colleagues working in the field of agriculture but it is very clear that reserves in the sphere of agriculture are a way forward - not to destroy agriculture but to put it in its proper setting within the Community 's priorities .
Information policy is the last reserve and on this point I must compliment Mr Oreja .
He has made a lot of progress but I hope that in the course of next year we can make progress there on substance within our various institutional frameworks .
Mr President , when we presented the 97 budget for first reading in the October session we were aware of its limitations .
Some of them were general , concerning all the institutions , and some very specific , as in the case of the Court of Auditors ' urgent need for more auditors in view of the expansion of the European Union 's activities , as well as its geographical enlargement , which required an increase in staffing .
Another specific example was that of special advisers for the Committee of the Regions .
Despite these limitations , we were satisfied that we had met the requirements set out for us by the trialogue held on 3 April of this year , at which Council , Commission and Parliament reached agreement on the effort required for standardization of financial rules and on stringency , transparency and zero growth of the establishment plan ; above all , we were pleased with the considerable saving we should be achieving in the 97 budget as a result of interinstitutional cooperation .
We went so far , in fact , as to hope that this would be the first budget to be approved on first reading , but this hope was not realized .
The Council rejected a series of amendments , but after reviewing this rejection and noting that the amendments were in line with the trialogue , since the Council produced no explanation of this rejection , we in the Committee on Budgets unanimously decided to resubmit these rejected amendments .
As a new amendment , Mr President , there will only be support to ensure the continuation of language courses , since we believe that we must go on facilitating opportunities for contact amongst ourselves .
We have a major barrier , that of language , and a valuable source of help , the interpreters , but we cannot each carry an interpreter in our pocket to help us with our contacts .
I do not know whether there will be any more , since the deadline for submission of amendments has not been reached and there may be something further .
At all events , Mr President , I would like to say here that we do not understand and cannot grasp the reason for the rejection of certain amendments , when we note , and I say this with all due respect , a certain lack of consistency .
This shows up in the way that an amendment which has been accepted by one institution is rejected by another .
Moreover , amendments which have no financial implications are rejected ; amendments with the sole aim of improving transparency are rejected .
An amendment has even been rejected contrary to the provisions of the Financial Regulation .
We have the case of the Court of Justice : we sought greater transparency on rents ( the short time which has elapsed since this was discussed has proved us right : we can see the situation of the Court of Justice building ) .
Eighteen regradings have been refused ; even in a situation of zero growth , I believe we cannot deny officials the chance of continued career development , and in my opinion these regradings were important , particularly since they have been accepted in other institutions .
Amendments are re-submitted concerning the Economic and Social Committee 's meetings , notices of meetings and publications .
As for the joint organizational structure of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , an amendment , which I see as important , relating to analytical accounting procedures for the standardization of accounting practices within all the institutions , was rejected .
I would like to conclude , Mr President , by saying that the Committee on Budgets has reached a unanimous decision , and seeks a vote in favour of the amendments tabled for purposes of improving cost-effectiveness and improving the functioning , transparency and monitoring of the institutions , all of this in line with the trialogue of 16 April .
Mr President , a short time ago , in this Chamber , we heard President Santer reconfirm the need to develop an economic and social Europe and present to us once again the confidence pact to ensure that , without prejudice to the powers of the Member States , we have at European Union level coordinated efforts providing back-up on the issues of employment and social policy .
The European Parliament plainly agrees with all of this and has consistently called for it .
But the Council has turned a deaf ear to those requests and , at its seconding reading of the budget , rejected all Parliament 's proposals .
This House , however , is showing great consistency and retabling all of its proposals ; tomorrow , the Committee on Budgets will be asking the House to vote again for its proposals on employment and the more vulnerable categories - the elderly and the handicapped - so as to ensure that the social dialogue is able to be pursued .
We are also proposing a specific line for the development of pilot projects in the third sector - ' jobs ' .
In that connection , I wish to draw attention to a further issue of concern to us : the incomprehensible stance adopted by the Council on legal bases .
Mr President-in-Office , I would venture to say that this is a somewhat short-sighted position on the part of the Council and one that aggravates further the relationship between citizens and Europe .
It gives a very negative signal to Europe 's citizens .
I think what we have here is an absurd test of strength with the European Parliament .
Parliament is putting forward an extremely reasonable solution which does not pose a threat to the austerity and budgetary policy we in fact endorse .
We also think it a response , albeit a small one , to the needs of Europe 's citizens , a response that will bring Europe closer to its citizens .
And so what is the Council trying to prove by adopting this - let us not mince words - incomprehensible position ?
I am therefore asking the Council to reconsider its position .
It is never too late to do so .
The Dublin summit will discuss the confidence pact ; the agreement on the legal bases offers an opportunity to show consistency .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that the Council has seen fit to respect Parliament 's request for additional funding for the Community coal and textile initiatives on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy .
This will bring a sense of relief to those regions that have been eagerly awaiting reports from the Council that additional money will be available in the budget lines .
I should also like to say on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy that we welcome the solution that has been found to the Northern Ireland Peace and Reconciliation Programme , but I would reiterate the views of our rapporteur that it is in fact Parliament that has sought the solution in finding an additional ECU 100 million .
The creation of a negative reserve , however , as Parliament understands that , will then be taken from proved performance ; underspends and other programmes will effectively pay for the Northern Ireland peace programme .
So it is effectively a situation of robbing Peter to pay Paul .
We should be quite clear that the Council has not met its responsibilities in this area .
Therefore I would say that the European Parliament insists on being consulted before those monies are moved into the additional funds for the peace programme .
It would , of course , be a singular irony if we end up funding the Northern Ireland peace programme from underspends in the Northern Ireland peace programme for 1997 and 1998 .
I should also like to make a point concerning the zero-growth strategy and the decision to cut ECU 1 billion of structural fund payments .
Mr Brinkhorst is right : it is not a question of savings .
This is technically not the way to deal with things because it will lead to longer delays .
Some regions and some projects have not had their payments in 1994 / 95 , and we end up aggravating the situation of poor implementation and potential underspends .
If the Council had wanted to be bold it could have singled out those Member States that have no commitment to the regional programmes and cut their payments and perhaps indeed their commitments .
That would have been a saving overall .
It is politically indefensible for the Council to now tie structural fund payments to EMU convergence criteria .
Here the Council is being inconsistent .
Only last week we had fine statements from the Council regarding the need to maintain investment efforts at national level , to promote growth , competitiveness and the creation of lasting employment , and now we have funds being cut to meet EMU convergence criteria .
Finally , can I say that this is not a budget for a citizens-first campaign .
This is a budget to satisfy finance ministers .
It is a budget for discipline and rigour , and I believe it will be poorly received in our regions .
Mr President , the 1997 budget of the European Communities which Parliament is preparing to adopt this week is overall reasonable and solid : it contains savings , the profile of priorities is sharper and there are interesting new projects .
The overall satisfaction is , however , accompanied by some disappointment : the budget procedure has revealed serious shortcomings .
An even better result would have been possible - better for all the institutions involved .
The 1997 Community budget contains important elements of rigour .
Some of them are real : for example , the ' zero ' for new staff for all institutions - except for enlargement - is a symbolic but highly visible signal .
Some elements of rigour are more provisional : ECU 1 billion are cut both from the Common Agricultural Policy and from the structural funds payments .
But the underlying regulations are unchanged and will need to be fully financed .
The actual rigour of the 1997 budget will therefore only be established during its execution .
With regard to agriculture , in particular , the decisions in the sector will have to be compatible with the tighter budgetary constraints .
There was a large degree of agreement between the institutions throughout the budget procedure on the need for rigour .
In 1997 , the decisive year for the successful launch of Economic and Monetary Union , the Community budget must be seen to be in line with the serious efforts being made at national level .
In spite of this basic convergence of views , concertation between Council and Parliament on implementation was difficult .
Important opportunities were missed , both to limit expenditure further and to improve procedures .
An adoption of the revision of the Financial Perspective to accelerate some key investments in 1998 and 1999 would have created a political framework for an even more restrictive budget in 1997 .
And it would have given a welcome message of confidence in the future of the Union .
In the end , it was not possible to agree even some small degree of flexibility between the categories for 1997 - not involving any additional expenditure .
It was never intended that the Financial Perspective should be written in stone for seven years .
Redeployment between categories - which does not increase expenditure - needs to be facilitated to respond to changing circumstances .
With regard to procedures , I am glad that an agreement has been found on better informing the budget authority on the fisheries agreements .
The key provision of this agreement is : if additional funds appear to be required there will be a trialogue on the causes of this situation and the measures which may have to be taken .
This should permit more transparency and better control of the budgetary costs of these agreements .
The failure to agree between the institutions on the question of legal basis is disappointing .
Sound financial management requires clear rules on this question .
They can only come from an agreement between the three institutions .
Until an agreement is found , the Commission has to shoulder its responsibility .
For the implementation of the 1997 budget it will follow the line taken in its Communication of July 1994 .
This will involve preparatory actions and pilot programmes for a limited time , even before a legal basis is proposed .
This will apply , for example , to the new pilot projects for refugees and asylum-seekers .
The missed opportunities show that the concertation procedure is not working as it should .
Some reflection is required on how it can be developed .
Along with elements of rigour , the 1997 Community budget will have a sharper profile .
In fact , in times of scarce resources , spending has to focus more on the priorities of the Union .
This also implies moving away from activities where there is less European value added .
It was in this sense that the Commission proposed concentrating Community spending more on employment creation and growth .
It has identified research , Trans-European Networks and small and medium-sized enterprises as particularly valuable in this respect .
The Commission would have preferred a significant reinforcement of these activities for 1998 and 1999 by means of a revision of the Financial Perspective .
The undisputed financing of the ECU 100 million still outstanding for the Irish peace process was also part of this proposal .
Without agreement on revision , financing for these priorities has been difficult to find .
In these difficult circumstances the Commission welcomes the proposals of the Committee on Budgets for the financing of the Irish peace process in Category 2 , for a reinforcement of research and development in Category 3 and for additional infrastructure investment in Category 4 .
The Community budget for 1997 , as it is in front of you , contains a number of new projects .
I have already highlighted the new pilot projects for refugees and asylum-seekers .
I would also like to express my full support for the initiatives of the rapporteur , Mr Brinkhorst , in further rationalizing the use of Community funds .
In fact , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control , under the leadership of their chairmen , Detlev Samland and Diemut Theato , have from the beginning used pressure and encouragement in support of the Commission 's efforts for a new culture of financial management .


Let me conclude by thanking the rapporteurs , Laurens Brinkhorst and Juan Fabra Vallés , as well as the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Detlev Samland , together with his colleagues , for their hard work towards a successful conclusion to the 1997 budget procedure .
Mr President , whilst I speak on behalf of the Socialist Group , I should like to make a personal comment .
Of the seven years that I have been involved in the budget process , this has been the most unsatisfactory .
I have to say that in a personal capacity .
That is for several reasons , two of which I would like to highlight .
Firstly , the two strategies which our group supported were not agreed by Parliament as a whole , and that put us in a very weak position when we were trying to negotiate with the Council .
We went in to negotiate with the Council with no weapons in our hands .
But secondly , the attitude of Council has not helped at all .
It is best summed up by an amendment to the resolution which was put forward by Mr Colom i Naval last night in the Committee on Budgets , which reads : ' Parliament regrets that the Council has rejected a minor revision of the financial perspective to allow for the priorities voiced by the budgetary authority within conciliation contrary to what has been decided by common accord on several previous occasions ' .
That sums it all up .
But there was also an intransigence on the part of Council towards things like getting agreements on the legal base , and it has left a sour taste in a lot of people 's mouths .
We now have three Union priorities which we have wanted to support from the very beginning .
The solutions we have got will , I suppose , have to do .
The negative reserve in Category II has been outlined quite well by Mrs McCarthy .
It would seem that , yes , we do have a solution to the Irish peace process , but in a way that we would not have wanted .
It seems that the last resort is what you do when you have run out of rational debate , or when you have lost the rational debate .
Concerning research and development , we have a negative reserve in Category III which means that in the one category where we have our priorities , we have to hope that some of those priorities will not be met or spent so that we can fund the negative reserve .
Then we have the TENs in Category IV which we hope that the Commission will transfer to Category III at some time in the future .
As I said , this is not a situation that we wanted to support in the first instance .
Our group is left with Hobson 's choice : take it or leave it .
For the sake of getting those 314 votes in Parliament we will not jeopardize the extra money for research and development , neither will we put the TENs money in jeopardy if there is that possibility of it getting into Category III .
Therefore we will take it rather than leave it .
But as I said at the beginning , it has not been a satisfactory process .
It is a bit of a mess .
One has to hope that next year there will be far better conciliation between ourselves and the Council to ensure that we do not go through this procedure again .
One would hope that in the future Parliament will be united , which it certainly has not been on this occasion .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Brinkhorst and Mr Fabra Vallés , for their excellent work during this year .

As Mr Wynn has indicated , this has not been a simple year ; indeed , it has been a bruising and difficult year , because we basically had the choice of maintaining those agreements which we have entered into as a Parliament , including the interinstitutional agreement , which , I am delighted to see as a result of our debates today and our procedure on Thursday , will be confirmed , or voting for funds on the transEuropean networks or research and development which would take us outside the limits .
We as a group have always maintained that we should uphold those agreements which we have entered into .
Of course we would have an unsatisfactory budget procedure , I would say , Mr Wynn , because once you have actually agreed in principle to have an austere budget , there is very little to discuss because we are all going to be within a similar margin for manoeuvre - both Parliament and the Council .
In this particular year there are three points I would like to make in summarizing the point of view of the European People 's Party .
Firstly , we have begun to refine the way in which we use the reserve to achieve Parliament 's aims .
We have done this in terms of information policy , where we have seen a remarkable change-around by the Commission in its willingness to come to some radical decisions on how information policy should be developed .
We still have not quite got to the end of that process .
We are supporting that 25 % of the funds should remain in the reserve so that in the institutional working group , which is now well established both for general and specific reasons , we are able to come to a proper decision between Parliament and Commission as to how the funds should be operated .
Similarly , in terms of small and medium-sized businesses , tourism and DG XXIII , we have also seen some change once funds are put in the reserve by Parliament on first reading and we come to the second reading .
It may be coincidental perhaps from the Commission 's point of view , but so far as Parliament is concerned , it is unlikely that decision would have been taken so quickly had we not also put funds in the reserve .
Again , we are getting a better use of the reserve .
Obviously the third example , Turkey , is a much more sensitive question , and we have not yet been able to get the right balance of confidence between the institutions : between , on the one hand , the Commission 's view of the code of conduct and therefore its desire to have its freedom of manoeuvre and , on the other , that of Parliament , which does not yet have the confidence that the Commission will do what we have asked it to do .
This is the first point - that we will continue to use this instrument to be able to ensure that Parliament 's priorities are properly asserted in the budget and legislative process .
Secondly , this leads me to the linkage which we have not really made in this budget process , which is in the Intergovernmental Conference .
We should now be able to see some progress in the Intergovernmental Conference , where the Council can see that it has a responsible , rational and disciplined partner in the budgetary process with which to implement the priorities of the European Union .
I would expect some progress to be made in the elimination of the distinction between obligatory and nonobligatory expenditure , once we come to a conclusion , either in Amsterdam or a little bit later next year in the Intergovernmental Conference .
Lastly there is the point that if the European Council is going to continue to put out statements that it wishes to top up money for the trans-European networks , or wishes to be able to put more money into research and development and then does not provide the new money to go with that , then obviously we are going to continually find ourselves in the kind of situation in which we found ourselves in this budgetary process .
So I would strongly endorse the point in Mr Brinkhorst 's resolution - indeed it is an EPP suggestion - that we should have a fiche financière , a financial statement , from the European Council at every single point at which it makes use of funds , so that we know where the funds are meant to be coming from .
Otherwise , I think this House will find that when it comes to the revision of the financial perspectives , enlargement and all these bigger questions which we are heading for , then there can only be trouble in future between the two arms of the budgetary authority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are examining at second reading a budget which , despite its shortcomings , has the support of the UPE Group , since in the end it is entirely in line with what we were advocating : no additional fiscal charge on national budgets in 1997 because of the Maastricht Treaty .
Indeed , whatever feelings we may have about that Treaty , I believe that this Parliament should do nothing which might impede the actions of the national governments , which are required to ensure that , in 1997 , their annual budgets make a positive contribution to the fulfilment of the convergence criteria .
The zero growth approach , which was broadly supported by Parliament at first reading , will - we hope - enjoy equally wide backing in the vote on Thursday .
I believe that whilst this pause in the rise of payment appropriations represents a special effort for 1997 , the significant increase in programme authorizations safeguards the future and respects the financial perspective .
Moreover , the adoption of this budget will make it possible to preserve the interinstitutional agreement , even if we have to agree that the Council presidency did nothing - that is the least that can be said - to ensure that the dialogue , and subsequently the trialogue of 19 November , bore fruit .
I would add that the Committee on Budgets has given a display of collective wisdom which is worthy of praise , since the majority ensured that reason was able to prevail .
I should like to offer my sincere thanks to our colleagues , Mr Samland and Mr Brinkhorst , for their hard work - even if they may think that it was somewhat in vain .
In this respect , I would repeat the ancient words of wisdom pronounced by our rapporteur last night , towards midnight : ' dura lex , sed lex ' .
The months that have just gone by could be characterized as ' the battle for ECU 300 million ' , which is divided into three groups of ECU 100 m .
And even if this might seem a modest amount in relation to the ECU 88 billion of the total Community budget , it has to be said that it was fiercely disputed . For my part , I welcome the satisfactory outcome of the debate on the ECU 100 m earmarked for the peace process in Northern Ireland .
As someone who lives on an island myself , I believe that you cannot put a price on peace - so let the funds which we allocate be earmarked for positive purposes and genuinely give the impression that the European Union represents an element of peace for every Member State .
Similarly , the allocation of ECU 100 m to the RECHAR and RETEX programmes will make it possible to free up a situation in these two sectors which some people already see as extremely precarious .
Let us hope for the success of these two programmes .
There remains the question of the ECU 100 m earmarked for the networks .
A number of Members believe that releasing these funds under category 4 is no more than a ruse that will enable us to give a boost to relations with the CCEE , whilst avoiding exceeding the ceilings in category 3 .
I do not share this view , since the most that can be regretted is that the final arrangement might appear to many to be like pulling a rabbit out of a hat , whereas the main point is to safeguard the interinstitutional agreement .
On Thursday , therefore , Parliament will vote on a budget whose uncertainties were due more to questions of principle than disputes over the level of appropriations .
Let us be content with the way in which these questions of principle have been settled .
I should now like to draw attention to the financially positive measures .
In releasing forthwith 50 % of the appropriations placed in the reserve at first reading for Euronews and undertaking to re-examine the financing arrangements for the latter at the end of March , the Committee on Budgets has demonstrated wisdom and understanding .
This same understanding came into play to rectify the impact of the mad cow crisis on public opinion .
ECU 20 m have thus been earmarked for the promotion of quality beef , and that is the least that could be done to make it clear to European consumers that cattle which are fed in accordance with traditional and controlled methods should not be confused with animals which are victims not so much of the madness of cows as the madness of men .
Finally , there is in my view a shadow cast over this budget , and that shadow concerns the MEDA programme .
There is no point in giving with one hand and taking away with the other .
In placing ECU 100 m in the reserve against the MEDA programme , for the reason that these appropriations might be earmarked for Turkey , we are anticipating an allocation of funds which is not provided for in any document and , in a way , we are throwing the baby out with the bath water .
This late-night decision , which was handled in a dubious way , without prior financial assessment , is rather like one of those acts of atonement that give a clear conscience at minimum expense , and reminds us that like all good primitive tribes , the Committee on Budgets well knows - borrowing the title of a famous sociological work - how to navigate between totems and taboos .
Mr President , the deep convergence of options taken by the Council and those adopted by the European Parliament , in vital areas and at first reading , would virtually dispense with the laborious exercise that we have been indulging in over recent weeks . I therefore limit myself to certain aspects of the issue .
We distance ourselves , as everyone knows , from the restrictive option adopted at first reading , with a view to the single currency and , particularly , with an eye already on enlargement .
For the same reasons we do not go along with the general direction taken in the second corrective charter on farming expenditure .
As for the essential part , we are still in favour of inscribing 300 million ECU for the trans-European networks , research and Ireland .
We continue to emphasize and criticize the absence of employment among the priorities set for 1997 .
As for the inscription of the priorities set , we should like to stress the following :
First of all , they would have a different meaning in the context of a revision of financial perspectives .
Without them , the solutions found are inevitably distorted .
Indeed , the inscription in Category 2 of 100 MECU for Ireland now represents , objectively , as it is accompanied by a negative reserve of the same amount in this category , a further cut in the structural activities with which we obviously cannot agree .
We would say the same for the negative reserve for internal policies .
As for the inscription of the networks in category 4 ( external policies ) , we think that this is tantamount , on one hand , to a once and for all abandonment of unemployment as a priority ( with the abandonment of the networks themselves ) and , on the other hand , a new means of reinforcing the funding of enlargement , more directly and at the expense of internal objectives .
Finally I would like to say a word to say that we go along with the decisions taken yesterday in other fields , such as Turkey and the creation of a 100 MECU reserve and , also , concerning the code of conduct in respect of fisheries agreements .
But this is not enough to change our global appraisal of the budgetary process which , in our view , is deeply negative , frustrating and extremely lacking in prestige for the European Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this year 's budgetary procedure has left a nasty taste in the mouth of everyone who has taken part , for what message is it supposed to send to Europe 's citizens ?
Saving for monetary union ?
But we all know very well that , irrespective of monetary union , the burden of debt in national budgets has to be drastically reduced in order to allow the Member States ' governments to take any action in the future .
However , blaming all the failings of economic management on the efforts to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria is not only untruthful but dangerous , since it contributes to anti-European propaganda , the results of which cannot be foreseen .
The intention to make savings was not even that resolute .
The ECU 1 billion cuts in both agricultural and structural spending are simply loans for 1998 and 1999 .
But of course , I am forgetting that there are also some positive priorities which have to be financed from this budget .
Quite frankly , the damaging fiddling with the ECU 300 million can only produce an embarrassed smile , since who could possibly understand the petty wrangling over the socalled revision of the financial perspective , or believe in good faith that the ECU 100 m for the trans-European networks is a job-creation initiative in itself ?
Moreover , by means of a budgetary contortion , not to say an artless ruse , this amount is being transferred to category 4 - and I should like to see just how we spend this ECU 100 m and what we spend it on .
This budget does not represent a convincing signal to the people of the European Union , but the management of the status quo at less than the lowest common denominator .
The fact that ECU 100 m for the peace process in Northern Ireland was incorporated into the package which was finally agreed is the only ray of light .
It is to be regretted that we had to force Mr van den Broek to respond to our demands by placing the ECU 100 m for Turkey in the reserve .
Finally , I would ask Mr Liikanen to ensure that , through proper cooperation , our efforts to safeguard the pensions of the Members of the Commission and other Commission staff produce some positive results next year !
Mr President , last year the French and Flemish non-attached Members protested at the significant rise in the Community budget .
This year , we might be able to welcome a budget which spares taxpayers to a greater extent .
However , the goal of zero growth - which we should not be too far from achieving in the end - only applies to payment appropriations , and it is less a case of real savings allowing this to happen than the adjustment of appropriations to the expenditure actually carried out .
One sometimes has the impression that the savings relate to spending which would not have taken place anyway .
In a way , we are being asked to vote on virtual savings .
Moreover , this budget only has the appearance of austerity , since commitment appropriations - and it is these which we must keep in check - will increase by 2 % .
So there is still an upward trend , because commitment appropriations are continuing to rise .
However , the comparable expenditure - on support measures and investment - in the budgets of the Member States and local and regional authorities is not rising , but falling .
This means that the budgets of the Member States and local and regional authorities are more austere and more geared to savings than that of the European Union itself .
And it means that we still have a long way to go in moving from the virtual budgetary rigour that we have at present to genuine budgetary rigour and the increased protection of European taxpayers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin with a quote from Albert Einstein which I have just found in my diary .
It is very appropriate : ' I never think about the future , it comes soon enough ' . This could be the heading for the 1997 budget .
This budget is not a response to the challenges of the future , not in any respect , and nor has any of the institutions - our own included - covered itself with glory by providing that response .
In fact , Mrs Müller , 314 votes are required to reject the Council 's decisions at second reading .
We did not even have the courage to say that the organizational framework which is supposed to improve the budgetary procedure as a whole is only a framework , and will only be retained if it actually works , not if it hinders future policy-making for the people of Europe .
The political procedure represents a first-class show of incompetence .
Moreover , this has also been acknowledged by the Council .
I am glad that the Council presidency has not come to this second-reading debate , since there is nothing to discuss with it anyway .
That was also the case at first reading ; it was the case before and after it , and it will also be the case in future .
However , this is not the fault of the Irish alone : it does not matter if the Dutch , the Irish or anyone else is in office !
It is because of the fact that the Council of Budget Ministers is the last in line in the whole institution , that it has nothing to say or to decide , and that as a result , absolutely no political discussions have ever taken place with the Council !
The fact that the long arm of the civil service sends the ministers notes which , following political talks , render them incapable of doing what they have previously promised - because it is not on the note - represents a show of incompetence .
This has nothing to do with policy-making !
It is just a show of incompetence on the part of the European Union 's political class , which should be making a creative contribution to solving the Union 's problems !
I should like to say something else : when people say that it will all get better when we come to the Intergovernmental Conference - unfortunately Mr Elles is no longer in the Chamber , so I cannot argue with him about this - I can only laugh !
When I read in the annex to the Irish paper that this subject will be dealt with over the course of the coming weekend , then I can only say that it will not get better , but worse - since the realization that the current procedure is not working is leading to an intention to apply the latter in future not only to agricultural policy , but also to the second and third pillars , i.e. foreign policy and home affairs .
They wish to establish compulsory expenditure in those areas as well .
Ladies and gentlemen of the Council 's clerical staff - the technical class : if you believe that your bosses should actually try to sell this to the public - there is still not enough democracy , but democracy will be improved in the future by making another two groups of expenditure compulsory - then I have to tell you that we are going to have fun with one another !
This House will make an almighty song and dance about the proposal that you are preparing .
A final comment , Mr President : not all saving is the same , Mr Elles .
We agreed on the need to make savings , but our group wished to make savings in order to use them in the service of the European Union and its citizens ' goals .
This should be given careful thought , if we wish to make policy from the viewpoint of opposition or government politicians in our home countries , and not just from our viewpoint as Members of the European Parliament .

Mr President , with demands for containment of spending this was never going to be a very happy procedure and yet I want to congratulate the rapporteurs , Brinkhorst and Fabra Vallés , and also the Irish presidency , for having achieved what might seem to be the impossible , of meeting our long-term commitments and resolving the immediate problems of today .
I want to draw attention particularly to the BSE crisis , which has incurred an increase in expenditure of 50 % , up to ECU 7 billion in that sector .
I think that farmers particularly in the peripheral regions in Ireland , Northern Ireland and Scotland have to be grateful to the Commission , Parliament and the Council for the prompt attention which has been given to this problem and the resources which have been provided to meet the worst crisis those people have faced in a whole generation .
I want also to recognize that in spite of the need to contain spending we have met our commitments in the area of regional policy and we have gone on to increase commitments for the structural funds by 8.05 % .
Again , it shows the willingness of the Community to honour its commitments to the poorer regions .
I also want to refer briefly to the disagreement on fisheries and to thank the Irish Council for having made a sincere effort to bring forward at least some understanding between Parliament , Council and Commission on how decisions are arrived at .
We spend a lot of money on these agreements .
Half of all the money that we provide for the fishing industry goes on these agreements , something like ECU 300 million annually .
To achieve a better understanding between the institutions is important , but I want to underline that this is just an interim agreement .
I believe that as far as international agreements are concerned , if there are significant amounts of money involved then Parliament is entitled , under Article 228 of the Maastricht Treaty , to full assent procedures .
Parliament confuses itself with this argument about what is compulsory and non-compulsory .
If the Treaty is ratified in the proper way , if Parliament is properly consulted and gives its assent , then of course we have an obligation to meet the spending .
But the emphasis , from Parliament 's point of view , should be on having the letter of the law complied with in so far as the making of these agreements is concerned .
Finally , I want to say that in spite of all the talk about the necessity to cut back , this budget represents 1.22 % of GDP of the European Union .
It is a very small amount of money .
Mr Samland underlines this .
The importance of containing spending and being careful has nothing to do with denying the needs of the Community in so far as budgetary resources are concerned .
We are on course to increase our budget to 1.27 % by 1999 .
Let us not pretend that this will be enough resources to provide for the enlargement of the European Union and meet the needs of the states which expect to become full members .
Nevertheless , the amount of money which we spend has a minimal impact on monetary or economic policy within this Community , while national governments are not cutting back spending .
What they are doing is reducing the rate of increase and we should underline that .
If you look at the figures , even the more stringent budgets in the Community are only slowing the rate of increase ; they are not reducing spending .
We have done that this year but we cannot continue to do it for ever .
Mr President , at the outset I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs on the presentation of their reports and to take the opportunity during this budget debate to refer to an increasing number of reports that the procedures involved in applying for EU funding are becoming more difficult , more bureaucratic and more demanding in terms of accounting requirements .
This is not to say that I do not believe that there should not be financial control : there is a need for financial control .
However , there must be a balance between applicants ' eagerness to participate in EU programmes and the volume of details now required .
The paperwork , the preparation necessary to apply for grant aid of , say , ECU 5 , 000 , is totally disproportionate to the benefit .
Many of those who are eligible might apply if the detail and the bureaucracy were less and I would venture to say that there are many in the Union who should qualify but it is possibly too expensive and requires a disproportionate effort .
The Commission must distinguish between , say , sums of ECU 5 , 000 and sums of ECU 50 , 000 and over for smallscale grants to SMEs - and we realize the importance of SMEs and the important role that SMEs can play in the creation of jobs .
Small companies like this should not need the equivalent of a PhD in financial control to apply to the Commission for grants .
There is a serious need for rebalancing , a serious need for monitoring EU applications .
All the aspects that I have referred to are , I believe , a deterrent to small companies .
I would venture to say that this is totally contrary to the stated intentions of the EU .
We will very soon have the communication on the single currency , the citizen and the IGC .
We must ensure that funding in relation to these will be found on the ground as soon as possible .
In conclusion , I want to welcome the fact that the matter relating to peace and reconciliation has now been resolved .
I believe that all the commitments will be in place by the end of the year .
The fund will be drawn down and let us hope that next year we will be discussing an extension of this fund .
Mr President , I wish to make just two comments .
In this budget , in this game of chess which is the budgetary process , the European Parliament sacrificed its best pieces to the Council on the first reading , and now , on the second , we are without a queen , rooks , knights or bishops , facing a Council entrenched in this stringent and austere stance , with all its pieces intact .
With such an unequal position on the board any efforts to seek a draw are pathetic when the Council is about to checkmate us .
This is the first zero-growth budget .
It would have been better not to cut the funds assigned for job creation , Objectives 2 , 3 and 4 of the structural funds and internal policies .
It is a very unfortunate political signal , since the savings are made on precisely those policies where the citizen is most strongly aware of the presence of the Union .
And another poor political signal is the failure to guarantee that such zero growth will be an exception and not the general rule until 1999 at least .
Second comment : the planned reorganization of the so-called ' A lines ' , particularly in the fields of culture , youth and education , should be put forward again for 1998 , but , I would emphasize , from an objective viewpoint , evaluating the effectiveness and knock-on effect of the programmes .
There are some very positive moves along these lines , such as the European Movement or the inter-university association ESST .
However , there are many initiatives which are simply a response to a shopping list produced by Members , with no check on whether they are needed or effective .
I shall now conclude .
This budget , taken as a whole , shows a lack of ambition which bodes ill for the difficult challenges the European Union has to face .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development welcomed the opportunity to work more closely with Parliament 's Committee on Budgets , the Commission and the Council .
We participated fully in the ad hoc procedure and particularly congratulate Mr Brinkhorst , the rapporteur .
However , we felt badly let down when the Budgets Committee refused to consider B1 line amendments to the budget report proposed in our opinion .
Amongst these lines was the promotion of beef-eating line - the ' eat more beef ' line .
Subsequently this has been tabled by the Commission and agreed at the trialogue and by the Council .
We would argue that a ECU 50m promotion of beef-eating would increase consumption by 1 % , which would save 60 , 000 tonnes in cold storage , thereby making us a profit of ECU 70m .
We think this is good and sound business , and we sincerely hope that Parliament will vote for it .
We deeply regret that the Council has turned down a budget line for honey .
We produce less than half of the honey we eat , in a climate which is excellent for bee-keeping and honey production .
I sincerely hope we will agree to money for research into bee-keeping and honey production from the reserve which we have agreed .
Maybe with good will we can achieve this .
For many years we have agreed that honey and bees should be helped , but we have put no money where our belief is .
We would have preferred monies to address the beef overproduction problem to have been added to the budget rather than taken from projected savings .
But as we have guarantees that all price commitments and policy costs will be met , we feel that our interests have been protected .
In conclusion , we feel that our desires have been met .
We have liaised , we believe we have been honourable in this year 's budget discussion , but unfortunately we have not developed a trusting relationship with Parliament 's Budgets Committee .
Mr President , as regards the structural funds this budget has involved a demonstration of responsibility by the various institutions and particularly by the European Parliament .
Fund implementation rates have certainly varied widely .
With Objective 1 the rate was very high , and with Objectives 2 and 5b these rates have increased considerably , although there is still a shortfall in implementation , particularly in the more prosperous countries , which ought not to be experiencing such budgeting difficulties .
Linking progress with Category 2 to progress in implementation rates means putting one 's faith in more efficient management and greater budgetary stringency in the Member States .
For this reason , although it is difficult for a Parliament to accept a cutback in the structural funds , even in accounting terms , we have exercised responsibility and are now transferring to Member States the obligation to spend wisely and to implement the structural funds well , thus avoiding larger cuts in future budgets .
We must remind everyone that the European Union budget is also an instrument for ensuring economic and social cohesion .
This principle should inspire the budgetary process from the outset , and so although the European Parliament may have accepted this book reduction in Category 2 , this should not be seen as abandonment of the pursuit of economic and social cohesion .
If one day - and we hope it never comes - someone takes an initiative which means a real cutback in Category 2 , then that person should know that the European Parliament will be against it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I should like to begin by thanking the two rapporteurs for having brought this difficult task , namely the general budget for 1997 , to completion .
Never before have we been faced with so problematic a budget , including in terms of the - sometimes rather pathetic - restrictions with a view to 1999 . Never before have we been faced with so deaf a partner in negotiation - the Council - in response to the right and proper demands of the House .
Never before then have we set out on a journey without knowing where it would take us .
The Council is incapable of defining its own policy even in relation to the budget .
It is incapable of giving substance to its own declarations : in Florence , it entered into specific commitments which it subsequently deliberately ignored , in relation both to the confidence pact and the refinancing at least of the priorities it had itself determined .
It is incapable of reaching agreement with us on the issue of the legal bases - and therefore improving effectiveness here and making it possible for the Commission also to implement the budget in a properly informed manner .
In point of fact , the Council is giving way to the caprice of one Member State which is actually using the legal bases in an attempt to prevent the Institutions working properly .
In relation to fisheries then it is dragging its feet over a long-accepted agreement ; it is in fact doing all it can to undermine the very existence of the Institutions and their capacity to function properly .
Parliament therefore does well to give a firm response to all of that via the budget that is to be put to the vote on Thursday .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 19 November 1996 the Council gave a second reading to a budget providing no increase at all relative to the budget for 1996 .
I remind you that during the first reading , the European Parliament accepted the principle of zero increase and hence too the reduction of agricultural expenditure by 1 billion ECU and the reduction of sums earmarked for the structural funds again by 1 billion ECU .
During the second reading , the Council approved the incorporation into the 1997 budget of the plan to support beef and veal producers with 1 billion ECU , so approving only as much as it had accepted on first reading .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has stripped off most of its own clothes and is today discovering dumbly that it is walking the streets quite naked .
This budget is the personification of poverty , it is a budget for the few and the powerful and not for the many and the weak .
It is a budget which will make the rich richer and the poor poorer .
It is an anti-developmental budget , a budget devoid of social sensitivity , .
The people of Europe , ladies and gentlemen , are awakening .
Working people and those who run small and medium enterprises are coming out in the streets .
Social upheaval is getting closer and the European Parliament is unfortunately once again giving way to the Council 's blackmail .
Unless we understand that , and unless we put across the message that behind the figures there are people to be considered , we too will one day wake up only to find that it is by then too late .
I will take pleasure in voting against this budget of poverty and austerity .
Mr President , the draft budget for 1997 is not the result of a satisfactory budgetary procedure .
For me it has indeed been somewhat frustrating .
I shall , and I believe I can speak for many of us , be voting for the proposal of the Committee on Budgets with a high degree of resignation , and also , no doubt , from a sense of responsibility .
But this is not the budget some of us would have wanted and believed possible , as complying with the Interinstitutional Agreement and also meeting the Union 's needs in the coming year .
The comment has been made , and even published , that this has been an innovatory budget procedure in many areas , and that for the first time the budget will be below the preliminary draft tabled by the Commission in the spring .
No doubt this is so , but it will also be the first time Parliament has voted for the budget dreamed up by the Council without obtaining anything in return .
We have made no progress towards solving the eternal problem of classifying compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
We have talked a lot , but we have not moved forward an inch as regards the legal bases .
We have not even secured a minor - genuinely minor - revision of the financial perspective to meet the priorities fixed by the Council and Parliament .
The Council 's dominance has led some of our colleagues to suggest breaking the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Even the operation of the MEDA programme was threatened until last night .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is not a satisfactory balance .
Parliament split virtually 50 / 50 on a strategic matter during the first reading - this for the first time , as I should like to remind you - and a blocking minority , although indeed a minority when all is said and done , imposed its view upon the majority in cutting ECU 1 billion from the structural funds - in the payment appropriations of course - in the programmes for industrial restructuring and the reduction of unemployment .
A minority imposed this policy .
This is something which goes well beyond figures and technicalities and even support for national austerity policies .
Behind the cutback I see a wish to provide ideological backing for national cutbacks in social and welfare policies adopted in the interests of Maastricht .
I see an attempt to discredit the cohesion policy , which is now the Community 's second policy , and also , I venture to suggest , the wish of certain parties to lower in advance the bases for calculating the structural costs of our desired enlargement to the East .
This is what I see behind this budget and this cutback , not a policy of austerity and stringency .
So a sad message for the citizens of Europe , and a sad message and some poor working methods which should make us think carefully about our own institution .
Mr President , I would just point out that we must not feel we have been defeated .
The other side of the House has continually claimed that Parliament has been defeated , but this is absolutely not true .
We have managed to get the priorities we wanted included in the budget , which no one can dispute .
We had ECU 400 million that we did not know what to do with , and we have succeeded in finding a home for ECU 375 million of it .
So anyone who claims that we have lost out is completely wrong .
That was the first point I wished to make .
The second point I should like to make to Mr Samland is that this budget is for one year , not ten .
Next year the situation will be quite different , and I would warn the Council that the Interinstitutional Agreement is not guaranteed for ten years either , just this year .
There has been no reason to revoke the agreement this time round , because we have managed to get our priorities through , which is , after all , what it is all about .
The Council can be blamed for many things , but the Budget Council in particular cannot itself be blamed for failing to address these prospects .
We know that decisions have been taken at the highest level , so we cannot blame the Budget Council .
What we can blame it for is , I have to say , the childish manner in which it is dealing with category 3 .
It is behaving like a class of two-year-olds , rejecting every proposal from Parliament and the Commission , yet at the same time the ministers from the Member States are pleading with Parliament to allocate funding for their section of category 3 .
It would be much more sensible for the Budget Council to keep in closer contact with its own ministers , so that it could also deal with category 3 as a proper budgetary authority should .
The main point I have not yet mentioned is the legal basis .
If the Council continues in this way , then it will itself be placing a bomb under the Interinstitutional Agreement .
It should come to an arrangement as quickly as possible , on the basis of Mr Christodoulou 's sensible suggestions , it should adopt a rather more sensible approach to category 3 , and then we might actually get somewhere .
Mr President , Parliament maintains a network of information offices in the national capitals of each of the Member States .
These offices and the staff assigned to work there are funded at considerable cost from the annual budget of Parliament .
Their function , as I understand it , is to disseminate information and defend the interests of this institution in a non-partisan manner in the country in which they are located .
For some time now this institution has been under hostile attack in some Member States - not on the basis of policies which Parliament is pursuing , but rather in the form of outlandish insinuations about the internal administration of Parliament .
These attacks culminated recently in a classic hatchet job programme made by an English television company and broadcast in three or four of the Member States .
What , if anything , did the information offices do to rebut the allegations made in this television programme ?
As far as I can see , the officials based in these information offices rarely , if ever , make any serious efforts to defend the interests of this Parliament and its Members when these types of attacks are made .
When an effort is occasionally made it is usually far too little and absolutely too late .
Most organizations which operate on a multinational basis have developed a policy of rotating senior staff .
What I am asking you today , Mr President and Members , is that we have a rotation process in those offices so that every four years there is a rotation of the A grades in those offices so that they become familiar with one another , with the workings of this Parliament and with the work of its Members .
There is one other point I want to raise .
It concerns paragraph 8 of the report where we are making proposals concerning Members ' allowances , expenses and working conditions , including the single statute for MEPs .
Taking into account the fact that we have appointed a committee , a sub-committee or an ad hoc committee to deal with this matter , I think it is very wrong that the outgoing President and Bureau should have their arms tied now and into the future as regards this most important subject .
I am asking that , as an amendment , the Bureau should be presented with the report as soon as possible rather than to have it at the outset of the examination of the 1998 draft estimates .
If this committee is to work properly it is vital that it gets the time to do the job correctly .
Votes
Mr President , the Commission proposal seeks further to harmonize the type approval of agricultural and forestry tractors at EU level .
The aim is to enable the internal market to function better than at present .
Requirements are updated so as to raise the maximum design speed for tractors from its present level of 30 km / hr to 40 km / hr .
As rapporteur I should like to say that it is very difficult for me to accept Amendment No 4 by the PPE and PSE Groups .
The first two paragraphs of the amendment have already been taken into account in the directives which this directive will amend , and the second sentence of the third paragraph cannot be accepted because whatever falls outside the scope of this directive will in any case remain a matter for national decision-making , so that it will remain possible for the Member States to choose freely whether to grant national type approval to tractors with a maximum design speed exceeding 40 km / hr .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
As I have already said on the first and second reading , I support Mr Burtone 's sound work on a matter of such importance , particularly for the young , as this programme of Community action on the prevention of drug dependence .
The Council 's common position has followed neither the original Commission proposal nor all Parliament 's amendments in such vital areas as prevention , substitutive therapies , help for the families or guardians of drug addicts , information for the young , etc .
This leads me once more to support the rapporteur and to endorse his view that ' drug addicts are , above all , people who are ill ' , despite the Council 's refusal to accept amendments which backed this view with facts .
The fight against one of the most repugnant of crimes , the trafficking and distribution of addictive drugs , must be intensified , and every step in the right direction is to be welcomed .
At the moment , however , we have to admit that the methods used for dealing with the criminals concerned are still not tough or merciless enough .
Politicians and the courts will never be able to put up an adequate fight against drug crime without sustained and persistent efforts to develop a new public spirit , in which ethical values and moral standards are restored to their rightful place .
This kind of renewed public spirit with its values and standards would be a more powerful and effective weapon against the scourge of drugs than any punishment , however necessary and commendable the action taken by our courts and politicians may be .
That is why the many apologists , including - which hardly comes as a surprise - large numbers of intellectuals , must be morally indicted and condemned .
Those who say that it is not so bad , that it is best to legalize soft drugs and other such nonsense are , objectively speaking , just as guilty as the drugs criminals .
Those who advocate the ' live and let live ' approach have caused far too many serious disasters already , and will always remain the advocates of chaos .
The scourge of drugs is not only causing the slow death of individuals - mainly youngsters - but is also destroying whole families , thereby undermining the structure of society .
Unfortunately , this phenomenon is no longer confined to certain social circles , to a few intellectuals seeking to escape from reality : trafficking is an international business .
Far from solving the problem , freedom to purchase drugs - even if restricted to so-called soft drugs - would exacerbate it .
A young person who is not subject to temptation can avoid the trap of addiction .
If , on the other hand , these substances are sold at the school gates , then even though the attraction of what is forbidden will disappear , the rise in consumption will be unstoppable .
This has been proved by experiments conducted in several countries , in particular Sweden , a few years ago .
What is more , we know that in this case the transition from soft to hard drugs is inescapable .
In my region , for example , we are seeing a resurgence of Ecstasy and heroin .
The campaign against drug addiction is beyond the means of a single state ; it must be organized at least at Community level .
I therefore very much welcome the fact that agreement has been reached regarding this Community programme on the prevention of drug dependence .
The intended measures seem to me to go in the right direction .
Our strategy in the war against drugs must in fact be a comprehensive one .
Repression is necessary , but not sufficient ; three other crucial approaches must be adopted at the same time .
Firstly , prevention : all the categories of persons concerned must be informed and educated .
Secondly , the treatment of addicts to prevent them from contracting other diseases , and to help them recover from their addiction .
And finally , the promotion of substitute products , so as to avoid in particular the spread of AIDS .
By joining forces , we shall be able to combat this problem effectively .
I hope that this programme of action will be a great success , and that it will be a prelude to better cooperation between the Member States .
We need to carry on the fight against drugs at all levels .
It is , naturally , pleasing that the EU is prioritising this issue but the programme is open to different interpretations which is why I , as a representative of a country with a restrictive narcotics policy , have chosen to abstain from voting .
We need to carry on the fight against drugs at all levels , locally , nationally and internationally .
It is , therefore , pleasing that the EU is also prioritising this issue .
There are many good points in the programme , its emphasis on information , exchange of experience and education for example .
However , we Swedish environmentalists , who represent a country with a restrictive narcotics policy , cannot vote for the action programme for reasons which include the following :
It is not clear whether the action programme supports a liberal or a restrictive drug policy.-The aim is to ' coordinate the policies of Member States ' ( Article 1 ) .
The question is which policy is being referred to , the restrictive Swedish model or , as is more likely , the liberal drug policy of the Netherlands ?
We are of the opinion that drug policy is a matter for national governments.-Drug users are regarded as sick or , put another way , personal drug use is decriminalised .
This view is contrary to the Swedish view and to Swedish legislation.-Financial support will also apparently be given to liberal drug projects such as certain experimental towns and non governmental organisations , which we cannot accept.-It was obvious from the debate that the programme is open to many different interpretations and meanings .
Many speakers referred to the Irish draft of the review of the Maastricht Treaty which includes a point stating that the EU shall ' ensure standardisation of action on certain aspects of illegal narcotics ' , and said that the Burtone report is an important step towards this .
It is our firm belief that legislation on narcotics must never , under any circumstances , be an issue to be determined at EU level .
The fight against drugs must be conducted at all levels , i.e. at local , national , European and international level .
There are many good points in the report , the emphasis on information and education for example .
I represent a country with a restrictive narcotics policy and cannot , therefore , vote for the report in its entirety for the following reasons :
It is not clear whether the action programme supports a liberal or a restrictive drug policy.-The aim is to ' coordinate the policies of Member States ' .
There is no mention of the type of policy which is to apply , liberal or restrictive.-Decriminalisation of personal drug use is a move in the wrong direction and is contrary to Swedish legislation.-Economic support for liberal drug projects cannot be accepted.-In my opinion , policy on drugs and narcotics is an issue which should be determined at national level by each individual Member State but there should be extensive European and international cooperation .
During the now completed debate on the action programme in connection with prevention of the misuse of drugs , the European Parliament has worked actively to ensure that all significant aspects of misuse , and the causes thereof , have been included in the action programme .
As a consequence of this , Parliament has stressed the need for implementation of a broad spectrum of provisions , ranging from general public information to a targeted effort for special risk groups .
The programme also opens up the possibility for the implementation of initiatives that will provide support for existing addicts ( including training ) and provisions for the limitation of damage and negative social consequences affecting people who either are or have been drug addicts .
In view of the extent of drug misuse , implementation of the action programme must be given full support .
In this regard it is seen as very positive that the Commission intends to make a proposal for the introduction of public and private bodies , including non-State organizations and voluntary aid organizations , in addition to treatment and accommodation initiatives in the concrete implementation of the programme .
Schnellhardt report ( A4-0406 / 96 )
Mr President , the Green Group in the European Parliament supported the Schnellhardt report , although with very serious misgivings , because the Commission simply removed the section concerning the labelling of alcoholic beverages from the proposal .
Moreover , our position is very weak .
We are now dependent on the goodwill of the Commission to announce that it will submit a proposal on the labelling of alcoholic beverages .
I think we are all agreed in the House that there has to be such a proposal , not only because this is the wish of consumers , but also because there are other considerations which make it necessary .
For example , there are people who need alcoholic beverages to be labelled , because they are unable to drink alcohol for health reasons .
It is therefore quite impossible to understand why the Council and the Commission have bowed to pressure from the alcohol lobby to such an extent .
We shall therefore be extremely vigilant in checking that the Commission actually brings forward this proposal .
Parliament must take this matter very seriously .
We shall not be taking ourselves seriously if we do not now press the Commission to submit a proposal on the labelling of alcoholic beverages very swiftly .
Moreover , that was the arrangement made in the Conciliation Committee .
The Commission must not shirk its responsibility in this respect .
It is Parliament 's task to ensure that this proposal is brought forward , that it is applicable in practice , and that it contains no loopholes which make it possible to circumvent the labelling obligation .
I believe that I can leave it at that .
Our group will be very vigilant in ensuring that the Commission brings forward a proposal on the labelling of alcoholic beverages as soon as possible .
That is the urgent wish of consumers , and we must do justice to that wish !
von Wogau report ( A4-0390 / 96 )
We would like to make the following declaration , just as we have in other discussions of this report , in connection with our vote for this report :
We assume that the Customs 2000 programme concerns agreement at Community level on criteria for the minimum extent of controls to be introduced .
As Member States currently have differing legislation in areas such as narcotics and weapons control , we consider that a common interpretation of the powers of customs authorities cannot be made .
In our opinion , each Member State shall determine for itself to what extent they will implement controls at their borders with other EU countries .
The Customs 2000 action programme has come back to the House for the third time , in accordance with the normal workings of the codecision procedure , now that the differences of opinion between the Council and Parliament have been reduced and a joint text has been approved by the Conciliation Committee .
This programme , which we can only approve in principle - since its aim is to improve the training of national customs officers and facilitate cooperation between their administrations - has nevertheless undergone several unwelcome changes in the course of the debate .
I shall take one example , which sheds new light on how the codecision procedure operates in practice .
It shows , in fact , that - under the guise of ' European democracy ' , which does not exist - this procedure allows the most integrationist views to prevail in Parliament .
Study of this example demonstrates why it is that the federalists heap praise on codecision and why , at the IGC , they would like to extend it to all matters ' of a legislative nature ' .
In the matter we are considering today , the codecision procedure has enabled the European Parliament to place the Customs 2000 programme in a context of gradual unification of national customs authorities and of ' the development of the internal market into a real European home market ' , as the second recital of the decision puts it .
This concept of a ' home market ' , the emergence of which I criticized when I first spoke on Customs 2000 on 25 October 1995 , is thus being legitimized for the first time , with the endorsement of the Council of Ministers , in an official decision adopted jointly by the various institutions .
In this way , approval is being given at the highest level for the internal market to drift towards full unification of the Member States , something which most of the governments supporting this text would be hard pressed to defend clearly and unequivocally before their electorates .
In point of fact , the term ' home market ' appeared for the first time in the Commission 's communication of 8 May 1992 on the removal of border controls .
This stated that to enable the internal market to operate under the conditions of a home market , it was necessary to abolish physical borders , in other words to abolish all checks , in keeping with the absence of checks at the borders between regions within a national market .
This objective , which the Council was careful not to endorse directly at the time , is now receiving official approval through the second recital , and is even specifically defined as the abolition of differences between the internal market and Member States ' home markets .
It is worth pointing out that it was Parliament which , at the first reading in codecision , inserted this objective into the text , that the Council then withdrew it , that Parliament reintroduced it at second reading and , finally , that the Conciliation Committee granted Parliament a total victory . ' Long live codecision ! ' say the federalists , and one can understand why .
However , as regards the substance , this deepening of the internal market to the point of total unification does not seem to us to reflect the wishes of the peoples concerned , who prefer to maintain their distinctive identities .
Furthermore , its economic and social advantages are questionable , as I said here in the House when I spoke on 26 November 1996 concerning the report on the single market in 1995 .
The main aim of this headlong rush into unification is , in fact , to iron out any differences which could hamper the smooth functioning of the single currency .
The integration - or rather disintegration - machinery has been cranked into action .
I welcome the multiannual action programme for Community customs .
I believe that it will help strengthen the operational efficiency of our customs service at the Union 's external frontier .
The customs service has a critical role to play not only in relation to the smooth functioning of the internal market but also in relation to combating drug-trafficking .
This is particularly important in relation to our East / West frontier .
Furthermore , if we are to ensure success against the drug barons , then each Member State should have a joint police / customs anti-drug team under a single leadership .
If these teams operated under a strong Europol , then we would make real progress in the war against drugs .
Gahrton ( V ) , Holm ( V ) , Schörling ( V ) , Lindholm ( V ) , Eriksson ( GUE / NGL ) , Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Seppänen ( GUE / NGL ) , Lis Jensen ( NI ) , Bonde ( NI ) and Sandbæk ( NI ) , in writing .
( DA ) We have today voted against the report on an action programme for Customs authorities in the EU 's ' Customs 2000 ' , since it is our view that the programme fails to acknowledge the individual Member States ' sovereignty .
It should still be up to each Member State to determine how it wishes to control its borders , train its personnel , etc .
The concept of Customs personnel now being required to wear an EU badge is quite alien to us .
This is still an empty symbol on the part of the Union and an attempt to draw attention to itself .
Customs officers and other personnel are not answerable to the EU but to their national authorities .
There exists today a wide range of legislation within all the Member States with regard to the importation of different types of goods , e.g. drugs and weapons .
And this is likely to continue into the future , so we see no reason for harmonizing legislation in this area .
Moreover the programme is aimed at turning the Customs authorities into a Community affair and sets the objective of an even more standardized internal market than we find in the existing internal market , which in practical terms restricts any form of freedom in each nation 's legislation .
We are most strenuously opposed to this .
An agreement on the action programme for customs in the Community was finally reached at a meeting of the Conciliation Committee between Parliament and the Council .
I welcome the fact that a series of elements repeatedly advocated by Parliament have been included in the ' Customs 2000 ' programme .
Particularly important , in my view , is the ' psychological ' measure whereby customs officers will in future wear the 12-star symbol alongside their national insignia on their uniforms .
This is to highlight the fact that customs officers are also in the service of the European Union and have important European tasks to perform .
With a view to ensuring that these tasks can be carried out as well as possible , the European Parliament raised a number of additional key points .
In the ' Customs 2000 ' programme :
the joint training of customs officers in all categories , with a view to Europe-wide cooperation , will be improved ; -the computerization of all customs administrations and the harmonization of data and programmes will be stepped up ; -the mobility of officials will be promoted by means of the development of long-term exchanges between national customs administrations.However , these positive elements will only be able to take effect in practice if the Member States are prepared to make actual use of the opportunities for Europe-wide cooperation in the customs field .
In any event , the Members of the European Parliament will do what they can , in collaboration with the Union of financial staff in Europe and the customs trade unions , to ensure that the ' Customs 2000 ' programme is translated into practice .
Only in this way will it be possible to step up the fight against tax crime , transit offences and drug trafficking - to give just those examples - in the interests of Europe 's citizens .
In a single European market , the Europe-wide cooperation of customs officials is essential !
It is heartening that , after lengthy discussions between the European Parliament and the Council , agreement has now been reached on the Commission 's proposed action programme ' Customs 2000 ' .
It is worth bearing in mind that the programme is geared towards a further development and modernization of the Customs authorities of the 15 EU countries with a view to ensuring effective control at the EU 's outer borders and , thereby , a better management of the internal market .
In its consideration of the proposal the European Parliament has rightly stressed the need for a common computer system and the need for closer cooperation between the EU 's Member States in order to combat fraud .
In this connection we must also take account of the Commission 's undertaking , in close cooperation with Member States and with due regard for the principle of proximity , to look into possibilities for the ongoing development of Customs officers as part of their technical training , and the general efforts made to strengthen the exchange of experience among the national administrations of EU Member States .
The idea of a single market with 15 different customs administrations might at first sight seem to be a paradox .
However , this may well be due to the fact that we cling excessively in our thinking to the structures of the traditional nation state , in the form in which it has evolved in Western Europe in the modern age .
What we are dealing with here is not symbols of national power or the foreshadowing of a ' unified European nation state ' , but entirely practical operating problems of the Community 's internal market .
Bringing the procedures for cooperation between customs authorities into the Community domain seems to us to be the most appropriate approach to solving the problems .
However , that was clearly not available .
Nevertheless , perhaps the imperfect compromise now before the House represents a good starting-point for a creative new approach to finding solutions to the problem of turning the internal market into a genuine ' home market ' which can still be democratically controlled and regulated , without being subordinated to a unified state .
Tsatsos report ( A4-0342 / 96 )
The European Parliament 's report on the constitutional status of European political parties implicitly reveals a real danger of anti-democratic developments .
The establishment of such parties would in fact - as I said in yesterday 's debate - be based on institutional confusion , which would weaken the national democracies in a bid to consolidate a European superstate .
This would be a disastrous move , since national politics still underpins democracy in Europe today .
But that is not all .
It is disturbing to note that the report seems keen to confine the right of expression to a small inner circle of federalists , who would monopolize the funding .
We see , in fact , that the status of European political party would in the first place be denied to organizations operating in a single Member State ( paragraph 3 ( d ) of the resolution ) , which would unlawfully exclude many voters who wish to have their say in the Union through parties - or Members - who maintain their national individuality .
Secondly , the status envisaged would also be denied to parties not voicing opinions on matters deemed ' European ' and not organized in a way that is likely to reflect ' the political will of citizens of the Union ' ( paragraphs 3 ( a ) and ( b ) of the resolution ) .
The quite deliberately arbitrary nature of these definitions is perfectly obvious and is primarily intended to eliminate opposition .
In order to lock the door even more tightly , differences of opinion on the application of these criteria would be settled by an arbitration panel deriving from the Community system ( paragraph 7 of the resolution ) .
Finally , to complete the picture , we must add that public funds from the Community 's coffers would be offered to the good boys and girls .
The purpose of this ' carrot ' would be to encourage parties to fit themselves into the mould of European status , even if that meant betraying both their original aims and the peoples they represent , in order to champion the superstate .
We therefore repudiate this so-called ' constitutional status ' , which is in no way constitutional or indeed democratic .
Eriksson and Seppänen ( GUE / NGL ) , Holm , Lindholm and Schörling ( V ) , Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Bonde , Lis Jensen , Krarup and Sandbæk ( NI ) , in writing .
( SV ) The Greek proposal for the Intergovernmental Conference is that Article 138a shall be expanded to include a framework regulation on the legal status of European political parties along with a regulation on the economic position of European political parties .
We cannot see any pertinent reason to amend the Treaty in this respect .
Even the Conference of Presidents , when the issue was raised , did not consider an amendment of the current regulations was necessary .
If , in the future , the people of Europe gain an identity and view themselves as a single entity , then there may be popular demand for European political parties .
Political parties should arise as a result of popular demand and for no other reason .
This situation is not currently to be found - although there is cooperation between parties in the whole of Europe , the Green Federation for example .
The lack of popular participation in EU politics cannot be remedied by pumping money into new parties .
We do not wish to create further artificial pseudo-democratic ideals and force them on people in Europe .
We believe in subsidiarity and initiatives from the ground up rather than from the top down .
In view of the above , we cannot vote for the report .
I voted in favour of the Tsatsos report .
As a former President of the European Free Alliance ( Democratic Party of the Peoples of Europe ) , which has developed from humble foundations in 1981 into an association which now unites over 20 regional , national and autonomist parties in the European Union , I am a firm believer in the benefits of efforts to promote international contacts between political parties .
I believe that European budgetary resources should be made available in due course to provide technical and material support to facilitate cooperation of this kind , and look forward to the day when the European Free Alliance will be recognized on an equal footing with the other European political movements .
The Danish Social Democrats have today declined to vote in favour of the Tsatsos Report for the following reasons :
There are no laws governing the setting up of parties in Denmark .
We do not have any regulations defining what form a political association should take in order to be recognized as a party .
On the other hand we do have provisions , in the Danish legislative system , which make it possible to ban parties if they make use of force and are therefore unacceptable .
From a Danish perspective we have problems with the concept of allowing Union citizenship to play so central a role in the Report .
Denmark concurred with the Edinburgh agreements that Union citizenship should not replace national citizenship .
At the same time we must make it clear that it is not the political will of citizens that the parties represent .
It is the political will of their party members .
It is clear that any person elected by the people is elected on the basis of his political will .
This is enshrined in Danish legislation for instance .
The Report draws up guidelines for ' the rights of certain of the European political parties ' , including the right to put up candidates for elections .
We have no sympathy with this .
There is no common European election legislation , so it is not possible to propose candidates for elections at a European level .
The situation today is that political associations receive financial support with the inclusion of one item in the budget .
It is our view that , on the same conditions as such associations , and in accordance with Article 138a , European political parties should also receive support with the inclusion of an item in the budget .
We do not therefore agree with the argument that supporting political parties requires an independent legal basis in order to comply with the criteria of openness , transparency and reliability .
The budget today is controlled in such a way that it would be impossible to cheat or deceive without this being discovered .
We therefore see no need for making use of Article 235 of the EU Treaty in conjunction with financial support from European political parties , and we are against the proposal of applying Article 235 in conjunction with this matter .
I have voted against the Tsatsos report because in my opinion the role of the parties lies above all in bringing people together at national level to bring influence to bear within society , the most important forum being national parliaments .
Cooperation between national parties is a good thing and worthy of support , and we here in the European Parliament have good experience of it .
In cooperation between national parties , even representatives from small countries have an opportunity to state their opinions .
On the other hand , in the European parties whose status the Tsatsos report seeks to secure , it will be impossible for citizens from small countries to make their voices heard .
Parties should be founded at citizens ' own initiative .
Only when the citizens of Europe themselves express a desire for European parties will a credible basis exist for them .
I cannot endorse the report 's proposals on the funding of European parties .
On the other hand , Parliament has a continuing duty to safeguard the preconditions for the work of Parliament 's political groups .
The report 's proposal that information about funding should be public is an excellent one , but could equally be implemented under the present system if the will exists .
This declaration of vote is , equally and especially , an affirmation , an unequivocally political affirmation , of political principles and values .
' European construction ' has been marked , in our view , by the primary intention to serve economic interests on the basis of political suppositions that we feel should at least be discussed .
In this ' European construction ' it would seem now that ' European parties ' are an integral part .
As we are questioning the political suppositions that underpin this ' European construction ' serving particular interests , we are mostly very doubtful about a construction of party political institutions , forged in this context and resulting from arrangements behind the scenes or created ' in the lab ' .
We think it significant that the discussion of this subject should be taking place at the end of a year in which political parties were celebrating 75 years of existence and , in particular , coinciding with the end of the congress of the party for which we stand , which was founded in 1921 and which started along a long road that formed its identity , something proven once again by this congress .
We refuse to accept pre-fabricated arrangements , notarial models and formulae , an opportunism compensated for by considerable material benefits , nor do we wish to exclude ourselves from the process of political negotiation adapting party political structures to real and ever-changing situations , and we are open to forms of cooperation and inter-party organization without any kind of preconception , as long as we do not call into question the identities resulting from collective experiences that transcend particular points in time and reflect profound popular expressions .
One thing is abundantly clear from this report by Mr Tsatsos : the two numerically largest political families in the House , the socialists and the Christian Democrats , are on the lookout for money again , and lots of it .
What could the reason for this be ?
The fact that there is stricter monitoring of party funding in the Member States ?
The fact that more and more politicians are being accused of corruption and fraud in every country in Europe ?
The fact is that the House is almost unanimously in favour of dipping once again into the taxpayer 's purse .
The politicians in the most powerful parties can obviously never get enough money .
The ordinary people of Europe are once again going to have to stump up in order to fund the megalomania of a group of political profiteers .
In Flanders , one of the MPs from my party said in Parliament that politicians are , almost by definition , parasites growing rich at the expense of society .
I know that this does not apply to all politicians , but I also know that it is certainly true of politics in the European Parliament , which has almost become synonymous with profiteering .
Even apart from these fundamental reservations , it must also be obvious that I completely reject the very idea of ' European political parties ' .
It is yet another attack on national sovereignty , and yet another step on the road to a bland and colourless Europe where national individuality is blurred as much as possible or else deliberately erased .
Of course , there can and must be transnational cooperation between the European political parties , but they must retain their national identity and decision-making capacity .
This report is really nothing more than an ode to money as a weapon against the preservation of the political and national identities of the peoples of Europe .
The main characteristic of the political systems in the Member States is the fact that political parties , as relatively recent social phenomena , have developed in very different ways , not just in terms of their origins and organizational structure , but as regards their legal basis and the social functions which they perform .
Much of this stems from the different electoral systems used in the countries of Europe .
Political parties also tend to be deeply rooted in the history and culture of a particular country .

The report by Mr Tsatsos unfortunately fails to recognize this , and tends to assume the existence of a European nation and a broad level of European awareness .
Although there is no doubt that European party groups do exist in Europe , it is unlikely that European political parties will bring European politics to the people , who are much more likely to rely on their own national politicians .
This is also evident from the fact that Members of the European Parliament are elected using the national electoral systems , and are recruited through the national political parties in each Member State .
We would also contest the view that Article 138a of the Treaty contains a constitutional mission to create European political parties .
It simply acknowledges the fact that European party groups exist and indicates their importance for the process of integration and the development of European citizenship .
Article 138a in any event does not provide a legal basis for the further statutory development of European political parties and certainly not for providing their organizations with funding .
Nor can Article 235 be used as the legal basis , for the same reasons .
It must be left to the people to decide whether supranational political parties should be set up .
At the same time , the governments should interfere as little as possible in the formation of such parties , in accordance with the principle of freedom of association , which is recognized in all the Member States of the Union .
The involvement of the European administration in the formation of parties could easily result in undesirable influence , which is why we object to the way in which the legal position of the European political parties is developed in the Tsatsos report .
We also reject the proposals to subsidize the European political parties .
The direct and generalized provision of subsidies would make the parties dependent on the European administration .
This is why the government in the Netherlands only provides indirect support for political parties in the form of subsidies for scientific institutions , training and work among young people .
It also has to do with the fact that the Netherlands deliberately does not have any legislation on the position of the political parties .
We appreciate that the situation is different in some other countries , but rules at European level would indirectly undermine the situation in the Netherlands .
The main argument against the proposal is that the formation of European political parties in itself presupposes that the groups in question are in favour of a federal Europe , and the provision of financial support would mean favouring this view over other groups which do not want a federal Europe and thus prefer not to form a European political party .
These were the reasons why we voted against the Tsatsos report .
At the heart of the European Union 's problem of legitimacy is the question of democracy .
Universal democracy , in the form endorsed by the majority of the population in modern society , is unthinkable without a network of associations in which the political parties play a key role .
Only oligarchic and aristocratic élites can do without such organizational forms of collective political participation .
The challenge at European level consists of strengthening and enhancing the European dimension of the existing political parties in a way which frees them from dependence on concentrations of power in the economy and the media , without turning them into the agents of a self-centralizing state power .
This is undoubtedly a long and difficult task , but one that is of crucial importance .
Herzog report ( A4-0338 / 96 )
The Herzog report on participation of citizens and social players in the Union 's institutional system declares a willingness to introduce proper information , transparency and the right to evaluation , concerted action , participation and consultation , all of which are laudable intentions , but the specific ways in which they will be applied are still not well enough defined to be truly practicable , in our view .
What is worse , the vagueness of the report as regards the implementation of these principles could disrupt democratic procedures , unless care is taken .
For example , the report calls for the establishment at European level of a general right ' of every citizen and every representative organization to draw up and promote their opinions and to receive replies directly or indirectly ' .
But how exactly would this right - which could mean the European institutions having to produce replies on a massive scale - be exercised ?
We do not know .
All the same , we should have liked to be told how the existing consultation processes operate in the multitude of management and regulatory committees and the numerous working groups already gravitating around the Commission .
How are the participating organizations designated , how do they work , and how are their views taken into account ?
These points should have been examined before launching any new initiatives .
Furthermore , we fear that the universal pronouncement of a right to consultation will , in reality , serve to promote inadequately representative organizations , which would distort rather than improve the procedures .
We also fear that conclusions reached nationally by democratic means could be challenged at European level in the general chaos of consultations , whereby the cleverest and most experienced pressure group could gain acceptance for its opinions , even when in a minority .
We have therefore tabled some amendments showing the lines along which we would like these ideas to be developed : consultations should be held only at a level determined by the principle of subsidiarity ; it should be up to the national government to decide which associations are representative and which are not ; no association could be deemed representative at Union level unless it had been deemed so within the Member States ; and no association should be consulted at European level , in a working group or at a general hearing , if Community subsidies represent an excessive proportion of its resources , for example more than 10 % .
However , these amendments should be seen as merely indicative .
In actual fact , we would have preferred to see a detailed preliminary study launched , showing how the external partners participating in the various EU working groups are designated at present , and how the system could be improved with due respect for all the stages in the democratic decision-making process .
I have voted for the Herzog report as it represents a basic critique of the democratic shortcomings of EU systems and the weak position people are in when it comes to influencing decisions .
I am , however , disappointed with several of the compromises which have been made between Herzog and PPE / PSE , especially the section on the importance of national level influence on decisions .
I would also like to emphasise that I have not voted to strengthen the status of the Economic and Social Committee or the Committee of the Regions or for the Union to have a tax system .
I am also opposed to the insertion of the social protocol into the Treaty ; this strengthens above all the federal operating bodies , the Commission and the Court .
An initiative report from the Committee on Institutional Affairs proposes a number of actions to strengthen popular confidence and participation in the Union .
The aim , according to the rapporteur Philippe Herzog , is to contribute to ' the advance of democracy within the EU ' .
The Commission and Member States are urged to develop the proposal during the Intergovernmental Conference .
It is of course important to highlight the need to emphasise employment and social issues as well as economic issues , but decisions regarding all of these important issues should take place totally at national level .
But , there must of course be cooperation between the governments of the Member States on these issues .
That concludes the vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.35 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Communities ' draft general budget for 1997 ( continuation )
We will now continue the debate on the draft general budget for 1997 .
Mr President , we talked in detail this morning about the problems that Parliament has had with the Council during this procedure , and about the Council 's unwillingness , as part of the budgetary authority , to be reasonable in trying to find common ground with Parliament .
I almost have the impression that the Council has gradually forgotten that the budgetary authority has two arms , and not just one .
This is sure to lead to serious problems one day , although it has not happened this year because Parliament has not found a way to counteract the effects of the Council 's uncooperative attitude .
We had the chance at first reading to keep at least the financial elements of the Commission 's confidence pact afloat , but we did not dare to take the risk .
We could have kept a substantial part of it afloat at second reading , but it looks as if this too is not going to happen .
So we have the problem here in the House that we cannot summon up 314 votes for a policy that dares to risk confrontation with the Council in order to achieve a generally acceptable result , the kind of result which Commissioner Liikanen said this morning that he would like to see .
The question now is how we should organize ourselves in future .
I think that a great deal of internal debate is required if we are to avoid a repetition in 1997 and 1998 of what has happened here in 1996 .
There is just one glimmer of light .
If everything goes according to the plans of the Committee on Budgets , the decision will be taken on Thursday to include the money for Turkey and the MEDA programme in the reserve . This is a direct result of the decisions we voted through by a large majority - 420 votes - at first reading .
I am delighted that this appears to be going through , and to those who claim that this is not fair , because Turkey is being treated differently from other MEDA countries , I would simply say that Turkey is and wants to be a different country from other MEDA countries .
Turkey is the only country in the MEDA group that is a member of the Council of Europe and has signed the European Convention on Human Rights .
It has a customs union with us , which we voted through last year .
It hopes to become a member of the European Union , and the Treaty on European Union allows for this to happen .
In short , Turkey is a special case in the group of MEDA countries and must be treated as such , as a country which is closer to Europe than the others . And in view of the human rights situation in Turkey it is , in my view , both possible and acceptable for us to adopt the same approach as the majority of the Committee on Budgets did yesterday .
It appears even more acceptable since we are currently holding talks with the editors-in-chief of the five main Turkish newspapers , who have come here to urge us to oppose the restrictions on press freedom which are currently being threatened in Turkey .
This is evidence enough of how Parliament can influence events in that country .
I have one final comment .
I welcome the fact that we have included a sentence in the Fabra-Vallés resolution on the need to conclude our investigations into payment of our allowances before the start of the 1998 budgetary procedure .
And I welcome it because I fear that - certainly as far as the Netherlands is concerned , and probably other Member States as well - unless we put our house in order , the 1999 election campaign will not be about European issues , but about the money that Members are pocketing , and this is something Parliament must avoid at all costs .
Mr President , the fulfilment of the Maastricht criteria for monetary union by the Member States is just as important to us as it is to the Member States themselves .
However , that is not the only reason why it is as necessary to make savings in the EU budget as it is in national budgets .
Making savings does not just mean making cutbacks , but above all using the available funds sensibly .
Although we are making the budget for 1997 a zero growth budget , therefore , we also wish to maintain our priorities : increased support for the peace process in Northern Ireland and research and technological development , and additional funds for the trans-European networks of some ECU 100 million .
Since this extra expenditure cannot be financed by means of an amendment to the interinstitutional agreement , new solutions must be found , such as the creation of a negative reserve in category 2 .
A rather limited increase for research together with a negative reserve is acceptable .
My group refuses to let matters now come to a clash with the Council because of a breach of the interinstitutional agreement due to the trans-European networks .
As it is , the planning but not the implementation of projects is being supported .
On the other hand , funds for the TENs in the PHARE countries are available in category 4 .
In any event , we need the onward connections in those countries .
I wish to thank Commissioner Liikanen for his comments on this point .
The Council accepted only a quarter of Parliament 's amendments to all sections at first reading , ladies and gentlemen !
This seems quite arbitrary and at times even inconsistent - as is particularly apparent regarding the issue of ' no money for measures without a legal base ' .
It is a matter of urgency to adopt a suitably constructive joint declaration on this subject .
In the meantime , however , we must ensure that the support funds entered by Parliament at first reading take effect , especially in the areas of employment and combating youth unemployment , education and training , the equal treatment of men and women , environmental and health protection , as well as the strengthening of democracy and the observance of human rights .
However , Parliament must try to thin out the items in question before the next budget , in order to avoid the dispersal of resources and improve the transparency and control of their use .
And the same applies to the satellite agencies .
I should like to thank the two rapporteurs most sincerely and congratulate them on their reports , and I also wish to thank the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , as the Commission might expect I will make my comments solely on the question of the satellite agencies .
Can I first of all thank the Commission for their cooperation in operationalizing the request we made in the 1996 budget , where we asked the Commission to present proposals for consideration by the Committee on Budgets and Parliament on harmonization and modification of the agencies ' financial regulations ; on the question of budgetization of the agencies ' revenues , on the question of a policy on property , on the question of their tax status and more importantly on the question of harmonization of the discharge procedures .
Can I compliment the Commission on meeting us half-way on this .
But for the budget process of 1998 we need to address the general questions that remain unresolved : the budgetization of revenue of own resources , the question of property , the question of tax and more importantly the question of discharge .
What I would now like to comment on are the issues that remain unresolved from the first to the second reading .
I would like to hope that the Budgets Committee have met the spirit of the Commission 's wishes more than halfway .
Firstly , on the question of CEDEFOP on line B3-1026 , we still wish to place our ECU 1.72 million in reserve , pending the start of building in Thessaloniki .
We see no problem with this as the third payment does not have to be made until September 1997 .
Secondly , on the question of Bilbao .
There are still problems with this agency and the Budgets Committee are recommending that we put ECU 3 million on the line with ECU 1 million in reserve .
We now know that the agency has a director and its work programme is in place and I have asked Mr Brinkhorst the rapporteur to consider adding an amendment to the remarks of the budget line , that Bilbao may apply for further appropriations in the framework of an SAB , if it is proved to be justifiable and the resources are available , to enable them to carry out their programme .
Thirdly , there is the question of the drugs rehabilitation agency in Lisbon .
I see Mr Mingasson there as a new member of the management board .
Why do you need me when you have Mr Mingasson ?
We hope that , by moving funds from the REITOX line to the agency as a way of operationalizing the REITOX line , we can meet your demands .
I think that is a good way forward .
Finally , on the question of the European Training Foundation , we are requesting that you take operational expenditure for that line from the Tempus programme to meet the work that agency does .
Can I note the comments made by Mr Liikanen at the Budget Committee hearing last week ?
We are not against the creation of new agencies , in fact we have no objection to them .
What we do need are standardized and harmonized procedures before any new ones are created .
I hope the Commission will now accept our recommendations .
Mr President , while adequate in the circumstances , this year 's budget has shown many procedural shortcomings , not only inside this House but also in other institutions , particularly of course in relation to the conduct of the Council as one arm of the budget authority - a Council which has been inflexible , irresponsible , inconsistent and at times irrelevant throughout this budget procedure .
I would just briefly disagree with Mr Samland when this morning he criticized the Council for being at the end of the line of ministers .
Of course all too frequently they are at the end of a line of civil servants with politicians taking their diktats from national civil servants who have no political background , are not responsive to democratic impulses but are largely officials serving finance ministers ' diktats to cut spending , to increase refunds to Member States and to bow the knee to Maastricht convergence criteria .
Even though the European budget needs to be soundly based , we need at times to remind ourselves that in a country like the United Kingdom , for every £ 20 of public expenditure - I am a rich man , that is a £ 20 note I am showing you - the British Government still spends £ 19.94 of it .
Six pence in every £ 20 of net public expenditure comes through the European budget .
The United Kingdom consumes £ 1 billion out of £ 300 billion of public expenditure and to expect that budget to satisfy the demands of the Maastricht convergence criteria is a nonsense .
I believe our rapporteurs have done well in the circumstances and deserve our thanks .
However , things cannot continue like this .
We are reaching a stage where the European Union is faced with potential budgetary gridlock .
We have a fixed own resource .
We have constantly increasing demands upon that fixed own resource .
Our spending committees are making ever greater demands on it , as is the Council , and the envelope is now too small for the demands made of it .
That means we have either to get more money or tackle the reality which is that if we cannot get greater resource - and I do not see that happening - we must have better evaluation of projects , better use of cost-benefit evaluation , better use in the Commission of zero-based budgeting and greater recourse in the Commission to eliminating programmes which were originally perceived as having a finite life or of being of limited duration or , on the basis of cost-benefit analysis , are deemed to have outlived their utility .
That is what Commissioner Liikanen was referring to this morning when he said we are in a crisis of budgetary procedure .
If that is what he meant I fully support him .
Mr President , I just wish to say that I agree with what Mr Tomlinson and Mrs Theato have said about the risk of spreading Community spending too thinly .
I commend the Committee on Budgets which tried to limit the number of actions to those which are important .
If the Community seriously wants to enlarge - and this debate is just beginning - we must be able to concentrate on big projects , with critical mass , and within a certain period of time .
If a programme has been successful , it can be brought to a conclusion and we can launch a new project .
The Community tradition is that once something has started it must be continued forever .
That is something we are trying to change .
I hope that when the Commission discusses the budget in January , there will be a serious discussion on priorities , and when we know that spending ceilings exist - and there is no dramatic change there - there must be the political courage to curb activities which are no longer useful .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10 a.m.
Financing enlargement
The next item is the report ( A4-0353 / 96 ) by Mr Christodoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the financing of the enlargement of the European Union .
Mr President , before saying anything else I would like to thank the members of the various working groups of the Committee on Budgets who helped and who are essentially coauthors of this report , namely Mr Bösch , Mr Di Prima , Mr Miranda , Mrs Müller , Mr Porto and Mr Olli Rehn , the last of whom is not with us because he was not returned in the recent elections , but who contributed excellent work in the area of agriculture .





Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to begin with , it should be noted that this report is a first approach to the subject and cannot possibly consider all the financial and economic aspects of enlargement .
Consequently , it does not aspire to make definitive estimates but is limited to the presentation of facts and figures on the order of magnitude of the costs in the main sectors .
It will become possible to give more accurate cost figures when enough information for that purpose is obtained from studies of a dynamic nature , in other words not static as they have been so far , and ones based on more realistic assumptions .
For exactly that reason , in the report we call on the Commission to undertake such an analysis and study , so that we may know exactly what financial and economic framework we are operating in .
Consequently , this report is a provisional one and I ask Parliament to render its decision accordingly .
It must be stressed that the analysis of enlargement 's costs and financial consequences is not intended to obstruct enlargement or make it more difficult .
Its purpose is to shed light on the financial aspects of enlargement , which are often neglected , to ensure that the decisions will be governed by consistency and to secure the best possible conditions for the accession of new Member States .
Mr President , excessive political zeal always generates a tendency for political declarations to be made , which are later contradicted when it is found that insufficient consideration has been given to the economic factor .
That is exactly what we are trying to do now , in other words to stress the economic aspects of the problem so that the political decisions will be correctly based and we will not need to have retractions which , as we all understand , are exceptionally damaging to the European Union 's credibility .
First of all , it must be said that the more general geopolitical reasons that compel the attachment of Central and Eastern European countries to the European Union and that essentially constitute a factor for the area 's security , are a basic and fundamental choice of the European Union .
There is no point in discussing them ; they exist , and they are as they are .
On the other hand , however , we must bear in mind that hasty accession without appropriate preparation would have negative consequences , not only economically but politically as well , because first of all there would be a risk that the new countries would be unable to participate in the Union 's main policies for a long time , in other words there would be very many deviations and postponements which would mean that the new members would be joining as second-class partners and not as full members able to participate in the process of creating the European Community , and secondly , it would largely obstruct the operation of the internal market because any who joined subject to deviations would set the elimination of those deviations as a basic policy aim .
For that reason , then , the conditions satisfied by countries that are candidates for accession must be those laid down by the European Council .
They too are not subject to discussion ; they are prerequisites which cover the social , economic and political structure of the candidate member states .
It must be said , however , that from a purely economic standpoint the structural reforms in each country applying for accession are definitive factors for successful enlargement .
That is why the need is stressed to strengthen the structural nature of the European Community 's interventions in candidate member states , and the PHARE programme will therefore either have to become clearly structural , or better still , a new financial instrument will have to be created .
Besides , we should recall that the European Union is not the sole source of funding ; finance can be provided from elsewhere as well , and consequently , coordination between the alternatives is absolutely essential if economic issues are to be correctly addressed .
Correct preparation , then , takes time and financial support that will involve considerable costs for the European Union , which must in parallel continue its own efforts to achieve greater depth , a factor that must not be neglected .
Because of all this , as I said earlier , estimating the cost is not an easy matter .
Besides , apart from the immediate financial consequences , in other words those relating to finance for the candidate countries either in the context of their preparation for accession or after their accession , such as participation in the Union 's policies or administrative expenditure related to staff salaries and all kinds of other establishments , we must not underestimate the indirect financial consequences , in other words expenditure to support the cohesion and convergence of the present Member States and , later , the necessary adaptations to the Union 's policies : the CAP , the structural policies , etc .
That expenditure is unavoidable , it will take place in any event , but it will have to be considered from now on in the context of the possible accession of the new member states as well , so that it will be realistic and internally consistent .
Consequently , successful enlargement will be beneficial if those involved prepare for it correctly .
For exactly that reason , Mr President , besides clear criteria , we must regard it as a basic element of our strategy to define preaccession periods adapted to the individual features of each candidate country .
The mass accession of countries with little in common and which do not all conform to a general economic framework could create problems , and disagreements about who comes first and who second .
A pre-accession period that is shorter or longer depending on the characteristics of each country , a period culminating in the certain and legally well founded accession of the country concerned to the European Union , with financial interventions to support each country 's development efforts , is the best solution and is exactly the basic political concept which this report advocates .
This is , of course , a matter of both historical and strategic importance , but we have , unfortunately , a limited time in which to deal with it .
I would therefore ask honourable Members to respect the speaking-time allotted to them .
When this report was being examined in the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on Foreign Affairs put forward a series of amendments which it had itself unanimously adopted .
Not many of them have survived the vote in the Committee on Budgets , and despite the talks we have held with the rapporteur , Mr Christodoulou , whom I respect as a great expert in this field , we still do not entirely agree on certain points , though there are fortunately some where we do .
The thing that strikes us about this report from the Committee on Budgets - and this is a point that was made on a number of occasions in the committee , including by the rapporteur himself - is that we do not actually have enough information yet to produce an accurate picture of what the budgetary effects of enlargement are going to be .
Mr Christodoulou also made this point .
So we are really not much further forward on this important issue than we were six months ago . I myself and the Committee on Foreign Affairs would have preferred to wait until we have reliable and comparable statistics on which to base a more authoritative report .
The Committee on Budgets acknowledged this when it proposed the title of interim report , indicating that it is itself not happy with it , and suggesting the possibility that there will be others in future which might have more to say .
Having said that , I still find it a pity that the present report is rather negative about Central Europe .
It does not need to be .
I agree that we must be cautious and that we need to be honest about any problems we identify , but we must also be careful not to let our attitude alarm Central Europe , which is already wondering whether we really want enlargement or not .
So I feel that we are risking provoking a negative reaction there .
There has of course never been any question of the Committee on Foreign Affairs being the only one allowed to speak on this subject , and I have always hoped that the Committee on Agriculture and , in particular , the committees dealing with structural policy , public freedoms , external relations and budgets would all have their say .
It has never been our intention to overlook them , although when we drew up our report six months ago , the Committee on Budgets was the only one not to give us its opinion , even though we asked for it .
It has thus never been our intention to overlook the budgetary aspects , but if we are to talk about such specific issues , then we would prefer to have specific figures to show exactly what we are doing .
I believe that it is particularly important to stress to Central Europe that enlargement is not just a quantitative and financial issue , but also a qualitative and structural one , as the rapporteur said a moment ago .
A report such as this should not give any worst-case scenarios , and it should make it clear that it is not the final word on the subject and that none of what it says should be interpreted negatively , since it will in any event be reviewed when we have more reliable data in the future .
Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Christodoulou , has been able to incorporate relatively little of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , and I can understand why .
We have spoken with one another , and we both take the view that , next year , the Committee on Regional Policy should draw up its own report on this complicated issue .
I believe that anyone tackling the subject which is being dealt with here by Mr Christodoulou has an extremely difficult task , since figures are not open to debate .
If this issue is discussed in terms of figures - and it is indeed rather too soon to do that - the outcome is more likely to be frustration than enthusiasm .
However , I see no reason to panic or become agitated , since the financial aspect of enlargement to the east is only one aspect of the matter .
Mr Christodoulou has deliberately focused on this aspect because it is his special field .
We do not believe that the Christodoulou report deals with the whole question of enlargement to the east .
Panic is quite unnecessary for another reason : the applicant states will most certainly not accede en bloc .
If it should happen - and without wishing to establish a chronological order , since it is not my place to do so - that Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovenia , Hungary , Estonia and others join , a certain period of time will undoubtedly elapse between the accessions of individual countries .
The European Union will change qualitatively , and not just quantitatively after each individual accession .
We shall probably be surprised - and pleasantly so - to see how the EU develops when these dynamic , highly motivated countries join us .
As regards the financial aspects , moreover , I can report that the Commissioner responsible , Mrs Wulf-Mathies , believes that enlargement to the east is feasible even without an increase in own resources , and without a rise in the GNP quota of structural assistance .
I should like to conclude by taking up what Mr Oostlander said .
Compared with what the Union stands to gain from the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , all the financial burdens which lie ahead of us are truly negligible - after all , burdens are always relative .
Europe will gain so much from enlargement to the east that I hope this process will be driven forward dynamically by each and every one of us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , I too could begin by joining in the general chorus of complaint at the lack of hard data .
No specific predictions can be made , or worked into this report , but I see this as an interim report which , as Mr Christodoulou has said , will need to be followed up by others .
The important role of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media in the further development of the constitutional state and democracy in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe has been highlighted repeatedly at the various summits , even though the main emphasis in terms of enlargement to the east is being placed on economic restructuring and harmonizing legal standards and provisions .
However , these important educational and cultural aspects must not be disregarded .
Intensive financial support for the educational sector is particularly important now , in view of the considerable decline in educational standards which , according to the Commission , has already become apparent in the CCEE .
One does not need to be clairvoyant to predict that , in the medium term , this trend will lead to economic stagnation and produce adverse consequences for accession , because the gap is still widening .
What can we do as a Community to ensure that funds are earmarked not only for the modernization of sectors of the economy but also for education , culture and the audiovisual media ?
As long as the applicant states are considered ' foreign ' , the Maastricht Treaty does not permit educational and training projects to be carried out via the Structural Funds .
According to the Commission , nothing can be done about this for legal reasons .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media nonetheless believes that the countries of Central and Eastern Europe should be allowed to use 10 % of the PHARE funds at their disposal to cofinance EU programmes .
But , as I said , this can only happen if the key question is answered : do we , or do we not , still consider these applicant states to be ' foreign ' from a legal point of view ?
Our committee is arguing for a pragmatic approach in this context , to allow for a more flexible use of PHARE funds up to the time of accession , so as to give these countries greater powers to take decisions for themselves .
The Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media is also calling for an increase in the percentage of resources available for cofinancing under PHARE - I repeat , under PHARE - as a practical way of ensuring that culture and education are not neglected , perhaps even becoming an obstacle to early accession .
Mr President , Parliament is once again discussing a very important topic today , and I think it was very ambitious of the Committee on Budgets to put this issue on the agenda so soon .
Its very nature means that certain aspects are rather speculative , which could put the whole debate on our hopes - and I stress the word hopes - for enlargement on entirely the wrong track .
Enlargement is a political decision , not a financial one .
It costs money , but it also brings certain benefits , including financial ones .
How much it costs depends very much on what the Union does both internally and externally over the next few years .
By internally , I mean the structural and financial reforms that we carry out and , of course , the principles we apply in doing so .
For the Committee on External Economic Relations , it is an important principle to maintain the necessary solidarity and cohesion , even in an enlarged Union , but more important still is the question of what efforts the Union is going to make over the next few years to help the applicant countries achieve full membership .
Linked to this , of course , is also the question of what those countries themselves will do until they become members .
The more successful this strategy is , the less enlargement will cost .
The strategy may vary from one country to another , as will each accession , and this too will affect the final bill .
In the opinion which I have drawn up for the Committee on External Economic Relations , the emphasis is very much on the efforts to be made prior to accession : through PHARE and the EBRD , trade cooperation - not least in sensitive sectors , market reforms and , in our case , giving priority to social policy ; through investment in administration and infrastructure , and by encouraging cooperation with the EU in every field , including the single currency , of course .
The costs , and not just for the EU budget , may become very high if this strategy does not work .
Preparations for enlargement are a dynamic process and require a dynamic approach .
So let us have done with all this waiting and seeing , let us get on with enlargement , since timing too will determine the final bill .
What we should really be talking about is not the funding of enlargement , but the cost of accession .
Mr President , I should like to begin by complimenting the rapporteur on the work he has undertaken .
It certainly cannot have been easy to produce such a committed report at the present time , and we are seeing now what differences of opinion such a report from the Committee on Budgets can provoke .
One thing is clear : what the Committee on Budgets has presented us with is no diplomatic treatise .
We do not yet know , of course , when or which country , of what size , and with what budgetary requirements , will join the Union , but once we do know all that , there will probably be no need for long reports from Parliament , because everything will already have been decided .
We wish to make one thing clear : Parliament , including its Committee on Budgets , is committed to and in favour of this enlargement , and we do not wish to send out the wrong signals .
But we also owe it to our electorates - and that also means the taxpayers - to try to place this enlargement debate on a rather firmer footing , not least from a budgetary point of view .
Surely we cannot go on allowing leading EU politicians - including the German Chancellor and the French President - to speak casually in Warsaw of the year 2000 as an accession date for Poland .
We all know that this cannot be .
Even the Members opposite know that it will not be the case , leaving aside altogether the fact that these governments are often the very ones which advocate a completely contrary budgetary policy .
It is here that the principal task of this report by the Committee on Budgets lies .
It must be made clear that it will only be possible to enlarge the European Union after a profound and radical reform of the structural policies and the CAP .
For this reason , it is relatively immaterial whether we assess the costs of enlargement rather cautiously - as does the Commission - or as a continuation of existing per capita transfers .
To give an example from the structural policies : the Commission maintains that the additional costs could be around ECU 9 billion annually .
If the existing per capita transfers in favour of the poorest states of the Union are continued , that means additional costs of ECU 26 bn just to incorporate the four Visegrad states .
But things will happen , even if we do nothing .
For example , enlargement to incorporate the four Visegrad countries would reduce the average per capita income in the Union by around 7 % , which would mean that several of the present Objective 1 regions would no longer qualify .

It was not our aim to draw up a second Oostlander report .
As MEPs , we have been confronted on several occasions recently with the problem of how to reconcile , in the minds of our voters , the grand declarations issued at summit meetings of the Heads of Government with the reality of day-to-day politics .
I believe that Mr Christodoulou 's efforts constitute a serious step in this direction , and we must press on along that road .
Mr President , I must begin by congratulating Mr Christodoulou on a report that has struck the right balance between the different elements under consideration in respect of the accession of the next Member States .
The greatest enthusiasm has been aroused in relation to the accession of countries whose joining the European Union , only just over eight years ago , would have been nothing more than a dream which is now being made true thanks to their progress down the road to democracy .
But in their interest and in the interest of the Community as a whole , certain basic measures based on realism must be taken in various areas .
One of those areas is agricultural policy , which has to be adapted to a more efficient market , otherwise the prices would be far too high for consumers in those countries and place an unbearable weight on the Union 's budget .
We should not be ' bowled over ' by optimistic estimates but should be realistic and not ask for the current CAP to be applied as the budgetary amounts would be incompatible .
The budget has to be prepared , fundamentally , so that we can support the structural policies needed to adapt the economies of the candidate countries to a more open and far more demanding market .
On the other hand , unless we want to compromise the integration process itself , we must maintain and even strengthen the structural policies in the existing Member States .
It is not because we would be lowering the Union average that many regions in these countries would cease to need this type of support .
A strong Europe is vital for the economies of the candidates to accession , creating new demand and earmarking investment resources .
Finally , as I emphasised in the report I drafted for the Committee on Budgets , the accession of the current candidate countries makes its all the more urgent to introduce measures in the budgetary field , especially concerning size and revenue .
Since the agricultural policy cannot be changed from one moment to the next ( in any case considerable resources would be needed for its adaptation ) , since there must be a new strengthening of the structural policies , other expenditure being far less significant and to a large extent not leaving any room for cuts , it does not seem to us to be possible to integrate new members without increasing the Union budget in percentage terms ( in my view ) , above the scanty 1.27 % planned for 1999 , or otherwise , given the figures , we would be calling into question the ' seriousness ' of expressions of the desire to accept new member states .
In any case we cannot accept a situation where encouraging consumption continues to be the main way of boosting the Community 's own resources .
It would be better , not to say crucial to boost the resources directly , in accordance with the ability of the citizens to contribute , so as to identify them more closely with the integration process as they are becoming more demanding in respect of controlling the use of resources .
Furthermore , we cannot continue to accept a situation of regressiveness , made worse still by new Member States , in which the poorer European Parliament citizens pay the highest amounts per capita .
This is an unacceptable situation domestically and cannot be allowed to continue in a Europe that claims to treat all its citizens fairly and to encourage their participation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Christodoulou has drawn on various sources in producing his very interesting report , as he has said himself , but it cannot be regarded as a conclusive contribution to the debate on enlargement .
In fact , even though all of us in this House are convinced of the inevitability of enlargement , I for my part am not sure that the rapporteur has the same view of adequate funding as do the contributors .
I would point out especially that the strategy of reducing CAP appropriations is a short-term one which disregards the fact that the CAP is a mechanism of the market economy , which has budgetary relevance only for the budget of the European Union .
That is why I agree with those who commented yesterday that a few more weeks would have enabled us to consider some alternative hypotheses .
I believe , in fact , that taking account of all the consequences of the transition to the single currency - which will require a costly levelling-out of the differences between the ins and the pre-ins - will have a significant impact on Community resources .
However , there is no reason to think today that , after the year 2000 , it will be possible to exceed the ceiling of 1.27 % of GDP , as currently laid down in the Treaties .
What is more , I think that - in the extremely sensitive period between 1999 and 2002 , when the energies of the Fifteen will be taken up for the most part by the transition from the virtual euro to the euro in our pockets - the rapporteur 's call for a review of the own resources system , to be undertaken by the IGC , is unlikely to be met .
I personally cannot imagine that the IGC , which is having to address itself to a multitude of increasingly urgent matters , will be able to examine such a vast subject .
That does not detract from the value of the work done by the rapporteur , I repeat , but the UPE Group is sceptical - to say the least - as regards the glaring discrepancy between this and the Member States ' budgetary constraints .
Mr President , the debate so far already indicates that we are just in time with this interim report .
Of course the question of enlargement is a political choice and the Liberal and Democratic Group has always supported it .
But , at the same time , it is also clear that words must be matched by deeds .
That is the central significance of a debate on this report at this particular moment .
There is no denying that the coming enlargement has fundamental implications , both institutional and financial , for the very essence of the European Union .
These changes are of a greater magnitude than what we have experienced so far .
This time it will not do to concentrate simply on the overall political objective , however desirable it might be .
It is for that reason that the nitty gritty - and sometimes it is said that these are technical questions - should be discussed .
As the rapporteur , Mr Christodoulou , indicates , we must have an accurate picture of what this entails in reality in order to determine the best strategy to follow to achieve these objectives .
The unknowns are even greater this time and , therefore , we must be as well prepared as possible .
It will not be possible to have an accurate and complete picture of the implications , but we must keep them in mind every step of the way .
That is the underlying motive of the amendments which my group has tabled .
We wish Mr Christodoulou 's resolution to highlight the implications of the fundamental choices which the Union is making in order to give a clearer picture of exactly what is at stake and what needs to be done in concrete terms to achieve the coming enlargement .
There are three essential points which my colleagues and I would wish to make in this regard and they are reflected in the amendments .
This time the deepening of the Union will have to precede the actual enlargement .
Only then will the candidates have an accurate idea of the Union they are joining .
It is not possible , as the whole IGC business shows , to readjust the integration process once the deed is done .
Secondly , there is the question of financial implications .
Either Member States increase the budget and the allocations for the structural funds and the other distributive policies or our current financial solidarity will be affected .
There is no alternative .
It is a fundamental choice which must be made .
Already I can hear from colleagues on the right and on the left that very different signals are being given in this respect .
Thirdly , the enlargement has implications for the PHARE programme which will need to undergo a rationalization of its objectives .
There are some very important points made about this in the Christodoulou report .
If this is to become an ever-more efficient tool at the disposal of the candidate countries - Mr Wiersma made this point very clearly - we must do a great deal at this stage and not wait until the deed has been done .
Mr President , the complexity and trickiness of this matter call for serious reflection .
We therefore welcome in specific respect of funding enlargement the exhaustive listing of problem areas and the care taken in finding solutions .
In particular , I should emphasize in this context the need , referred to , for considerable transition periods - and even the idea mooted in one report for a longer pre-accession period - or the considerations ( not yet finalised ) put forward about areas as controversial as agriculture and structural activities , although we distance ourselves from the approaches suggested in this area on the need to reform the CAP .
We think it vital and unquestionable , on this score , that new objectives really need new resources and new means of obtaining those resources .
Another obvious question is whether the European Parliament is not able to make a serious and final quantification of the financial costs of enlargement . It would be desirable , despite the fact that we do not yet know in what conditions it will take place , if we tried to do so right now .
Another aspect , which the report does not deal with , is this : the analysis of the financial costs of enlargement should be coupled or even preceded in the various options by an analysis of the overall effects on the economic and social fronts , for the Union as a whole , or for each of the Member States , as well as for the applicant countries .
The financial question is important but it is not the only or most important factor .
Finally I should like to mention our disagreement with the report in relation to two specific aspects : the close link it establishes between enlargement and EMU - when we know full well that even the current Member States are not adopting it , because they do not want to or because they cannot - and the requirement for the applicant countries to adopt ultra-liberal economic and social models , particularly shocking given that the report does not mention social issues once .
As for these other aspects we shall present some amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , only when we are sitting beside our Polish , Hungarian , Czech , Slovak , Estonian and perhaps other Eastern European colleagues in this House in the year 2009 , 20 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall , racking our brains with them about Europe and the world , only then will the cold war really be over , only then will the peaceful unification and restructuring of Europe really have been achieved .
Then we shall look back together to our discussion of the Christodoulou report in 1996 , and even 15 years on we shall judge it as being far-sighted and realistic .
The report is far-sighted because it resolutely sets its sights beyond the end of the millennium , and leaves no doubt that enlargement of the European Union will take place and will need to be financed .
It is realistic in that it describes in no uncertain terms the extent of the changes required both of the applicant states and of the present Member States .
It also shows that the established patterns of interests in the old Union will be dissolved and re-formed in the context of priorities affecting the whole of Europe .
It is therefore a question here not of a new savings scheme for Europe - or rather Eastern Europe - but of introducing the citizens of Europe to a new situation , to the novel and crucial idea of an institutional order based on peace , and to ways of becoming actively involved in it .
Consequently , greater democratic participation is just as much a part of this process as the review of transfer payments .
In order to speed up enlargement to the east , while at the same time taking our responsibilities in the third world more seriously , the funds for structural and agricultural transfers will be reduced by a few billion ECU and will therefore need to be better targeted .
The expiry of the Cohesion Fund at the turn of the millennium is another part of this equation .
Enlargement to the east can be financed ; not to take the risk would cost us more dearly .
To tackle it as steadfastly and expeditiously as possible will bring incalculable benefits for all concerned .
Mr President , as I had the opportunity of saying yesterday , when I called for the Christodoulou report to be withdrawn from the agenda , it seems to me that the timing of this report is inappropriate .
It is , in fact , too soon to assess the cost of enlarging the European Union to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , because a process of dynamic change is under way .
What is more , the rapporteur himself tells us that the data available to him do not permit any firm conclusions .
Moreover , the fact that only the financial consequences of enlargement are being examined here today could well give the countries concerned a negative impression of the Union .
The EU might appear to be concerned solely with budgetary and accounting matters and , ultimately , to be ill disposed towards the arrival of newcomers .
It would have been preferable to table this report in the context of a general debate on enlargement , exploring all the political and financial aspects at the same time .
A more balanced overview would have emerged , and the political message to the CCEE would have been more positive and encouraging .
We shall be voting in favour of the amendments seeking to supplement the report by giving it a more political , more positive slant , and we shall naturally withhold our vote if the main amendments are rejected .
Mr President , there is no doubt that , aside from being an economic issue - which it is and a major economic issue at that - enlargement of the Union is fundamentally a political matter and indeed the motion for a resolution before us calls upon the Commission to prepare a detailed study on the future reform of the CAP and the Structural Funds so as to provide a reliable basis for any decision on enlargement .
To put it another way : the political aspect of enlargement takes priority over its economic consequences for the agricultural sector and management of the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
The impact of enlargement to take in twelve new Member States has to be considered in all its aspects , including changes to a range of policies which could imply serious risks for the Union and lead it to take on a different character .
Budgetary assessments may be made as forecasts of what may happen but they will be valid only if we know what the policy for the various sectors is to be or if we are able to start out - as stated in the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy - from specific alternative political scenarios .
In point of fact , as far as the future of the Union is concerned , the possibilities for enlargement will be influenced not by the budgetary problems but by the institutional difficulties . Those difficulties relate to the composition of the different institutions , the nature of the decision-making process within the Council , the powers of the Commission and the supervisory powers of this House .
Unless those issues are resolved , it will not be possible to have the kind of enlargement that guarantees the continuity of the Union ; and unless a constitutional state and full democracy are established in all of the CCEEs the political priority of enlargement will be left jeopardized .
According to what is , to say the least , a charitable estimate , the cost of this enlargement will be in the region of ECU 3 bn per annum .
As far as agriculture - a sector of prime importance and not just for the CCEEs - is concerned , enlargement would require a series of additional adjustment costs in excess of ECU 12 , 020 million per annum , the equivalent of ECU 120 , 200 million between the year 2000 and 2010 , not to mention the resources needed to adapt and modernize production and , in the best-case scenario , improve existing infrastructures .
And so , already problematic as applied to fifteen countries , in line with the principles of subsidiarity , financial solidarity , Community preference and market unity , the CAP will be substantially weakened as a result of enlargement , and the effect of this will not be on the Community agricultural sector alone , it will have negative implications for agricultural workers in the CCEEs who are therefore likely to migrate to the more profitable agricultural sector .
Only once the Union has undergone radical reform - and this is something that cannot be left to the Intergovernmental Conference but will depend on the real political will for a Union - will it be possible for the CCEEs to accede to the Union with sufficient likelihood of that accession being a success for both sides .
Political Union is the only valid basis for discussing enlargement : we have first to lay down the ground rules for this , and it involves reforming the institutional structure and redistributing responsibilities - only thereafter will we be able to talk in terms of enlargement and financing that process .
Haste is never a good thing .
If irreparable damage to the nature and progress of the Union is to be avoided , we have to hope that the IGC concludes its work by giving new impetus to the achievement of political union ; if that does not happen , we shall have to resign ourselves to extending the association agreements .
That will be the lesser evil .
The report by the Committee on Budgets seems precipitate just because it does not place the accent on the priority need to bring about political union .
I have to say that the majority of previous speakers stressed the need for political union prior to enlargement , the need then for political union to take priority over economic union itself . The implication is therefore that we need to ascertain whether political union - once established - is able to function properly before embarking upon any kind of enlargement .
In point of fact , unless political union is established and consolidated , enlargement will mean for our peoples - the people of the current fifteen Member States of the Union - an increase in unemployment and poverty and will at the same time condemn the CCEEs to greater poverty and make it impossible for them actually to enter the Union .
We are faced with a choice : political union or a free trade zone .
We , for our part , are for political union .
Mr President , apart from congratulating the rapporteur , I would like , if you will allow me , to begin with a comment unconnected with the budget .
I would like to stress that those of us who lived for forty years under a Fascist dictatorship , who still recall that the first Spanish application to join the European Economic Community in 1962 was rejected because the required democratic conditions were not met , and who therefore know what it is to live unfree and in isolation , are , I believe , particularly well qualified to understand the aspirations of our Eastern European neighbours .
I would also like to say , on behalf of Spanish socialists , that , just as we unhesitatingly supported German unification at the time , so shall we also be ready to support European union without hesitation when the time comes .
Only those who rule themselves out should be left outside .
Mr President , I am basically in agreement with Mr Christodoulou 's report and I would like to make a few comments .
In the first place it is not premature .
It would be if , as some here mistakenly suppose , it were an accounting report .
What we are doing here is to set out the financial problems of the future , and this is not premature because the questions will be highly complex .
Secondly , the Union cannot allow itself the luxury of failing to expand , and will have to make allowance in its costs for those of non-enlargement , if we want to have a true balance .
Third , enlargement to include the countries of central and eastern Europe is important and advantageous to the Union 's citizens , its workers , its companies , to those of the candidate countries and even , I would venture to say , to those of other countries , but it will not be cost-free .
In my view it is ridiculous to think that a dozen countries with a per capita income of less than half the present Community average can be incorporated on the basis of 1.27 % of gross domestic product of a Community whose per capita GDP will be reduced by the actual enlargement process .
So I believe that we shall have to consider new needs here .
Mr President , in conclusion I would like to add that we should perhaps consider the need to include in our financial perspective a specific category for enlargement .
Only in this way can we , I believe , give proper consideration to all aspects , from monetary union to structural policies , including agricultural reform for all , in and outside the Community , which we must carry out at the beginning of the next century .
Mr President , I should like to begin by complimenting the rapporteur , Mr Christodoulou , on his report .
It has stimulated an open debate in this House on enlargement to the east , although I would caution against creating the impression that the cake is becoming ever smaller , and that we are already starting to fight over the best piece .
Secondly , I would urge that we avoid replacing the imminent blending of East and West - namely eastward enlargement of the European Union - with a North-South divide .
Enlargement to the east is a subject of tremendous importance for my country , since Austria borders on four potential applicant states - Hungary , Slovakia , the Czech Republic and Slovenia - which , together with Poland , will be among the first to accede , in all likelihood .
The iron curtain , the fault-line which divided Europe , used to run along these borders .
In Austria , we regard enlargement to the east as an opportunity to mend this fault and complete the unification of Europe , a process in which politics is still lagging behind the economic reality .
Austria 's economic ties with Central Europe are already extensive : 13 % of our exports go to this region , a third of all investments have been made there , and 56 000 jobs have resulted from these links with the east .
Naturally , the balance sheet has both a credit and a debit side .
Company relocations to the east , where workers earn a tenth of our wages , and the pressure from the latter to move to the high-wage countries , mean that many of our citizens see enlargement to the east as a nightmare .
For this reason , unlike the rapporteur , Mr Christodoulou , I am in favour of phased integration , with exemptions and long transitional periods , especially in respect of the free movement of persons .
The second major problem is agriculture .
If all the Central European countries were to accede at the same time - which in fact is most unlikely - Europe 's utilized agricultural area would increase by 55 % .
I am therefore in favour of a reform of the CAP , but would warn against an over-hasty alignment of farm prices to Western market levels .
Our farmers could not cope with that .
Central Europe 's economic structures must be supported under the PHARE programme , the funding for which should be increased .
As an Austrian , I believe that enlargement to the east must be linked to conditions such as the abandonment of nuclear energy by Central Europe in the long term ; until that is possible , the nuclear power stations there must be made safe and brought up to our environmental standards .
It would cost ÖS 702 billion for the CCEE to comply with the EU water directive alone .
But the raising of environmental standards helps to promote fair competition for everyone .
Last but not least , respect for human rights and democracy must be ensured in all these countries , since the EU is after all a community based on shared values .
All of this has its price .
I would call upon the House to see this price as an investment in the secure future of Europe .
Mr President , when we debate enlargement of the EU , we should bear in mind that the principal objective of enlargement is to reinforce peace and security in Europe .
Accordingly , increased cooperation with Russia is also an element in it .
To us Finns , the development of cooperation both in the Baltic region and in the Barents Sea region of the Arctic is particularly important .
In itself this report is thorough and highly meritorious , but it has the defect that it does not devote sufficient attention to the economic and social impact of enlargement , as Mr Miranda has said here .
With regard to the capacity of the present Member States to fund enlargement , employment is the decisive factor .
Similarly , attention should be devoted to unemployment in the applicant countries , which in the case of a number of them is catastrophic .
Strict economic discipline and compliance with the EMU conditions will have a further impact on the applicant countries ' ability to improve employment and social security .
Mr President , the report we are considering is an interim one .
I hope that in future these social aspects will be stressed more .
Mr President , what is our European Union ?
It must be the greatest international experiment in democracy the world has ever seen .
It is also a reaction to Europe 's centuries of bloody wars .
As a child of the war and the longest-serving Member of this Parliament I have seen three enlargements .
It is very moving to hear the way Mr Colom i Naval and Mrs Stenzel have spoken .
Greece , Spain , Portugal , Sweden , Austria and Finland : each enlargement has enriched this House and enhanced the lives of all on our continent .
We have seen the Berlin Wall tumble down , we have seen the Iron Curtain swept aside .
And the great question before us now is the one Mr Christodoulou has posed : are we going to be able to extend our umbrella over these new applicant countries ?
There are different views , of course . Germany - the best citizen , perhaps , of our Community - wants deeper and wider ; the UK , perhaps the worst Member State , wants wider but not deeper ; France wants deeper but not wider .
So there are different views here .
Mr Christodoulou has not been simplistic ; he has spelled out the financial difficulties .
But the main thing is : the welcome is on the record .
With this report and , I hope , with this vote , we say : ' we want you to join us ' .
Mr President , the report before us is predicated on the dogma that the European Union must be enlarged , whatever the consequences in either financial or human terms .
Well , these are considerable , because it is a matter of the coexistence , within the same economic and administrative entity , of nations and peoples whose traditions , industrial standards and levels of development are radically different .
Starting from that premise , and in an effort to offset by budgetary means the economic and social consequences of enlargement , the report recommends a rise of at least 30 % in expenditure under the Structural Funds .
It concludes that the Union 's own resources , in other words the revenue raised from taxpayers , must be increased .
This report therefore appears to make three leaps forward : the first is enlargement , without realizing that unfettered competition between different economies is disruptive and could well have intolerable social and human repercussions , both for the 15 existing Member States and for the countries joining the European Union .
The report also concludes that the Union 's own resources should be increased , in other words the revenue raised from taxpayers , as if this were infinite .
It therefore makes a leap forward in terms of expenditure , and similarly in terms of taxation , even though excessive taxation is becoming less and less acceptable .
Take care that the headlong rush to create a federalist utopia does not unleash the anger of the people and a taxpayers ' revolt .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think this report makes it very clear that enlargement to the east raises the question not of whether , but only how and when .
A high degree of sincerity is required in the conduct of this debate .
Mrs Lalumière , I should be grateful if you would listen to me .
Unfortunately , Mrs Stenzel has already left the Chamber .
A high degree of sincerity is required .
This debate on enlargement to the east is being conducted with more insincerity than hardly any other , however , and that applies both here in the House and outside it , and in the Member States .
As has already been pointed out , some people are using this debate to consider the question of the future development of the European Union .
Of these , some wish for a deepening of the Union , whereas others hope to avoid any deepening ; and enlargement to the east has become a bargaining counter among them .
Others are seeking to place the European Union in jeopardy , basing it on the outdated policies of the past which have long since outlived their usefulness in the existing EU , namely the CAP and the present structural policies .
Since these people either do , or do not , wish to change these policies , they come up with arguments for or against change .
Thirdly , there are those untrustworthy souls who tell their citizens back at home : we support enlargement to the east , we wish for policies at Community level , but someone else should pay for them !
The Union should develop into a savings bank , into which everyone should pay , hoping if at all possible to get more back than they initially paid in !
This insincerity must come to an end , and the Christodoulou report is of some help in this respect , although I willingly admit that it was difficult in our committee too to bring sincerity to the fore .
But it does help to shed clear light on one thing : either we are strong enough as a Community to devise new policies and thus to modify the existing ones , or we are not .
If not , then enlargement to the east will still take place , but it will be far more costly , and the existing Member States will be bled dry , since they will have to foot the bill !
Mr President , I am very grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Christodoulou , for this report .
It is a fact that any country in Central or Eastern Europe which wishes to do so may become a member of the European Union , as we have agreed here in the House .
Moreover , it is a fact that ten applications for membership have so far been received from these countries .
It is also a fact that the levels of development of the ten candidates , in relation to the conditions for membership , are very diverse , so that their accession in one group is most unlikely .
It is also a fact that the accession of Central and Eastern European countries would end the division of Europe and change the face of the Union altogether .
Enlargement is an opportunity and a challenge for the Union , but also for the applicant states .
The Christodoulou report is a parliamentary own-initiative report , which seeks to explain the financial consequences of EU enlargement .
At the present time it can only attempt to do this , and that is why it is an interim report .
The debate and discussion on this report have reflected the breadth of opinion on the matter .
This report should serve as a warning to all - including the Union - as regards the likely effects of sticking rigidly to the present structural and agricultural policies , for example .
But it should also show the applicant states what efforts we are expecting of them on their journey towards membership of the European Union .
No one should see this report as a means of impeding or preventing the accession of new Member States .
But nor should anyone see it as a means of preserving the status quo for ever more .
Rather , this report should signal that enlargement is certain to go ahead .
We must now seek the ways and means of making it happen - perhaps I should already say in conjunction with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
In my view , it is in no one 's interest to belong to a European Union which has no future .
It is now up to us as MEPs to address ourselves to this future , and to seek ways ahead for an enlarged European Union .
The interim report is an attempt to do just that , no more and no less !
Mr President , allow me to congratulate Mr Christodoulou on having drawn up an exhaustive and objective catalogue of the economic and financial difficulties which will flow from the enlargement of the European Union to include , in particular , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
I am one of those who believe that the political will to bring together the peoples of Europe in a common home must prevail whatever the cost - and the report in no way takes issue with that idea .
To enlarge Europe whilst consolidating its foundations : what a wonderful and ambitious plan to put to the young people of Europe today .
It is a realistic plan , the implementation of which requires two conditions : the will to see it through , and common sense in carrying it out .
The Europe we wish to see will be economically viable only if we have the courage and strength to ensure its self-sufficiency and - at long last - to impose protectionist measures on non-European countries .
That is common sense .
In plain language , the future of the Slovak people is of more concern to us than the profits of American trusts or the state of health of large companies in the Far East .
Mr President , today 's debate on the costs of enlargement is in itself a positive signal , indicating that Parliament is prepared to address itself to the difficult issue of the costs of enlargement , and I am very grateful to the rapporteur for his efforts .
As to whether or not it was wise to embark on this difficult matter of the financing before sufficiently reliable data exist for an estimate of the costs , that is open to question .
Both this own-initiative report from the Committee on Budgets and the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which is to be debated next and is closely connected with this one , raise more questions than they answer .
There is a danger of this being interpreted as a negative attitude on the part of the House , so one thing must be stated clearly and explicitly , and I wish to do so here and now in no uncertain terms on behalf of my group : we hope to see a new order in Europe , whereby the whole of the continent will develop together in a community of interests , and we wish this to happen as soon and as effectively as possible .
Answers to the outstanding questions will be found , in conjunction - I hope - with the associated countries .
There are already many different estimates of the costs of enlargement .
Sceptics always put forward high estimates and supporters low ones ; so far , I have seen no estimates of the costs of non-enlargement .
The Christodoulou report tends towards the former , in my view : for example , it assumes that ten countries could accede simultaneously .
That is so unrealistic as to have only two possible explanations : either it is an attempt to influence the debate in a negative way , or it reveals a lack of real knowledge about what is at stake .
The costs cannot be estimated with any degree of certainty until it has been established which countries are to accede to the Union , in what order , and at what point in time .
Economic development in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is another factor .
Here I would urge a study of the trade statistics and economic data .
As for enlargement itself : the accessions will be phased , so let us not get carried away by our misgivings !
That would be poor form on the part of the only directly elected international parliament .
Economic development in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe will create more financial room for manoeuvre .
For us , for the European Parliament , no task should be of greater importance or interest - after the cold war and the end of the confrontation between power blocs - than to help make the twenty-first century a European century in the best sense of the word .
Mr President , the European Union has set itself two major political and economic objectives for the coming decade : firstly to create the economic and monetary union , and secondly to prepare for and accomplish its enlargement .
Both these goals are associated with a massive financial outlay by the Member States .
The measures currently being taken in the individual countries with a view to meeting the Maastricht criteria on time are already lowering the social standards of large sections of the population .
But they are also causing many citizens to feel increasingly unenthusiastic about the European Union and , unfortunately , about the European ideal .
In my opinion this report , which is a very well-balanced one , is nevertheless based on a fallacy , namely that the deepening and the enlargement of the Union can - or even must - take place simultaneously .
On the contrary , it would seem that the completion of monetary union will make enlargement to the east impracticable for many years to come .
Some Member States are simply not able to take on even more financial burdens .
The mere fact that the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , with some 106 million inhabitants , will represent 29 % of the population , whereas their GDP amounts to only 4 % of the GDP of the 15 EU countries , shows what unimaginable efforts will be required .
The Union 's fundamental aim , enlargement , is very welcome for economic and political reasons .
But everything possible must be done to carry out all the necessary adjustments and reforms in good time , both in the Member States and in the applicant countries , and particular attention must be paid to what is tolerable from a social point of view .
As regards the enlargement strategy , it is vital to opt for a flexible approach , given the widely differing levels of development .
A transitional phase must be planned for each country , in accordance with its needs and circumstances .
Mr President , enlargement gives us a unique opportunity to unite Europe . It is an opportunity to safeguard peace and security in our part of the world , and also a good opportunity to enrich the European Union with new ideas .
But enlargement will not happen overnight .
Applicant countries must develop into democratic constitutional states with functioning market economies . The EU itself must also change its current form .
As is well known , methods of working are currently being overhauled by the Intergovernmental Conference but it is also important that the question of the financial effects of enlargement are raised for debate .
There is no point in sticking one 's head in the sand . What is required is an honest account of what enlargement will cost .
The report from Christodoulou is just one stage in a wider debate and it raises the financial questions for discussion .
This has to be a good thing .
One important conclusion , which was pointed out in the report , is that the EU 's agricultural policy must be reformed .
Already , this accounts for 50 % of the EU budget .
If there is no change , this proportion will increase greatly in an enlarged EU .
This is not compatible with the general costs brought by enlargement nor with the requirements which we need to fulfil in the EU Union .
Regardless of enlargement , there are still fundamental reasons for reforming the EU agricultural policy : it costs too much and involves too much bureaucracy .
The work on adjusting agricultural policy must , therefore , be intensified , not only to facilitate enlargement to the East but also to improve the current EU cooperation .
Mr President , the enlargement of the Union to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe must be one of our priority objectives for the sake of solidarity and the stability of Europe .
The applicant countries will , of course , have to fulfil certain minimum political and socio-economic requirements and must have developed into proper democracies and constitutional states . But we should not suggest , as the Christodoulou report does , that the date of accession should be postponed until these countries no longer need transitional periods or any special provisions .
There is no doubt that the enlargement of the Union will involve considerable costs .
Take agriculture : irrespective of enlargement , this sector is going to have to meet further environmental and quality requirements over the next few years and must prepare for the next WTO trade round .
But it is too easy to suggest that financial support for agriculture should now be drastically scaled down and prices reduced to the international level , as the report proposes .
Structural policy is the other major cost factor , and this too will require some reform , irrespective of enlargement .
The underspending of the funding available indicates that the Union reached the limit of its absorption capacity long ago .
We need to get away from the situation where more than 50 % of the Union 's population comes under one or other of the Structural Fund objectives .
The Structural Funds should only be used if they are effective , and only for genuine problem areas such as , in the near future , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Christodoulou on the exceptional work he presented .
On the opportunity of this debate , I want to make a number of general observations .
Enlargement is perhaps the most important challenge the European Union has faced since the beginning of the effort to build a united Europe .
If Europe really wants to play an international role and be a substantial political power , it must address this challenge and opportunity .
Enlargement to include the new candidate countries should not lead simply to a large market , but should aim to integrate the new countries and improve their standard of living , modernize their structures and democratize their political system , so that they can approach the economic and social cohesion that is essential .
Enlargement should involve the citizens .
It involves costs , and those costs must be shared fairly .
It is almost certain that economically strong countries will secure greater benefits than weaker ones whose economies are likely to suffer from the competition engendered by the new members .
The appropriate studies and estimates will have to be carried out . There is no doubt that both the CAP and the structural policies need rationalization and review .
The aim , however , should be to modernize them and not to abolish them .
We must all grasp the fact that if we want enlargement to take place , the European Union 's budget will have to be increased .
Enlargement has constitutional consequences .
The necessary changes must take place at the IGC to avoid undermining the Union 's effectiveness and enable it to go deeper .
Enlargement , negotiations for which must begin immediately after the end of the IGC , is of equal concern to the countries of Eastern Europe , including the Balkan countries , and those in the Mediterranean area , such as Cyprus .
There is an internal logic and cohesion to the European Union 's enlargement .
Enlargement towards the East and the South .
Mr President , I agree with those who say that this is one of the biggest peacetime exercises in European history .
That is why it must be approached with extreme seriousness .
I congratulate Mr Christodoulou on his report , which presents a serious , in-depth analysis of the problems .
I wish to make five comments on the debate .
Firstly , we must always bear in mind that the successful conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference is a precondition for enlargement .
The Central and Eastern European countries do not want to join a Union which is substantially weaker than it is today .
So a successful conclusion is a precondition .
If the member states are unable to deliver that , they will not be able to meet the huge challenge of enlargement .
Secondly , it is extremely important that every applicant country should be judged on its own merits , without any prejudices .
That is why the Commission will do its best to judge each applicant country on the basis of the political and economic conditions it is able to fulfil and its ability to take over the acquis communautaire concerning the administrative and judicial systems needed for the operation of the internal market .
These opinions will be given after the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference next autumn .
Thirdly , the Commission is preparing a document - also for next autumn - on the impact of enlargement on all Community policies .
As many people have said here today , the impact of enlargement on agricultural and structural policies is important .
Fourthly , next autumn the Commission has promised the first communication on the financial framework after 2000 , including enlargement .
In agricultural policy , the key point is that prices in the new countries will go up , so farming income will increase .
So there is no real justification for compensation .
But , at the same time , if we go forward with CAP reform , there may be increased requirements for compensation in the West .
We can say that we can solve the problem for the transition period but we also need a solution after the transition period so there is one coherent agricultural policy .
It is a very heavy challenge .
For the structural funds : if , as it seems , there is no great enthusiasm for increasing the old resource ceiling - I have met hardly anyone outside this House who is in favour of it - we must try simulations of enlargement with 1.27 % of GDP which means 0.46 % for structural funds .
This means that growth will provide new resources but that is not sufficient to cover everything .
So we need adjustments among the present Member States .
It will not be easy .
But , next autumn , we will present a communication on this whole financial framework , so Parliament will be able to study the issues on the basis of three Commission documents .
Finally , enlargement will be an extremely difficult exercise but , if certain conditions are fulfilled , perhaps not impossible in budgetary terms .
But if the IGC is not a success and the Union is not deepened , it will not be possible .
That is why we must put strong pressure on the IGC to achieve deepening of the Union and more efficient decision-taking .
We are on a very narrow path in this discussion .
On the one hand we must encourage all these ten countries in their efforts to strengthen democracy , to establish a market economy and to accept Community legislation .
But , at the same time , we should not give false promises that it will be easy : it is a heavy , tough undertaking .
We must encourage them to go forward , because successful enlargement will substantially strengthen peace and security in Europe and has huge economic potential .
But let us not think we can do it overnight .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
EU / associated countries relations in agricultural field
The next item is the report ( A4-0384 / 96 ) by Mr Rehder , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the Commission study on alternative strategies for the development of relations in the field of agriculture between the EU and the associated countries with a view to future accession of these countries ( Agricultural Strategy Paper ) ( CSE ( 95 ) 0607 - C4-0023 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the House should not panic , but an important partner in the discussion is missing , namely the Commissioner responsible .
I would ask for the Commissioner to be present , otherwise our words will all be in vain .
I shall continue when he has arrived .
He is just coming , I am told .
Let us wait a moment for the Commissioner , who is apparently just arriving .
Mr President , I shall not repeat the well-known dictum about lateness and history , so as not to take up any more of the House 's time , and I think that Commissioner Fischler is with us in spirit .
Ladies and gentlemen , discussion of the future of rural areas and the continuation of agricultural reform is not only important in terms of the decision to incorporate the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
It is also long overdue , because the ship of EU farm policy , still reasonably seaworthy after 1992 , has since become a decaying hulk in need of repair , which is placing the whole European crew in growing danger and has brought only a small percentage of those working in rural areas to a shore where they can make a living .
The fact is that 80 % of our farmers are having to watch , with increasing bitterness , as the biggest profits are routinely made by wholesalers , exporters , warehouse owners and , last but not least , crooks who obtain subsidies by fraud . They are also seeing the further desertification of many parts of the countryside , and the slow but steady death of rural areas - which account for 80 % of Europe 's surface - that have been under cultivation for hundreds of years .
Anyone who now maintains that a thorough reform should be postponed , and claims that only very general guidelines for the reform are needed , is either burying his head in the sand , so as to ignore the daily reports of scandals and consumer protests , or is guilty of accepting that the reform affects only the 20 % of farmers who take the biggest slice of the subsidy cake .
In future , our rural policy must be better targeted , so that European taxpayers ' money supports not a policy for millionaires , but a policy for millions of people in rural areas who have a right to a social and democratic policy which affords them a decent livelihood .
The manifestos demanded by some fail to do justice to the enormity of the problems , and in this field of European policy - as in others - our fellow citizens expect fewer words and more deeds .
Anyone who claims that the only issue at present is the context for enlargement to the east is either simply refusing to understand that general reform of the Union is one of the main prerequisites for the integration of these countries , or is quietly counting on a postponement of agricultural reform in the EU , so as to delay this issue until kingdom come .
We cannot sell the decaying hulk of the CAP to our partners in the applicant countries as a vessel for our common future .
Commissioner Fischler , you are most welcome .
I was just saying that you were with us in spirit , and I shall now continue .
Our partners in the applicant countries must be told quite frankly , and at an early stage , that because of our bad experiences in the past we are counting on an integrated policy for all rural areas in future , and that this is the only model which can hold good for Eastern Europe as well .
Farm policy will need to be incorporated into a regionally focused , well-targeted structural , environmental and social policy , not imposed by a remote bureaucracy but involving those concerned at all levels .
Some irritation has been caused in the Union and in Eastern Europe by the presentation of cost calculations which have basically been plucked out of the air ; no one in fact knows yet what this enlargement , this integration will actually cost .
Only once the main features of a new rural policy have been established will we be able to ask what costs will be incurred .
I should also like to speak on behalf of others who are affected , and whom we have all too often treated badly .
The readiness of many people in Europe to accept a common rural policy , and to make available the necessary resources through taxation , does not depend only on the framing of a socially and environmentally sustainable policy .
The people of Europe are also demanding that animals should not be produced , consumed and - when not needed - disposed of as if they were industrial raw materials .
They also expect us to create a new policy which allows no further scope for export subsidies to be misused to torture animals by transporting them for long periods virtually around the globe .
Following the most recent scandals , thousands of people in my country came forward to sign petitions demanding an end to these shipments , and I shall now hand over to you the 3182 signatures . Please do not see this as a request , but as a clear and unmistakable demand from our citizens that the torture of animals , legalized through subsidies , must be stopped immediately .
Here too there has been enough talking : it is high time for action !
Mr President , the development of agricultural relations between the EU and the CCEEs is undoubtedly a vital issue for the Community 's future .
The Commission document on alternative strategies for these relations is , in this context , insufficient and lacks justification .
Therefore , the European Parliament should have adopted a set of coherent guidelines to reshape that document and enable decisions to be taken later on on strategies and alternatives .
Nor will that happen , however .
Unless we take the decision to send back the Rehder report to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , we run the risk of approving a set of conclusions which are contradictory and difficult to understand , which would reflect badly on the European Parliament .
This is a position which does not , of course , belittle the far-reaching and committed work done by our colleague .
It would however have been better to waste less time on one-off aspects , some of which are very personal and of little foundation , of the reform and future of the CAP , and instead we ought to have looked at the fundamental aspects on which much serious work needs to be done .
On this score , the conclusions of the REX Committee opinion , approved ( I insist ) unanimously , would have been sufficient .
On what basis is it possible to decide future strategies if we have yet to make exhaustive assessments of the effects of the 1992 CAP reform , which should have been carried out by the Commission as an obligation any way , and if certain farming sectors have not yet been reformed ?
How is it possible to opt for strategies unless we have an independent and wholehearted assessment of the economic , social , regional and sectoral consequences of the enlargements , either on the current Member States or on those countries that might join ?
How is it possible to take decisions without the minimal attempt to look at the consequences of the GATT agreements on agriculture or even trying to assessment the foreseeable developments and consequences of the next round of negotiations ?
Finally , how is it possible to take options without safeguarding fundamental principles , those of financial solidarity , Community preference and , last but not least , giving implicit and passive cover to the possible dismantling and re-nationalization of the costs of the Common Agricultural Policy ?

It does not appear to me that Mr Rehder 's report comes to no very clear conclusions : I think it goes a long way to developing the new proposals contained in the strategy paper approved by the Commission in December 1995 , in Madrid , and makes them more complete .
I believe it will be very important to have this support from the House because there is a tendency to raise again and again , in a dramatic and exaggerated way , the problem of the costs of enlargement .
I believe that argument to be misleading .
It is rather irresponsible to wave today at citizens , Member States and taxpayers in the European Union , what are - in my view - estimates with no real basis on the costs of the CAP post-enlargement .
I do not believe that any of us today can realistically imagine that the CAP , as it now stands , can be extended to the CCEEs and remain unchanged .
Furthermore , I believe that Mr Rehder 's report has the merit of showing how the real needs of the countries that lay behind the Berlin Wall are not in any way in conflict with the need to strengthen immediately - and most importantly - the policy of structural rural development rather than that of the markets using the traditional system of supports and subsidies .
In the wake of the Cork Conference , I believe that we need to be resolute and courageous in going further along this path .
I am asking you for two things , Commissioner : the first is to set in place machinery for the continual monitoring of the state of agriculture in the CCEEs so that we can clearly observe the impact of the CAP on their development ; and the second is to present as rapidly as possible a detailed document on reform of the Common Agricultural Policy and stop proceeding in this disorganized and inconsistent manner and instead make a thorough assessment of the de facto situation and have a full discussion on the stage reached .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Rehder has produced a comprehensive paper on enlargement to the east , and also on the current situation in agriculture .
I am working on the assumption that the agricultural reform carried out in 1992 is valid until 1999 , and that in the meantime adjustments will be made and further discussions held .
I am not , however , assuming that farm policy will be changed overnight as a result of the Rehder report .
That would not be in keeping with your declaration in Cork , Commissioner , with which I entirely agree : that we must return to the principle of sustainability .
I shall keep on reminding you of this , since basically I was very taken by the principle of sustainability .
Anyone now wishing to modify the agricultural policy must be quite clear that three sets of demands will be awakened .
Budgetary experts are thinking that , if the CAP is modified , money will be saved ; farmers are saying that , if the CAP is modified , they wish to have higher incomes ; and consumers are calling for even cheaper food .
That is how simple it is , and that is why we need to know exactly what we want .
Consumers know what they want , and so do farmers .
But , after implementing a reformed agricultural policy for five or six years , we should begin by taking stock and seeing what has been achieved .
Since you have been kind enough to provide me with the milk price trends of recent years for which I asked you , Commissioner , I note that milk prices in the countries with strong currencies have fallen - yes , Mr Samland - and that only in the countries with weak currencies have prices risen markedly .
I do not believe that this is right in the long term , since to a certain extent farmers in strong-currency countries have higher costs than those in others .
It is in fact in countries with the highest wages , the highest taxes and the highest contributions that farmers have to manage their money most carefully .
Commissioner , you said in Cork that we are currently funding 62 Objective 1 programmes , 82 Objective 5b programmes - though not a single one in my region - 101 Leader programmes , 130 programmes under the regulation on agriculture and the environment , 36 programmes for Objective 5a measures , and numerous afforestation and early retirement programmes .
We cannot sustain this , you said at the time .
I would take the same view .
Some weeding-out is needed here , in the truest sense of the word : we must consider where the resources are going .
Your Director-General , Mr Legras , was even more explicit when he said that there are market , price and structural problems to be solved , and still a good many loose ends .
He said that farm prices and export subsidies should be reduced , without farm policy being renationalized , and that agricultural competitiveness should be improved .
My response to that is as follows : I do not think farmers want dozens of programmes .
Farmers want a basis for a secure income , which will allow for the development of sustainability .
I too believe that this must be brought about .
As the committee of inquiry has clearly shown , necessary and important processes of decision-making will run into the sand on their way through the many bodies concerned and will prove inconclusive unless responsibilities are apportioned better in the future , so that everyone knows who is responsible for what .
Take , for instance , the delays over important decisions on matters such as BSE and the transport of live animals .
I think that the partnership and cooperation between the EU , the Member States and the regions must be organized more effectively in future .
You have said as much , Commissioner , and I thank you , but I shall be even more grateful to you once you have achieved this goal .
Mr President , the first draft text submitted to the Committee on Agriculture recommended a very comprehensive review of the CAP .
The main purpose of the amendments tabled by the UPE Group is to highlight the fundamentals of the CAP , namely the guarantees provided to European farmers , taking into account the particular agricultural structures and potential of each of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , and to ensure that this enlargement does not jeopardize the present level of aid provided to the agricultural sector since the ratification of the Uruguay Round .
As you all know , France firmly supports the prospect of enlargement of the European Union , which should make it possible to build a coherent geographical entity with over 470 million inhabitants .
Agriculture will be one of the main issues at stake in this new enlargement , given the importance of this sector in the economies of the Central European countries .
It is natural that the European Parliament should take a close interest in this matter and its impact on the CAP .
However , this policy - seen by France as crucial - will develop gradually and will need to encompass a range of factors , including the accession of the CCEE .
In conclusion , these accessions do not justify a comprehensive review of the CAP , which is - and must remain - a bedrock of the European Union 's internal policies .
This is the first time that we have discussed the accession of the Eastern European countries and its implications for the agricultural sector , and I am sure it will not be the last .
I think the Rehder report contains a number of important points to be considered .
Agriculture is certainly one of the most important aspects , though the single most important aspect is surely the achievement of peace and stability in Europe .
Agriculture is one of the means of achieving this .
We know what the impact will be .
The population of the Union will increase by one third when the countries of Central and Eastern Europe join , but the area of agricultural land will increase by 55 % .
What will the implications of this be for our present agricultural policy ?
First of all , can we apply our prices policy ?
Various people have already said , and I agree with them , that this is not possible .
Prices here are almost twice as high as in Eastern Europe , and if we applied them to consumers who spend 30 to 60 % of their daily income on food there would be widespread social unrest .
So that is out of the question .
Applying our incomes policy is also not a good idea .
We have compensation for loss of earnings here in the West , but this has never happened in Eastern Europe and compensation is therefore not necessary .
I think we are gradually going to have to move closer together , and the current GATT agreements could help us in this .
So what can we do ?
We can ensure the widespread application of the third element of our present agricultural policy , the structural policy on rural areas , where the governments , cooperatives and all kinds of other groups can play their part .
Something else we can do is to provide support for every form of private initiative .
Could we not consider providing investment subsidies , interest rate subsidies or other such help straight away through the PHARE funding ?
Trade is usually in the interests of both parties , and should be encouraged as much as possible .
Mr President , while thanking Mr Rehder for the work he has done , and I am aware how much , and how many hours , this represents , it has to be said that , after the vote in committee , the resulting final document does not in our view meet the strict standards and show the responsibility required of our work .
I continue to make a distinction between Mr Rehder 's efforts and the end result of the vote in the Committee on Agriculture .
Here it seems to me that the end result does not deal with the matter in depth ; on many occasions it does not even take account of discussions in the Committee on Agriculture , and I believe that the outcome of the final report does not sufficiently refine the Commission 's report or produce a critical view of this document .
In my view this is of great importance , since the Commission 's document appears to be the chosen option , a development of the 92 reform approach .
This reform - and if the Commission claims it still has no serious studies of this matter the example of France could be used , where they certainly exist - has brought about a huge concentration of agricultural expenditure on certain kinds of herbaceous crop production , the disappearance of 10 % of farms and an increasingly reduced concentration of most aids in the hands of farmers .
I believe this to be fundamental when it comes to talking about the problems of enlargement .
But , as a strange paradox , the simplification proposed in the Commission document should not , if we add to it my Group 's critical analysis of the implementation of the 92 reform , result in the dismantling of the Common Agricultural Policy , something which is on the table and represents a great danger .
Having said this , my view is that the document should be simplified and reorganized , and that the report of the REX Committee , as presented by Mr Novo , gives simple pointers to methods of tackling these matters .
In this connection I would like to recall here that , firstly , we have to bear in mind that the countries of central and eastern Europe are not homogeneous ; secondly , that we have to analyse the impact of implementing the 92 reform of the CAP , the free trade agreements and the effects on the CCEEs , so that measures can be adopted in the preaccession period which do not distort the CCEE markets .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to point to two factors which need further thought : simplification of the CAP cannot result in renationalization , and as Mr Liikanen himself acknowledged earlier , we have to give serious consideration to possible developments in financial resources .
Mr President , the agricultural policy is not too expensive ; the money is going in the wrong direction , and into the wrong instruments .
Prices for agricultural products are not too high ; they are too low to permit the ecologically sound production of high-quality , healthy food .
We support the Rehder report - we support the whole of it .
It was cut by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Mr Funk , what matters is not to establish a new farm policy superseding the CAP , but the direction to be followed if enlargement to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is not to end in disaster .
It has quite rightly been said that our efforts should be directed not at the world market , but at the internal market and the regional markets .
Then the market will do what Mr Samland is not prepared to pay for out of public funds .
Because we cannot have both : cutting back public funding and reducing prices would be the death of rural areas .
I am in favour of bringing down subsidies where they are misguided , but in my view , consumers must be expected to pay a reasonable price for healthy food , in the context of a policy based on quality .
Mr President , the enormous differences between the Community and the applicant countries of Central and Eastern Europe will mean that lengthy transitional periods are required in the agricultural sector after accession .
It is economically important that the system of income support should be maintained for the existing Member States , without needing to be extended to producers in the applicant countries .
Increasing food prices would be socially unacceptable , given the proportion of the family budget already spent on food .
Union support should therefore focus on restructuring and modernizing the agricultural sector in these countries .
We must adopt a cautious approach on reciprocal trade , offering wider but controlled and differentiated access to the EU market , without allowing imports to cause distortions .
In the discussion on reforming the common agricultural policy , it is generally assumed that further liberalization of the agricultural market is unavoidable .
This would both meet the wishes of our partners in the WTO negotiations and facilitate the accession of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
But it must be understood that the reforms must not undermine the coherence of the CAP , which should maintain its basic function .
Before any new countries join , a careful analysis must be made of the effects of the 1992 reforms and the concessions that have accumulated under the free trade agreements with the Mediterranean countries , Mercosur and South Africa .
The horizontal approach which the Commission has adopted to promote an integrated policy on rural areas is , in my view , the wrong way to set about things .
Any adaptations to the CAP must be tailored to each individual sector or product .
For some products , a liberal market presents no problems , while others like dairy products and sugar will continue to need intervention and support measures .
In order to prevent distortions of competition , the report by the Committee on Agriculture rejects the idea that the CAP should be renationalized .
The same applies in general to the prices and incomes policy .
The situation is quite different when it comes to protecting nature and the countryside .
Regions mostly have their own requirements , and centralization is difficult .
It is therefore impossible to make Community income subsidies conditional on meeting requirements in this field , as the Commission proposes .
If national programmes are linked to European framework directives , then national funding for nature and countryside policy measures need not result in distortions of competition .
It could also prevent money from going round in circles , as is currently happening with the Structural Funds .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Rehder for his report which I welcome and congratulate him on all the hard work he put into it .
It is a very welcome report .
The future of European agricultural policy is high on our agenda , not only because its budget continues to eat up such a large proportion of the overall European budget , and at the same time fails to deliver many of the standards or meet the needs that the citizens of Europe deserve , but also because of the international commitments made by the European Union , one of which was made in 1993 at the Copenhagen Summit : a commitment to the expansion of the Union to incorporate the Central and Eastern European countries .
It is clear that the Common Agricultural Policy in its present form cannot be sustained .
This is true whether we are a community of six , fifteen or twenty-five .
Agriculture in the last 30 years has changed within the overall European context .
The rapporteur rightly identifies the need to regionalize the Common Agricultural Policy to account for these differences .
It is also clear that the current system of compensatory payments is expensive and distorts the market .
The reforms of 1992 were long overdue and , as the Commission now acknowledge , further reforms are necessary .
In the cereal sector , for example , success has been short-lived .
We have now reached the pre-1992 output levels but at twice the cost to the EU budget .
Perhaps the biggest failure of the Common Agricultural Policy has been the limited benefit it brings to rural communities as a whole and in some cases it has encouraged harmful farming practices .
We must all recognize that after 30 years the rural economy must be refocused and we must develop a policy to sustain all our rural areas and not just one sector .
The prosperity of our rural communities can only be ensured through an integrated rural policy .
The accompanying measures of the 1992 reforms must now be fully incorporated into the Union 's policy .
Recent events have shown that public health and caring for our environment have a central , and not a peripheral , role to play .
At the Cork Conference the Commission illustrated their commitment to change .
We should show our commitment , too , by supporting the rapporteur , whose work will pave the way for European agriculture and facilitate the accession of the Central and Eastern European countries .
Mr President , enlargement of the European Union to take in the countries of central and eastern Europe is a logical development along the orad to European Parliament construction .
But this enlargement cannot be underestimated .
Its significance is particularly relevant for agriculture , whose weight in the economy and society is three or more times greater than the European Union average and whose prices are far lower than those practised ion the European Union making them highly competitive .
The Commission document , dealt with by the Rehder report , set out to tackle , simultaneously the enlargement strategy and the future development of the CAP .
There is no doubt that these two issues are inter-related and that the evolution of the CAP must be decided by the 15 current Members of the Union , on the basis of a future option about what they want for their society and not determined by external factors or pressures .
What is happening is that , following the 192 CAP reform and application of the GATT round of negotiations , new situations exists calling for a response , particularly in the regions most vulnerable to the new international economic order .
What we need for the future is an agricultural policy that strikes a basic balance between the three major dimensions : a moderate policy of support for prices and markets , an income support policy , on a regional and not a sectoral basis , and thirdly a rural development policy able to diversify the economic base of those areas more dependent on agriculture .
It so happens that the average level of income of CCEE farmers is lower than that in the European Union .
It is also certain that certain rural areas in the current EU are even poorer than those of the CCEE .
Therefore enlargement cannot be rushed or carried out at the expense of the effort to achieve cohesion and convergence being made in the existing poorer regions of the Union , mainly those in Objective I.
It is necessary to speak of a future reform of the CAP and it cannot be hurried but must be done seriously and completed by 1999 or 2000 , the beginning of the new round of GATT negotiations .
The European Union must know what it wants or does not want , otherwise its hand will be forced by international pressures .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think we all understand the importance of this event : it is one of those moments in time on the basis of which the historians of the future will probably judge our capacity to be far-sighted .
Following the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989 , the accession of the former soviet socialist republics to Western Europe is now clearly an event of great moment but , for that very reason , it needs to be approached with great caution .
Hence the report leaves us with a sense of incompleteness , although the rapporteur himself has backed it with great determination .
It was perhaps a little too hasty , with too many issues lumped together , including an attempt to reform the CAP : that is certainly something that needs to be done , but elsewhere , in different circumstances and at a different time .
That is also apparent from the large number of amendments - 131 of them - many of them relating to paragraphs 8-35 of the motion for a resolution .
The 1992 CAP is having to contend with the fact that its programme is limited and , more especially , with the urgent need for a reform that can no longer be delayed .
Well just imagine what would happen if it had now to deal with the unfamiliar agriculture of the countries of Eastern Europe with its lack of balance and which varies so greatly from one region to the next and , above all , is so very different from western agriculture .
What sort of proposals can be made in relation to competitiveness , product quality and the need to give value added by processing products ?
How does this link up with the proposal to give greater operational independence to the Member States and the regions , to regional entities ?
All of that has to be reviewed and the parameters established , and there has not been the time to determine the methods and time-scales for this .
We know that there are three approaches to that reform : maintaining the status quo , setting under way a radical reform or further developing the 1992 reform .
The report takes the third approach without going into greater detail on the steps to be taken or indicating how this will affect our obligations arising out of the Uruguay Round , bilateral agreements and the free trade zones , not to mention the need to amend the price support and income compensation arrangements , with the structural and social risks that implies .
Welcome , but once again premature , is - in my view - the reference to codecision on agricultural issues which has to be decided and discussed in a more appropriate forum .
In short , I repeat : what is the hurry ?
What does it benefit anyone ?
Mr President , Commissioner , the Rehder report gives a good picture of the problems associated with the present agricultural policy and the way it should develop in the interests of enlargement to the east .
The conditions for agricultural production within the Union vary widely .
The differences concerned should be taken into account in connection with the reform of agricultural policy , requirements at world trade negotiations and enlargement of the EU to the east .
The very existence of the Union is based on the principle that the Member States ' differing needs should be taken into account as fully and justly as possible in common decision-making .
The purpose of the Union cannot be to destroy the preconditions for agricultural production in each Member State .
The Rehder report quite rightly stresses the importance of regionalizing agricultural policy and the practical application of the subsidiarity principle .
Regionalization and subsidiarity must be put into practice in the reform of agricultural policy .
Agricultural policy is being reformed by bringing producer prices closer to world market prices .
This would mean that farmers producing in relatively unfavourable conditions , such as those in Finland , will need more support than in the past : enterprise will be completely eliminated from this sector .
Serious attention must be devoted to this aspect of agricultural policy reform , as it must be possible to preserve the entrepreneurial angle .
Enlargement to the east will increase the area of farmland in the Union by more than 55 % .
The conditions for enlargement must be agreed in such a way as to secure each Member State 's continuing right to its own agricultural production , irrespective of the differing physical conditions .
Transitional periods must be sufficiently long and the production of the new Member States must be subject to the same quotas as before enlargement , to avoid disrupting the equilibrium of the market .
When Finland joined the Union , production was limited to quotas corresponding to the level which applied before enlargement .
I believe that another issue at stake here is that all Member States should be treated justly and without discrimination .
Mr President , I should like to say quite sincerely that I am surprised at the impromptu and superficial way - which probably conceals some dark ulterior motive - in which we are debating this gigantic issue .
What is this all about ?
A Community that is a political dwarf on the international stage and even within its own territory - we can look to the Yugoslavian crisis as an example - a Community with an agricultural policy which staggers from crisis to crisis , which adopts measures every week , every day , to restrict production , cut prices , impose fines on farmers and compel them to abandon their holdings and flock to the urban centres , unemployed and forced to demonstrate as they have been in Greece , as we speak Mr President , for the past 11 days .
Hundreds of thousands of farmers with thousands of tractors have blocked all the most important road junctions , and are demanding something in return for their toil to enable them to live .
And the government answers : ' Impossible , those are the orders of the Commission , that is what the CAP specifies , those are the GATT conditions ' .
Such a Community then , with such an agricultural policy , is now embarking on the adventure of helping and developing agricultural relations with the Central and Eastern European countries !
Mr President , I am not counting , nor am I in a position to calculate how many ECU that would cost .
What I do count , however - and the same thing was said by Mr Christodoulou and all the other speakers and by Mr Rehder himself - is that there will be tremendous social and economic consequences .
The Community 's cultivable land will increase by 55 % with accession .
And what will you do then ?
Products will be produced much more cheaply and will flood into the Community while you are restricting them .
What will happen ?
Nobody has thought about that .
Mr President , bearing all this in mind , when the issue was debated by the Agriculture Committee , I said that it reminded me of the folk-saying : ' A mouse carrying pumpkins will not fit through its hole ' .
That is what you are doing .
So take back your report - let the report be referred back to the Committee on Agriculture - and come back with a better-prepared study and propose whatever you think fit , provided it is realistic and not adventurous , and that it does not conceal coarse and dark interests that aim to rearrange the political , economic and commercial influences in the ten Central and Eastern European countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must begin by congratulating Mr Rehder on his report which is an exhaustive list of the implications of the future enlargement of the Union in CAP terms .
This enlargement will oblige the EU to profoundly reform this policy , something we welcome .
The current CAP is the Union 's most archaic , least fair and most job-destructive instrument .
Nearly half the budget of this institution is handed out to farmers and 20 % of privileged farmers absorb some 80 % of this slice of the budget .
In my country , 10 % of all farmers receive something like 90 % of the support .
On the other hand , the CAP fiances as a priority all the crops that most help to decertify and destroy jobs in the countryside .
Cereal production , mostly linked to the big farmers living in cities and which provides least jobs , is that receiving the biggest subsidies , 43 % of all aid .
In my country , the unemployment existing is identical to the number of persons who were obliged to abandon the countryside following Portugal 's entry into the EEC .
Enlargement must , therefore , impose a new agricultural policy based on solidarity , fighting privileges ; on quality controls , to face up to excessive production that harms public health , animal health and the environment ; on creating jobs linked to regional planning instead of unemployment and desertification ; on linking man to the land and nature , instead of fostering a wider gap or the latter 's destruction .
The Union 's enlargement is a unique opportunity to turn the CAP from a museum piece into a dynamic , forward-looking policy .
I hope , Commissioner , that you have the courage needed to create such a policy .
Mr President , one of the most important and stimulating tasks for the European Union is to enlarge the Union and include the new Eastern and Central European countries as members .
Great care must be taken , however , with this task .
I take particular pleasure therefore , in welcoming discussion of the reports by Christodoulou and Rehder .
In my opinion , both are fundamentally positive but they highlight a number of problems which must be taken into account .
Regardless of enlargement , adjustments in agricultural policy will be forced upon the EU .
Continuation of the CAP as it stands would be devastating .
We cannot , for example , continue to lock milk production up in a permanent quota system .
We have every reason to continue to aim at the goals set by the CAP , that is to adjust agricultural prices gradually , and I mean gradually , towards the world market price .
The majority of economists consider that these prices will increase in the future .
The PPE group 's second amendment reflects this situation exactly .
This process of change must commence in 1999 , when GATT is taken up again .
In my opinion , Europe has everything to gain from such a logical continuation of the CAP .
In the long term , we would avoid export subsidies and border controls , and compensation to farmers for environmental and nature conservancy initiatives , which are valued by our people , could be increased .
Such reform would also facilitate enlargement .
But , just as continuous reform of the CAP requires needs to be phased in , negotiations with applicant countries must provide for an equivalent phasing in period and the introduction of transitional regulations for these countries .
In respect of this , I believe that the effect of enlargement on the budget is being exaggerated .
It is also quite clear that , with large differences in GNP between the EU countries and these new countries , care must be taken when transferring structural programmes to them .
There are quite simply limits to the extent that large programmes can be absorbed . This applies equally to agricultural policy .
I think that the proposal to review set aside compensation and other fixed compensation under the CAP is a good idea .
This does , in fact , cover a great deal of the traditional regional policy ground .
It is also worth mentioning that approximately 8 billion ECUs per annum has been given in support by the EU to Eastern and Central European countries during the period 1990-1994 .
If this is compared with the Commission 's calculations for the total agricultural policy for all ten new Member States , the figure is approximately 9 billion ECUs for the year 2000 ; this , I feel , gives a good perspective on enlargement .
I think that European agriculture , after enlargement , can look forward to the future with great confidence .
With the right actions , it can be very competitive and an increased world market can be achieved .
Mr President , I should first like to thank Mr Rehder for his work .
I am delighted to hear so many references here today to the Cork Declaration .
The Commissioner is certain pioneering a very practical approach to agriculture and rural development .
The future enlargement of the European Union to incorporate the ten central and eastern European countries is the most dramatic development ever to be contemplated or undertaken by the Union .
The difficulties being experienced by the existing Member States in relation to reaching agreement on a single currency are nothing compared to the broad range of issues facing future enlargement to the east of which the future of the common agricultural policy and the structural fund review are but two .
The implications for each of the existing Member States for agricultural policy alone are profound , in particular for a country such as Ireland .
A number of the ideas raised and the suggestions put forward in the Commission study will have serious implications for Irish farmers and the Irish agricultural sector .
Creating a Community of 25 countries will eventually involve close to a 30 % increase and will have serious implications for the annual budget .
To make mistakes will be catastrophic not just for the existing Member States but also for the countries wishing to join .
The issue , for example , of renationalization of the common agricultural policy , on the basis that such a development is implied by a process of simplification of the common agricultural policy , means in effect its dismantlement , and certainly would not be acceptable .
The third option put forward by the Commission , developing the 1992 approach , has positive elements since it involves the development of an integrated rural policy .
Even with a gradualist approach to enlargement and long transitional periods which will reduce the overall cost , it will still be necessary to increase the size of the budget .
Substantial debate and the revision of the EU 's financial perspectives for the post-1999 period are vitally important and the budgetary resources must be dramatically increased .
Mr President , the enlargement of the European Union - not whether , but how - is the great challenge for Europe in the next decade .
It is a huge compliment to the EU that its achievement in evolving from a Common Market of six countries to a Union of 15 democratic states is such that the states of Central and Eastern Europe , having acquired the freedom to choose , have chosen to apply for membership .
How the present Union responds and adapts to facilitate this expansion , enabling the applicant states to develop and strengthen their newly established or re-established democratic institutions and economic transformation , will be the benchmark by which the history of this and the next decade in Europe will be judged .
Absolutely central to this process is the reform and adaptation of the CAP to meet the future needs of a wider Europe in the 21st century .
Currently the CAP continues to absorb half the EU budget .
Its original raison d 'être , the serious food shortages following the second world war , no longer exists .
There is already a need for change to meet new environmental and social imperatives in the countryside and more precise targeting of what are huge public subsidies , away from already wealthy farmers towards more marginal European regions and production of the food we actually need .
Also , GATT requires the dismantling of the system of import levies and export subsidies .
Our colleague Mr Rehder produced an excellent report , underlining the changes required , both to achieve a common agricultural policy appropriate for an enlarged Europe in the 21st century , and also to release the kind of sums required for regional and social programmes in that wider Europe .
I am sorry that colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development were unwilling to face these realities and that a majority on the right voted to delete essential paragraphs from Mr Rehder 's report .
I appeal to this House , when it votes tomorrow , to restore to its position on this issue a commitment to appropriate reforms in the CAP .
These reforms are necessary , even without enlargement , and are absolutely vital for the future of our agriculture , our environment and the process of achieving a stable , socially cohesive , continent-wide European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have a saying in Portuguese that means ' guessing is not allowed ' .
Guessing what enlargement will bring , a political reality that we all want , is very difficult indeed .
Mr Rehder has put in a lot of hard work on predicting CAP reforms but I would have preferred him to have predicted changes to the agricultural policy , speculation on farm prices and the costs of agricultural policies worldwide .
Because the future of the CAP will depend on that - or rather the future success or failure of enlargement .
That I know .
I also know something else from my own experience : the experience of Portugal 's accession , a country where everything was state-controlled , that had been through a revolution , that had undergone collectivisation , and which has yet to adapt to market rules let alone the current CAP ; on the other hand , the study conducted at Munich on the accession of east Germany , at the time of reunification , the mistakes made despite the fact that the two countries speak the same language , the negative effects that were not predicted : all of this teaches us that we should study the situation more carefully and not be like Alexander the Great who wanted to conquer the rest of the world in a hurry .
Mr President , it would have been more appropriate in political terms if this report had been dealt with after the review of the Maastricht Treaty .
Contrary to what the rapporteur intended , we are in such a hurry that we now risk sending out the wrong signal .
Let us be honest , the reform of the Union 's agricultural policy has only just begun .
North-South relations are still difficult , and the major problems are yet to come .
Before we embark on any talks with new partners , I believe that we need to put our own agricultural policy on an even keel .
Our citizens are being asked for more funding , and they may be willing to provide it if we have a coherent and transparent agricultural policy which firmly establishes the European farmer 's place in the countryside and his role in its development .
In the applicant countries , more people are dependent on agriculture , and this means that we have an even greater responsibility to support them materially and democratically once we have completed our reforms .
This report marks the beginnings of a strategy , but it is only a very small first step .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to start by expressing my gratitude to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and in particular to the rapporteur , Mr Rehder , for all their work and for today 's report .
I have said from the beginning that I am opposed to radical experiments , but also to merely preserving the status quo .
I still maintain that the common agricultural policy needs to be continually developed , in order to meet the challenges of the future .
Indeed , there is no shortage of challenges just ahead of us : the creation of monetary union , the conclusions of the IGC , the new financial perspectives , the future agricultural guidelines , preparations for a new round of multilateral trade negotiations and , last but not least , enlargement to the east .
In addition , there is a growing danger that various agricultural markets in the European Union will be destabilized , in spite of the increasing demand for food worldwide . Lastly , we have to recognize that on the one hand , the public is becoming more sensitive as regards the adverse effects of agriculture on the environment , whilst on the other hand there is a growing interest in the environmental benefits of farming , and a readiness to pay for them .
The Commission took up these issues in its position paper on agriculture for the Madrid European Council .
The rapporteur also states in paragraphs 3 to 6 of the motion for a resolution that he supports the Commission in its efforts to press on with the CAP reform on the basis of the 1992 principles .
We have also made it quite clear , however , that this reform must be carried out sector by sector , and not - as Mr Fantuzzi thought - across the board .
Some very important areas are to be discussed in the near future .
I have promised Parliament that I will present my thoughts on the development of the milk market in the spring .
We also need - and I have promised this to the Member States - a long-term reform of the beef sector , and we must press on with our consideration of the olive oil and tobacco sectors , amongst others .
Mr Funk quite rightly pointed out that we need to reduce refunds : that is a commitment which we made in the GATT Uruguay Round .
But it is not true that the Commission 's policy is geared exclusively to reducing prices .
What we wish to do is assist the markets : in other words , we must create the preconditions for maximizing our market opportunities both inside and outside the European Union .
In this context , I also agree with what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf said : what the Union cannot do is produce at rock-bottom prices , while at the same time levying the highest environmental taxes in the world , without any financial outlay .
Europe 's farmers cannot do everything all at once .
For this reason , these considerations and measures will continue to focus on how to improve competitiveness in the farm sector , whilst at the same time maintaining agricultural incomes at a reasonable level .
I am also pleased to note that the motion for a resolution supports the Commission 's views regarding an integrated approach to rural development , including all aspects of life in rural areas .
Rural areas require sustainable , integrated development .
According to the 500 or more experts who were responsible for the so-called Cork Declaration , this should be ensured through a single policy and a systematic , regional approach .
To my mind , the Cork Declaration addresses itself to many problems which are dealt with in today 's report , and contains some useful ideas on how to tackle future reforms , by adopting an overall approach to solving many different problems in a rural area through a single programme , to be administered at the most appropriate level .
With regard to enlargement to the east , I agree with the view expressed in the motion for a resolution , that the restructuring under way in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe should be supported both financially and by the transfer of know-how .
In the light of this aim , the European Union has devised a comprehensive pre-accession strategy .
This strategy includes the gradual , reciprocal opening-up of farm markets in the context of the Europe Agreement , the structured dialogue , the PHARE programme and the White Paper on the incorporation of the Central and Eastern European countries into the common market .
The PHARE programme has proved a valuable tool in the restructuring process in these countries , and there are plans to expand this form of assistance in the coming years .
More support will be required , however , and like you , I believe that the costs of integration should be examined in the context of the future financial perspectives .
We are aware of the challenges , and also conscious of how they can be met .
It is now time to tackle these problems head-on , therefore , and to work together in seeking rational solutions for the tasks which lie ahead of us .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-1226 / 96 ) .
Question No 36 by Lucio Manisco ( H-0919 / 96 )
Subject : The situation of children in Iraq
On 28 October Carol Bellamy , Executive Director of Unicef , and Catherine Bertini , Executive Director of the UN World Food Programme , drew attention to the catastrophic impact which the decision to postpone once again the ' oil for food and medicines ' humanitarian programme adopted by the UN Security Council is having on children and other vulnerable groups in Iraq .
The two officials stated that , every month , 4 500 Iraqi children under the age of five die from malnutrition-related illnesses or a lack of appropriate medication and that 2 150 000 Iraqis ( including 180 000 children and 900 000 war widows ) are now living below subsistence level .
Furthermore , food production in Iraq has fallen a further 30 % this year .
Would the Commission not agree that it should respond to Unicef 's call for the release of $ 10 million in extraordinary aid , to be used to purchase medicines and food for Iraqi children , and that it should promote the mobilization of a further $ 19 m in emergency food aid to the Iraqi people , as called for by the UN World Food Programme ?
Would it not agree also that , leaving aside any historical or geopolitical considerations , Western governments , which have allowed the UN Security Council 's humanitarian programme to be postponed time and time again , are directly or indirectly responsible for the situation in Iraq , which amounts to no less than a slaughter of the innocents ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with regard to the question concerning the situation of children in Iraq , the Commission fully shares the European Parliament 's concern at the worsening of the humanitarian situation in that country , and especially at the problems to which the most vulnerable section of the population - namely the children - is exposed .
On 25 September this year , the Commission received an appeal for a humanitarian aid programme totalling ECU 31.7 million from the Department of Humanitarian Affairs , which is responsible for coordinating humanitarian aid to Iraq .
In the near future , the Commission is due to adopt a general plan for humanitarian aid to Iraq worth ECU 20 m .
Through this programme , the Commission will thus make available two thirds of the amount requested in the DHA 's appeal .
This general plan will be implemented by the World Food Programme , UNICEF , the UN High Commission for Refugees and the International Committee of the Red Cross , as well as by five European NGOs .
Since 1991 , the Commission has been providing substantial humanitarian aid to the people of Iraq .
During the period 1991 to 1995 , the total value of this aid amounted to ECU 185.4 m .
In 1996 , up to the time when Turkey prohibited the transporting of humanitarian goods through its territory , and before the Iraqi army 's invasion of northern Iraq on 31 August , the Union 's aid to Iraq already amounted to ECU 9.5 m .
Moreover , the Community contributed ECU 8 m to rehabilitation projects in northern Iraq in 1994 / 95 .
Humanitarian aid has been provided to both northern and southern Iraq , in accordance with their respective needs and without any conscious distinction being made .
Priority has been given to the delivery of food and medicines , destined in particular for children under five - i.e. infant foods - pregnant women , widows and the elderly .
Furthermore , I am pleased to be able to announce on behalf of the Commission that yesterday an agreement was concluded between the Iraqi Government and the United Nations , the subject of which is the starting of the oil sales provided for by UN Security Council Resolution No 986 .
This allows us to hope that the implementation of the principle of ' oil in exchange for food and medicines ' will quickly and effectively help to improve the Iraqi people 's humanitarian situation .
Unaccustomed as we are to receive prompt replies - and often we receive no replies at all on violations of human rights and atrocities of all sorts when they are perpetrated by the United States of America - we are relieved indeed by the statement which we have just heard .
But we cannot help noticing that it has reached this House very late and post facto , that is the same day that the taps have been turned on again for a limited oil flow from Iraq in exchange for food and medicines .
Let us hope the decision by the United Nations Security Council and by Mr Boutros Ghali will bear the desired fruits in the next few months .
Let us hope that no new intervening factors or new geopolitical considerations will be used as a pretext to stop this minimal humanitarian aid .
We have heard many figures from the Commissioner and we just wonder why the money provided by Europe has not borne the desired fruits up to now .
The fact remains and will weigh for ever on our consciences that 4 , 500 Iraqi children have died every month because of our inaction , as Unicef has testified .
More than 300 , 000 children have been murdered over five years by malnutrition , disease , lack of antibiotics and other medicines because of the United Nations ' sanctions .
The fact remains that the Commission has for too long tolerated the slaughter of the innocents and we all bear the guilt .
Firstly , I should just like to make one point : you can , of course , say that the aid has been provided too late , but I believe that it is important that it has been provided at all . I have listed a series of aid measures which have been taken in favour of Iraq since 1991 , because these operations were started immediately after the Gulf War .
At that time alone , over ECU 100 million was granted and made available to Iraq .
Naturally , the Commission will not change its policy simply because this decision was taken yesterday .
We shall continue to provide the aid which has been pledged , and thus change nothing in this respect .
I share your opinion that , at present , we can only hope that these measures will together achieve the effect we all wish to see .
I should like to make it clear , however , that the aid provided by the European Union , in relation to that provided by other parties , represents the lion 's share .
Consequently , we should not beat our breasts in self-criticism and say that we should do more , but compare ourselves to others and draw attention to how much aid they provide .
Question No 37 by Gerardo Galeote Quecedo ( H-1027 / 96 )
Subject : Cuba
Could the Commission supply an assessment of the common position on Cuba adopted unanimously by the General Affairs Council , pursuant to Article J.2 of the TEU , at its meeting of 25 November 1996 ?
The honourable Member asks in his question for the Commission to supply an assessment of the common position on Cuba .
I should like to make it clear that the Commission fully supports the common position , which is line with and follows on from previous European Union statements , such as the declarations issued by the European Council at the Madrid and Florence summits .
The common position enables us to steer a middle course between vigilance with regard to human rights and support for the process of economic and social improvement .
It should also be emphasized that the common position is a very useful instrument , in that it sets out systematically and in detail the areas of the European Union 's cooperation and the terms of its relations with Cuba .
It thus specifies the various preconditions for the possible stepping-up of cooperation with Cuba .
This clear presentation should benefit the Union , as well as Cuba itself .
In general terms , the common position has the merit of reaffirming the specific nature of the political line taken by the European Union with regard to Cuba , and of pointing out , in particular , that the EU rejects any attempt to bring about change in Cuba by means of retaliatory economic measures or pressure on the people of that country .
Commissioner , thank you for your reply ; I am pleased to note that the Commission shares the Council 's common position which , as you say , is consistent with the trend of events between the Madrid and Florence European Councils .
It should be recalled that during this period the Commission , in the person of its Vice-President Marín , took note on the spot of the rigidity of the Cuban regime and therefore did not present the draft mandate .
By the Council 's offer of negotiations now , if a start is made on reforms to guarantee respect for human rights and to begin the transition to democracy , the European Union is opening doors to hope , for which the Cuban people will certainly be grateful .
I would also like to congratulate you , Commissioner , on the reference you made to the specific nature of the common position on Cuba , since this Parliament , and certainly my Parliamentary Group , have opposed the embargo policy of the United States Government , and the Helms-Burton Act in particular .
Following this question and your statement , clearly I would like to ask you what specific action the Commission proposes to take to develop the guidelines contained in that common position , and specifically how you propose to ensure that aid is channelled through non-governmental organizations with no link to the regime , as set out in the common position .
Mr Galeote , the common position undoubtedly provides the continuity that we wish to see , and it builds on the declarations issued by the European Council in Madrid and Florence .
It also unequivocally reaffirms the Union 's rejection of the use of retaliatory economic measures .
However , this continuity is not entirely linear , in the sense that the common position also makes an urgent call for an improvement in the human rights situation and greater political freedom .
This criterion also comes into play in determining our line of conduct .
Naturally , there is a need to ensure that the money we make available actually gets to where it is meant to go .
The aid is conveyed to its destination entirely by European NGOs , and those NGOs are required to ensure that the goods do actually reach their goal .
With regard to humanitarian aid , I should like to point out that the terms of reference agreed by the Commission and the Cuban authorities stipulate that the NGOs remain the owners of the goods until they are delivered to the final beneficiaries , and consequently also retain control over them .
In this way , therefore , we are seeking to ensure that the system functions properly .
Mr President , I wish to pay tribute to your very fair presidency of Question Time .
I gather this is going to be your last one and I am sorry to see you go .
I hope you will not take that off my one minute , of course !
I accept the Commissioner 's response on the question of the common position on Cuba but I hope that we will not get so hung up on the question of human rights that we forget the essentials of our position towards Cuba , which is to oppose the Helms-Burton Act and the attempt by the US to blackmail the people of Cuba and the people of the world , because of specific ideological commitments in the US .
I wish to say that , having visited Cuba and America on several occasions , human rights in Cuba are often rather better than human rights in the USA , particularly the rights to free health , to free education and to a system which attempts to protect them .
In fact , the infant mortality rate in Cuba is actually rather better than in inner-city Washington .
Those are the human rights which the Cuban people want to keep and , although we , of course , expect and respect democracy , the broader conception of human rights is one which is shared by this Parliament and I know is shared by the Commissioner .
The Commission does indeed view the situation in the way that you describe , Mr Kerr .
Clearly , our proposed approach or strategy with regard to aid to Cuba must not result in us neglecting to insist on respect for human rights .
On the other hand , though , it must not result in the Cuban people - who are already suffering from the fact that human rights are not fully respected - failing to receive the aid which they so desperately need .
This is why we have to strike a proper balance .
In any event , I am convinced that the strategy we have developed jointly with the Council will have the appropriate effects .
Commissioner , I do in fact agree that a certain balance has to be achieved , but I am glad to see the Commission believes that there is no individual dignity unless each man and woman has freedom of choice , that individuals or peoples cannot have their future imposed upon them without their consent , and that of course no generation can mortgage the future of those to come .
Democracy does indeed mean allowing citizens to decide on their collective future by the right to freedom of speech , by regular elections , by the demystification of individuals and the abolition of political dogmas .
These are the principles set out in the common position , which very clearly links any progress in relations between the European Union and Cuba to a scrupulous respect for and improvement in human rights and fundamental freedoms .
That is undoubtedly necessary , Mr Salafranca , and I entirely agree that it must be one of the basic principles governing our relations with other countries . I also endorse your comment that the fundamental principles of respect for human dignity , freedom of expression and democracy must apply .
However , it should also be quite clear - and we must be realistic here - that we cannot enforce all this by granting or not granting aid .
We can call for it , we can insist on it , but we cannot always automatically enforce it .
That is a fact that we have also learnt from a great many other situations .
Question No 38 by Freddy Blak ( H-0960 / 96 )
Subject : Ill-treatment of animals in transit
What specific action does the Commission intend to take against Member States infringing the provisions in force on the transport of animals for slaughter ?
Such infringements have been amply documented on German and Italian television , etc ..
By virtue of the subsidiarity principle and the Treaty , the practical application of the animal transport directive in the Member States and the day-to-day supervision and control of animal transport companies to ensure that they actually comply with its provisions is first and foremost an area of competence and the responsibility of the Member States .
It is the Commission 's job to check that all the Member States transpose the Community provisions into national law and perform these tasks of supervision and control .
To this end , the Commission is able to monitor the practical application of the directive through local inspections .
In July 1995 , the Council of Ministers adopted an amendment to the animal transport directive , whereby the animal protection requirements in the transport of animals were considerably improved .
At the same time , with a view to the Commission being able to monitor compliance with the directive more effectively in the future , the Council agreed to give the Commission an additional 12 inspectors .
I regret to inform the House , however , that the Commission has so far not received a single one of these promised new posts .
The new provisions adopted in July 1995 will enter into force on 1 January 1997 and , as I said , they should lead to an improvement .
I also regret to inform the House , however , that without these additional inspectors , the Commission will find it difficult to verify that all the Member States are monitoring the practical application of the directive effectively , thereby ensuring that the new requirements are being observed .
With regard to certain German television programmes concerning the transport of animals from the European Union to third countries , I can confirm that the Commission is not only aware of these , but has also requested additional information about the incidents in question from the authorities of the Member States concerned , with a view to putting a stop to them .
Moreover , this is the procedure that we are always required to adopt in such cases .
If it comes to the Commission 's attention , either through its own investigations or via adequately documented complaints , that a Member State is not transposing a directive properly or ensuring its practical application , then the Commission first makes representations to the authorities of the Member State concerned .
If those authorities then fail to adopt the necessary measures to prevent a repetition of the infringements in question , the Commission will normally initiate the infringement procedure pursuant to Article 169 .
To give an example , preliminary investigations , which may lead to such an action being brought in the Court of Justice , were recently instituted with regard to the transport of horses from Eastern Europe to Italy .
I should like to make it clear , however , that the Commission 's means of enforcing compliance with Community law are in practice very limited , since apart from the breach of Treaty procedure , it currently has no other instruments available .
With regard to compliance with the animal transport directive in the case of transport to third countries , the Commission is looking at how the granting of export subsidies for live animals can be made subject to compliance with the animal transport directive in the case of transport outside the European Union as well .
Here too , the problem of monitoring must first and foremost be resolved . However , I am confident that such a proposal will be adopted by the Commission in the near future .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
There were many good points in your reply , but I feel that you were somewhat defensive .
You have been described as the best Commissioner , the most active Commissioner , and for that reason your reply seems too weak and too defensive .
Those countries that do not respect the provisions should be brought before the Court for the appropriate judgment to be pronounced !
We must ensure that those countries are denied the recovery subsidies and support from the EU .
We cannot accept this !
This is something that citizens really feel themselves to be affected by , and which causes them harm .
They feel it is quite senseless to have a Community in which such situations can be accepted .
I know that you have the ability , Mr Fischler .
I know how clever you are !
Set an example and ensure that we no longer have to experience such an unacceptable situation .
And if countries are unwilling to comply with this , they must answer to the Court .
This is as it should be .
Show us that you are able to resolve the situation and I will express my full approval when you have accomplished it !
To avoid any misunderstandings , Mr Blak , I can take proceedings against a Member State in the Court of Justice if it fails to fulfil its obligations .
However , penalizing an individual transport company which has committed an abuse or bringing an action against it in a national court is the exclusive responsibility of the Member States .
The Commission cannot intrude on their areas of competence .
I can only stress what I said earlier : if we are not provided with further instruments enabling us to take action against such infringements , apart from the normal breach of Treaty procedure , then the latter is all that we can apply .
Otherwise , we must be provided with additional means .
I agree entirely with the Commissioner that it is deplorable that the Commission has not been given the extra inspectors it needs .
But , presumably , one way round this is to allow responsible NGOs to monitor whether Member States are enforcing the rules .
This was raised last month in Question Time by Mrs Bonino and , as I recall , Mrs Bonino said that Member States themselves could delegate authority to NGOs but that the Commission would not require them to do so .
If the Commission is looking into allegations made in television programmes , it could equally look into any allegations of infringements of the rules made by NGOs operating in the Member States .
Presumably , if you cannot get the extra veterinary inspectors - and there are plenty of people around Europe willing to carry out the inspections themselves , including very responsible bodies - the Commission should require Member States to take note of those inspections .
Mr Spiers , the idea that you have just put forward is not entirely new to me .
I am basically in favour of applying and making use of this possibility , if we are legally able to do so .
However , we must first of all clarify the legal question , since it is unacceptable that an NGO should , as it were , have to gain access illegally in order to be able to carry out such inspections on the ground .
We must be able to confer appropriate powers on these NGOs or their representatives , since we cannot accept the possibility of them being punished for acting in the interests of animal protection .
This question needs legal clarification .
If we can resolve this problem , then I shall be strongly in favour of us pursuing this additional course .
However , I do not believe that we can do without professional inspectors entirely .
I therefore repeat my request for the extra inspectors that we were promised - or at least some of them : perhaps we could share them with the NGOs .
Question No 39 by Marie-Paule Kestelijn-Sierens ( H-0949 / 96 )
Subject : Anti-dumping measures
The Commission is proposing to issue anti-dumping measures in the form of higher levies on the import of cheap footwear from China , Indonesia and Thailand .
The proposed measures will have serious consequences not only for European importers and distributers of cheap shoes from these countries , but also for the consumer .
Except in extremely urgent cases the Commission consults the Member States before issuing temporary protection measures .
Has the Commission taken an official stand on this question ?
Does it consider that there has been dumping of shoes from China , Indonesia and Thailand ?
Does the import of cheap shoes from these countries harm the Community to the extent that anti-dumping measures are called for ?
Has the Commission already consulted the Member States on this matter ?
Two anti-dumping proceedings concerning footwear are currently being dealt with by the Commission .
One concerns certain footwear with leather and plastic uppers originating in the People 's Republic of China , Indonesia and Thailand .
The other concerns certain footwear with textile uppers originating in the People 's Republic of China and Indonesia .
The Member States were consulted on the findings of the Commission during the anti-dumping advisory committee meeting of 17 September 1996 .
These findings are confidential at this stage .
As regards the textile uppers case , a decision is expected by the end of the year .
On the leather and plastic uppers proceeding the investigation is still continuing and a decision is not envisaged for some time .
In accordance with the provisions of the basic anti-dumping regulation the Commission will only adopt provisional methods where imports have been found to be dumped on the Community market and where this dumping has caused material injury to the Community industry concerned .
In addition , a positive decision that the Community interest calls for an intervention should be made .
In addressing the question of whether measures are in the Community interest the Commission cannot limit itself to the possible effects of measures on certain interest groups only , or one Member State .
It must base its appreciation on all the various interests taken as a whole and on a Community-wide basis in accordance with the provisions of Article 21 of the basic anti-dumping regulation .
My thanks to the Commissioner for her reply .
She mentioned a number of new facts which I did not see in the Commission 's reply to the written question from Mrs Maij-Weggen , about the two anti-dumping proceedings that are currently being dealt with .
I should like to know when these proceedings started , because there is a deadline involved .
Proceedings may take only up to one year , or 15 months in special circumstances .
So I should like to know when the proceedings started , so as to know by when they must be completed .
I should also like to ask whether the Commission has considered all the interests of the various groups involved here , namely consumers , importers and producers ?
You said that the Member States were consulted .
I understand that seven Member States advised against measures being taken and only the southern countries were in favour , but countries like the Netherlands and Belgium do not have their own footwear industry , and therefore have no interest in protective measures .
This proceeding was started on 22 February 1995 .
As I said , there have been consultations within the anti-dumping advisory committee .
Unfortunately the findings are confidential at this stage .
As I also said , on the textile uppers case , the decision is expected to be taken by the end of the year .
But in the second case it will take more time to find out if it has damaged our Community industries or not .
I would like to congratulate the questioner .
It is a very appropriate question .
It is certainly one that affects my constituency , Northamptonshire , and in particular Blaby where we have a large number of footwear companies .
I want to broaden the debate .
I want to know if the Commission welcomes the stance which has been taken by three major sports goods companies in Europe - Adidas , Reebok and Nike - who are now ensuring that there are fair wages from the sources where they import their footwear .
Surely this is the ethical approach that we would like to see being copied by other importing companies because this is the way to avoid some of the most unfortunate effects of the anti-dumping measures as we see them before us now .
I can understand the honourable Member being concerned about her own constituency .
But at the same time , we have to be very careful when we look into whether these cases really involve dumping .
I therefore hope it will be in the best interests of both foreign trade and our own workers in Europe .
Thank you , Commissioner , for your reply .
I am interested in this criterion of material damage being done to a European Union industry .
I would like you to expand on it a little .
If I suppose the reason you use this criterion is to establish that either an industry has been materially harmed , perhaps through factories closing down or people being made unemployed , is it not a bit late then to say material damage has been done when the people are unemployed and the factories all shut .
How much importance do you attach to the needs and interests of the employed people in these situations ?
As I said in my answer , we have to examine this from a comprehensive angle .
We cannot only look at one Member State or one group that might be interested in this matter , we have to take an overall view when we look into anti-dumping questions .
If we really are going to live up to our ideals of free trade with countries all over the world , we have to be fair when we examine these cases .
We have to have in mind both the interests of the European Union workers , but also the situation in the countries with whom we are trading .
Question No 40 by Rui Vieira ( H-0822 / 96 )
Subject : Corruption
Various official bodies , in particular those in the area of law-enforcement , are agreed on the extreme seriousness of the corruption spreading throughout the world ( in addition to other terrible evils such as drugs , terrorism , gangsterism , the traffic in minors and women and other mafia-style activities linked to organized crime which the European Community has not escaped ) and are appealing to the consciences of governments to set up better , more effective , closer , more open and much more urgent international cooperation .
This problem is difficult , complex , transnational and ' gangrenous ' in nature and must therefore be investigated at its roots , both close at hand and far away .
I believe that the EU , together with the Member States and countries in other continents , should study this matter meticulously with a view to finding an appropriate solution which may , if only in the long term , lead to its eradication .
When will the Commission carry out such a study and take steps on corruption which will give it credibility in the eyes of the public ?
Mr President , the Commission is well aware of the need for action against corruption both in the European Commission and at Union level .
Initiatives at a global level are also needed .
The Commission has already undertaken a great deal of work on rules for improved openness and transparency in public sector purchasing and in support bodies to third countries .
The Commission 's response to the European Parliament resolution on corruption of 15th December 1995 gives a detailed account of the actions which have already been taken .
Work continues in the Third Pillar to make corruption by officers in the institutions of the EU and its Member State a criminal offence .
We have also helped to produce a draft convention on legal aid .
The Commission is also involved in work currently underway in the OECD and the European Council on these issues .
Both of these organisations have taken concrete steps in the fight against many different forms of corruption .
We are also participating in the WTO 's work to create more transparency and openness in public sector purchasing .
At the moment , we are reviewing our work in these areas to see how we can be more effective in the fight against corruption .
This work will result in a report to both the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament next year .
There is already a wealth of information on corruption both within and outside the European Union .
The Commission is , therefore , not convinced that the honourable Member 's proposal for a further study would be the best use of the Commission 's resources .
Thank you very much for your replies , Madam Commissioner but they were not precise enough for my liking . I would like to have effective cooperation between the Commission and the Member States , especially when taking measures or actions by the Commission or each Member State .
As you know the problem is getting worse and it is not just a European Union problem but a transnational problem . I think that the whole of cooperation policy with other states outside the Union makes sense now that corruption has various aspects and is spreading throughout Europe .
This aspect of international cooperation , as in other matters outside the scope of the Union 's Member States , should be implemented on the basis not of palpable results but at least the sketches or outlines of a resolution as that would give a frankly more positive aspect to the Commission 's actions and help to give us citizens more confidence in Community institutions .
Forgive me , ladies and gentlemen , but I do consider my response to be concrete .
We are talking about genuine cooperation between the Commission , Parliament and the Member States .
This is the question at issue as , together , we work towards a convention to make corruption a criminal offence for us , for officers in our EU institutions and for people in our Member States .
I also said that we were cooperating intensively with both the OECD and the WTO to bring about international regulations in this area and to tackle corruption which is flourishing at global level .
Question No 41 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0922 / 96 )
Subject : Asylum policy
According to Eurostat , the number of asylum applications in the European Union handled by Germany is continuing to increase ; added to this there is a disproportionate influx of persons fleeing wars and civil wars .
What proposals does the Commission have to achieve a more equitable share of the burden between the EU Member States ?
Mr President , it is true that , during the last decade , Germany has dealt with approximately half the total number of asylum seekers in the European Union .
In some years , the figure was even higher .
For example , during 1992 , Germany received approximately 60 % of the total number of asylum seekers in the EU .
The corresponding number of applications was 438 191 .
Since then , the total number of asylum seekers has dropped considerably .
During 1994 127 210 people sought asylum in Germany .
This represents 41.5 percent of all asylum seekers in the European Union .
During 1995 the figure increased slightly and Germany accepted around 47 % of the total number of asylum seekers .
In absolute terms , there is no doubt that Germany has received the largest number of asylum seekers .
Germany has shouldered a great responsibility , particularly for people fleeing the conflict in Bosnia .
If we consider the number of asylum seekers in relation to Gross National Product or size of population , there are a number of other countries which have also played a commendable role .
I am referring , for example , to Austria and Sweden .
With regard to the distribution of responsibility for dealing with asylum seekers , I would like to remind you that the Council of Ministers have made two agreements relevant to this issue .
The first is a resolution from September 1995 on the division of responsibility when accepting asylum seekers and granting temporary residence permits .
The second is a decision from November 1995 on an alert and emergency procedure .
Our Member States are already able to offer temporary refuge during times of mass exodus .
And this does occur .
However , systems vary from country to country .
It is for this reason that I have initiated a discussion in the Council of Ministers on standardisation of regulations for temporary asylum .
I presented a working document during the informal meeting of the Council in September which raised a number of fundamental questions .
Included in the points for discussion were the differences in our systems concerning the rights and obligations applicable during temporary residence .
As an extension of this initiative I intend to follow up these discussions during the Dutch chairmanship by submitting a proposal for joint action in this area .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that very precise answer , and also for distinguishing between asylum seekers and refugees from civil wars - who in Germany are of course added to the figures that you gave .
My question is a twofold one : firstly , do you consider that a formal initiative enabling the Council to decide on and settle this matter appropriately will be forthcoming in the foreseeable future ?
And , secondly , do you think that you will be able to submit to Parliament , in the foreseeable future , data revealing the different ways in which the legal status or material situation of asylum seekers is handled in the individual Member States , and what the reasons are for the disparities ?
There is a survey of the situation concerning temporary residence permits in all fifteen Member States in the working document which I presented to the Council of Ministers .
During the discussions , which I have recently had with the Dutch presidency , we have also agreed to develop a proposal for joint action on this issue during the spring .
Question No 42 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0935 / 96 )
Subject : Europol register of wanted persons
Regarding the proposal for provisions implementing Article 10 ( 1 ) of the Europol Convention , does the Commission consider that the Europol register of wanted persons should be able to list persons other than those suspected or convicted of criminal offences ?
Does the Commission think there can be any justification for including information such as race , sexual orientation , membership of political organizations or religious communities in the register of wanted persons ?
Mr President , the Europol Convention was signed in July 1995 and must now be ratified by the parliaments of all the Member States before it comes into force .
The basis used for data protection in the Europol Convention is the European Council 's Convention of 1981 on data processing of personal details and its relevant recommendation on the registration of personal details in police registers .
There is actually more extensive protection of the integrity of the individual and legal security under the Europol Convention .
It includes mention of how corrections are to be made , how and when personal details are to be removed and under what conditions an individual will be informed that they have been registered , etc .
The Convention also stipulates that a joint supervisory authority shall be established to ensure that Europol uses its database as intended .
It is true that , once the Convention is ratified , Europol will be able to keep information on individuals who are neither convicted of nor suspected of any criminal offence .
The reason for this is that , in practice , it is largely impossible to determine in advance what role an individual involved in a criminal investigation has .
It is only when the investigation is complete that we can say with certainty that a person is an informer , a witness , a passive bystander or an active criminal .
This is particularly difficult where the crime involves narcotics or the trade in people .
It is more often the rule than the exception that people who , initially are thought to be witnesses or informers , are later found to be actually involved in the crime under investigation .
Consequently , the Commission shares the view of the Member States that it is necessary to register people in Europol 's database who are not criminals .
The Convention includes a number of protection mechanisms regarding the type of information which can be used for data processing .
Information must be strictly necessary and must supplement other information held before it can be registered .
It is also expressly forbidden to carry out searches in the database solely using this type of information .
The Commission also shares the view of the Member States that it is necessary to be able to register sensitive personal details in order to be able to help the national bodies of justice in their work .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the Europol Convention has a structure which allows it to go further than the European Council Convention in areas concerned with the protection of a person 's integrity and legal security .
I thank the Commissioner for her answer but I do not share her opinion that the provision for legal security is adequate .
I base my opinion on the proposal document for the regulations governing implementation of Article 10 ( 1 ) of the Europol Convention .
The definition here of what may be registered and on whom is very poor .
For example , according to this document it is possible to register the political views of people who are not suspected of any criminal offence .
The manual to be used by the body responsible for regulating how registration is to be dealt with place is also to be kept secret .
There is to be no transparency on this . Generally , there is to be very poor democratic control by the national parliaments on this huge register which could contain very sensitive information on people who are not even suspected of a criminal offence .
For this reason , I think that the issue should be opened up and debated freely in the Member States before a decision is made on the opportunities for such far reaching registration of the people of the Union .
It was still not clear from the Commissioner 's answer precisely what legal redress a citizen has if information about that person is placed by mistake on a register with Europol .
She talked about a committee overseeing the convention , but she did not say what legal powers such a committee has .
What happens if my name is down wrongly and I am arrested for a crime I have not committed ?
Who do I appeal to or where do I get compensation from ?
If the honourable Member is mistakenly entered into the register he can appeal to the national supervisory authority which will be established to ensure that Europol uses its database as intended .
Commissioner , this argument about the register is threatening to disguise the urgency of the need to set up Europol in the public debate .
I should like to ask you how things stand with regard to the process of ratifying Europol , and what the timetable is for finally bringing Europol into operation ?
It is not only the argument about the register which is important , therefore , but the timetable for Europol overall .
( SV ) Thank you for the question .
I am very concerned that ratification of Europol is taking so long .
This is why there was an intensive debate on ratification at the most recent meeting of the Council of Ministers with the Ministers for Justice and Home Affairs .
The President of the committee appealed to all Member States to ratify the Convention during 1997 because so far not one country has ratified it .
Question No 43 by Maj Theorin ( H-1000 / 96 )
Subject : Combating crime within the EU
Sweden 's Minister of Justice has said that the action against international crime can be made much more effective without having to amend the EU Treaties .
The Commission on the other hand considers that crime can best be fought by greater supranational powers , by removing the Member States ' right of veto .
Does the Commission not consider that Sweden 's initiatives , for example , for a multiannual programme of work for combating crime , and the Swedish initiative for including a new area , crime prevention , are clear examples of the way these matters can be effectively resolved by international cooperation between free States ?
Does the Commission not consider that Sweden is right in its opposition to supranationality , in the light of Sweden 's contribution to the EU plan of action against drug abuse ? This plan of action now states , on Sweden 's initiative , that legalization is in conflict with the EU 's policy on drugs .
Mr President , it is the Commission 's opinion that cooperation on domestic and legal matters must undergo a radical overhaul .
The fight against international organised crime is a particular area where cooperation must be improved considerably .
Every study carried out points to the fact that our people consider the fight against crime to be an absolute priority .
Consequently , the efforts of the EU in this important area must be as effective as possible .
They must also be carried out with democratic control and in a form which gives our people adequate legal security .
This is currently not the case and the Commission has submitted a number of proposals to the Intergovernmental Conference , currently underway , which aim to improve cooperation in these matters .
The Commission 's idea to establish a multiannual programme of work has meant that practical cooperation can now commence in a number of different areas .
The thinking behind this programme is that we will be able to link implementation of the budget closer to the political priorities ruling in the Third Pillar .
As an example , I can mention that the Ministers for Home Affairs and Justice decided , at their meeting in Brussels two weeks ago , to strengthen legal cooperation between Member States in the fight against sexual exploitation of children .
This is very pleasing .
This is an area in which the EU can , and should , play an important role .
At the same time the Ministers also agreed on a multiannual programme called STOP which means that a concrete exchange of experience can now commence .
The honourable Member refers to Sweden 's constructive initiative on cooperation in the field of crime prevention and asks for the Commission 's view on the value of cooperation between free states .
I warmly welcome Sweden 's efforts to put the issue of crime prevention on the EU agenda .
The initiative taken by the Swedish Justice Minister is very valuable .
At the same time , I am disappointed that none of the legally binding agreements which have been made within the framework of interstate cooperation have yet come into force .
The truth is that not one of the Conventions agreed by the Council of Ministers has been ratified .
The honourable Member cannot be unaware of the fact that some of these agreements are more than five years old .
The Commission does not consider this way of working to be effective .
I thank the Commissioner for her answer .
International crime continues to increase in Europe and must be fought .
We are completely in agreement with that .
On the other hand , we obviously have differing views on the methods to be used in that fight .
The decision which has now been taken on Europol , which will promote the exchange of information between the States of Europe , is an important step in the fight against crime .
This cooperation must be evaluated once it has come into force , and if it proves that such an exchange of information is insufficient , the next stage could be to commence joint interstate operative action . This already takes place between Swedish and Danish police .
This interstate cooperation is far removed from the introduction of a joint police force in Europe , a European FBI , which would mean that foreign police could operate in another country . Such a situation is totally unthinkable under Swedish legislation .
I wonder , Commissioner Gradin , if this is the length to which the Commission is prepared to go in its proposal on operative policing at European level .
I am gratified when I read the current news that both Chancellor Kohl and President Chirac , according to a speech released from a joint meeting , wish to place cooperation between police and the bodies of justice high on the political agenda .
We will not have a European FBI but we will have intensified cooperation which will become more of an activity in the First Pillar .
I believe that this is necessary if we are to succeed in the challenge before us .
Question No 44 by Luciano Vecchi ( H-0878 / 96 )
Subject : New general co-financing conditions for development NGOs
The European Union 's collaboration with non-governmental development organizations has , for many years , been a cornerstone of Europe 's international cooperation policy .
In particular , the co-financing instrument for development measures by NGOs has assumed growing qualitative and quantitative importance .
However , the increase in the volume of work has caused problems in examining projects in good time and in monitoring their administration .
Will the Commission say what organizational measures it intends to take to tackle the growing demand more efficiently ?
Will it also say what stage has been reached in drawing up new general conditions for co-financing or , at least , in experimenting with new working methods ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the first instance , the Commission has taken a series of organizational measures in-house to speed up and improve the administration of the NGO cofinancing budget .
One such measure , the strengthening of the unit which administers the NGO cofinancing budget with a number of auxiliary staff , has already had effects this year : firstly , the funds available for NGO cofinancing will have been utilized in their entirety this year and , secondly , the delays in monitoring the projects funded have been made good .
Also , the Commission has just brought in outside consultants to carry out an organizational audit , and has conducted an analysis of current administrative procedures and proposed improvements , so as to cope better with an increasing workload .
A programme reviewing the general conditions for cofinancing is currently under way within the Commission .
In this context , it is intended that in-depth discussions on the strengthening of the role of the NGOs and their links with the Commission in the field of cofinancing will be held in 1997 .
I am to some extent reassured by what you have to say , Commissioner , because it shows that something is being done and that a process of reflection is under way . I have , however , to say that it differs very little from the answers your predecessors have given me over the past seven years .
Over the course of time , the NGO co-financing line has been gradually increased , particularly as a result of Parliament 's support , and it is now 100 times the 1976 level .
There have on many occasions been staffing problems , not problems of quality - all of the people we have seen at work in ' Co-financing ' unit are excellent officials - but of quantity : they are few in number and each of them has to consider hundreds of projects every year .
This is , in my view , a procedural problem : the procedures were laid down when the number of projects was small or , at any rate , the resources were limited , and they have been made more difficult in recent years as a result of financial controls .
I also believe there to be a problem in actually monitoring and following through the projects and the real impact they are having .
Bearing in mind that , generally speaking , the NGO co-financing projects are well thought-of , I do think that it is necessary - and here I wish to put an additional question to you - to understand the approach being considered in regard to the new co-financing conditions . To be more specific : does the Commission consider it possible to move in the direction of adopting framework contracts , at least with some of the NGOs and at least in respect of part of the resources , and that it will be possible to conclude with some NGOs multi-annual and multi-project support frameworks ?
Mr President , it is quite true that , thanks to the support of the European Parliament , we have managed to more than double the resources available for NGO cofinancing .
Last year , in reply to a question put to me in the House , I had to express some concern over the question of staffing .
Fortunately , this year I can tell you that not only have we utilized all the available funds , but we have also made good some of the delays and greatly improved the monitoring of the cofinanced projects .
But this is not enough , which is why we have followed two parallel approaches .
On the one hand , we have the external audits , to help us better identify what could be done elsewhere , from a practical point of view , so as to release more energy for monitoring and , as it were , for instructive discussions with the NGOs .
On the other hand , we have embarked , together with the NGO liaison committee , on a very thorough debate concerning practical , pragmatic ways of increasing the efficiency both of the Commission and the NGOs .
I can tell you that among the options being considered , a consensus is being sought in respect of programme contracts - particularly with NGOs which have been working with the Commission for decades now , and which have proved their administrative capabilities and their rigour in dealing with the resources that are available .
That is all I can say on this for the time being , but I assure you that next year there will be many points to discuss in this context .
On 22 March 1996 the Council adopted the complementary directives which allow the Commission to start negotiations with South Africa on trade and cooperation .
Since then , the Commission and its South African partners have met several times .
The Commission presented its negotiating position , and gave qualifications on it at the request of its South African counterparts .
At the same time , the Commission has been preparing the necessary technical base which will allow the future negotiations to proceed smoothly .
As for South Africa , it is currently preparing its own negotiating mandate , which should be completed in the coming weeks .
As soon as this mandate is made available to the Commission , formal negotiations between the two parties will resume .
Despite some constraints in the agricultural sector , the Council directives provide a very good starting position for trade discussions .
It is not the Commission 's intention to assess hypothetical economic costs for South Africa or to return to the Council before the real negotiations begin .
In the course of the negotiations , and if necessary , the Commission could return to the Council asking for additional directives in order to conclude an agreement which fulfils the aspirations and interests of both parties .
With respect to the wider impact of the proposed agreement , the Commission acknowledges that the interests of South Africa 's neighbours and of the ACP group require special consideration .
The Commission will endeavour to consult closely with these partners during the course of the negotiations .
At their request , the Commission is giving technical and financial assistance to Botswana , Lesotho , Namibia and Swaziland ( BLNS countries ) for assessing the likely effects on their economies of the proposed agreement with South Africa and for preparing recommendations to the negotiating parties as regards projects of specific sensitivity for the BLNS countries that may have to be excluded from the free trade agreement .
Studies on these matters are under way and will be completed early next year .
The negotiations for an agreement on trade and cooperation between the European Union and South Africa are between those countries and not between the European Union and southern Africa .
There is no intention to use this agreement as a model to be imposed on other countries in the region .
European Union cooperation with South Africa 's neighbours already takes place under the provisions of the Lomé Convention .
The eventual consequences for the BLNS countries of an agreement with South Africa should be discussed and dealt with , if necessary , in the framework of this convention .
However , so-called compensation measures for losses for customs revenue are not being considered by the Commission .
I just wish to add that in the recent meeting I myself had with Vice-President Thabo Mbeki in Brussels , we agreed that we would enlarge eventually the scope for our discussions to include the possibility of taking into account several of the concerns of neighbouring countries regarding possible equilibrium for trade with South Africa through investment and other complementary aspects .
I must say that at this stage there is no room for pessimism .
There are some encouraging signs , yet I must acknowledge the complexities of the discussions and I will not in any way exclude that at a certain stage we will have to go back to the basics and see whether the political objectives we set ourselves - that is to help the new South Africa to have greater access to the European market and to improve trade with Europe - are not being lost sight of in the detail of too many sectoral aspects of the discussions .
Nevertheless , at this stage this is what I can tell Parliament .
I thank the Commissioner for his extensive answer and in particular his ad hoc remarks at the end .
I would like to ask him if he has any indication yet as to the precise negotiations for the mandate from the South African side ?
Also , could he comment on rumours that European multinationals based in South Africa , which have been protected by their industrial regime , are seeking to restrict the scope of industrial free trade within the context of this agreement ?
Regarding the state of play , the South African side has always been very much concerned about its neighbours .
From the beginning they have said that they do not want to be a prosperous country in the middle of poverty .
They want to take into account the concerns and the development concerns of their neighbours .
As you know , two or three months ago the SADC countries signed an agreement for a free trade area among themselves that will take effect in eight years ' time .
We should not ignore this .
It is a reality and has to be taken into account when negotiating with South Africa .
South Africa 's mandate has somehow been delayed and it has been difficult to put it on the table .
Yet , from what I learned a few weeks ago we will perhaps have the mandate in December and will therefore be able to start an assessment with our South African partners early in January .
With regard to the protectionism in some industries in South Africa during the apartheid period , it is quite clear that no protectionist measures will be accepted , despite the fact that there will be some asymmetry in many cases .
However , one thing is sure .
Infant industries which are struggling both in South Africa and in neighbouring countries will have to be protected .
Otherwise they will not be able to cope with sudden competition from the outside .
At this stage the greatest difficulties will be in the agricultural sector , in which many exemptions have been sought by the European Union , and some of the products for which exclusion has been sought are of great interest to our South African partners .
But , for the moment we are waiting for the starting point , the South African mandate , and as in every negotiation we will have to try to fill the gap .
I am pretty sure that with the support of the European Parliament , we will be able to finalize a good deal for both sides .
I thank the Commissioner for his note of encouragement .
I also note with interest that in his original response he used a euphemism .
He said ' constraints in agriculture ' when he meant ' excluded products ' .
About thirty minutes ago , Commissioner , you sat there , as I did , and listened to your colleague Mrs Gradin talk about the European Union 's free trade ideals .
Is it not rather hypocritical for us to pre-empt a negotiating session with a list of excluded products ?
What signal does that send to other countries ?
Should they do the same ?
Is it not the truth of the matter that the Council has instructed the Commission to obtain free trade only when it suits the European Union ?
The Council has to look to the interest of the European Union so that it tries to obtain the best deal in every agreement .
It is my task to try to show how good relations with the outside world , in this case South Africa and SADC are of importance to Europe .
Sometimes we talk as though this is just for the sake of those countries but that is not true .
If there are new areas emerging in the third millennium , in my opinion they will be in Southern Africa and possibly Western Africa .
So it is in our real interests - even putting aside our historical responsibilities and so on - to have deep-rooted relations with these countries .
Having been nine years on the other side of the fence , I know that the mandate is always very strict .
Perhaps some of you may recall the mandate of my former colleague Mr Andriessen when he went to the Uruguay Round .
At a certain stage he told the Council that he would rather wear his son 's very tight jacket than take the mandate he had been given into the discussions - he had no room for manoeuvre .
At the end some flexibility was sought , some discussions took place and I think the same will apply with South Africa .
I must repeat that the main objective in proposing a free trade agreement with South Africa is to help the new South Africa and the region .
That was the main reason why we proposed it and we should not lose sight of the main objective .
In each stage of the negotiation we have to assess whether what we are proposing is fair but that will also depend on the response from our South African partners .
At this stage I believe that the negotiators on both sides have great confidence in each other .
There is no hidden agenda .
We will have a very open and transparent discussion and it will be a model of a European and world trade negotiation .
I sincerely hope that it will be achieved as soon as possible because we are losing opportunities .
I would , first of all , like to thank the Commissioner for his very full and frank responses .
In September , along with a number of Members who are here tonight , I visited South Africa and two weeks ago I had the opportunity to meet the Deputy President in London .
The message from both those meetings was one of extreme concern , concern that unless we in the European Union are sympathetic to the already fragile state of the South African economy , an unfavourable trading framework would inflict enormous damage upon them .
It is against that background , Commissioner , that I put my question , because I learn that the European Union 's chief negotiator in the South African trade talks is shortly to be leaving his post .
I ask you if this is a cause for concern and I can assure you that these negotiations have to be continued and concluded in a most positive and constructive way , indeed , in your own words - and I wrote them down , ' for an agreement which fulfils the aspirations and interests of both parties ' and one reflecting the view that South Africa certainly deserves special consideration in this matter .
I could not agree more , and with regard to the chief negotiator , let me reassure you that he will be properly replaced .
As I have already said , I myself will be in very close touch with regard to the negotiations , not only with my own people , but with Minister Erwin and Vice-President Mbeki .
We have so agreed in order to try to eliminate misunderstandings , to try to lubricate the machine here and there .
So I hope that no discontinuity will take place .
I am sure that will not take place , despite the fact that Steffen Smidt is moving to another DG .
I am encouraged by the Commissioner 's tone and particularly by his acknowledgement of the complexity of the problem and the fact that the twin aims of achieving a free trade agreement and helping the Southern African countries might indeed prove to be incompatible .
The Commissioner will realize that a Commission financed study on the impact of the free-trade area on Botswana , Lesotho , Namibia and Swaziland shows that those countries will lose if they stay out of a free trade agreement and lose if a free trade agreement goes ahead and they are part of it .
They lose either way .
Therefore , I am rather unhappy with his answer that the Commission will not be considering compensation for loss of customs revenues if the free trade agreement goes ahead .
I wonder if he accepts the conclusions of the Commission finance study and , if he does , whether the Commission will reconsider compensation to those countries .
Let me put it this way : SACU revision which is being considered and is under way has shown that the revenue based on customs is something that cannot be the basis for the budget of the BLNS countries for the future .
So there is already some concern there with or without free trade areas .
What we have always said in the past is that we cannot do something which is thought to be compensation as such .
What we can do , and ought to do because we have done it elsewhere , is to try to help those countries in what we call transition periods with measures which correspond to a dramatic change in the sources of revenue from customs to other more normal , traditional and developed ways of obtaining revenue .
We have done that in many other countries .
We are doing that in UEMOA countries in Western Africa with the proposed Pari system and so there is no reason whatsoever why we should not consider it .
But it is something that will come out at the end of the negotiations .
If we come to the conclusion that these countries will be seriously hurt then we are prepared , of course , to consider those measures .
In no way will we fulfil our mandate if at the end of the negotiations we come to the conclusion that it would be detrimental to the neighbouring countries , because the mandate states clearly that it should benefit South Africa and the region .
So in that regard I will not exclude any measure , but I would like to consider them beforehand before we engage in a full discussion of the different sectors and products .
Frankly , in relation to the specific topic I believe the Commissioner has at least indicated in principle the direction of his response .
I do not know that I want to press him on the matter .
I would simply emphasize the point in the question : that is , that the anxiety to ensure that the smaller states in Southern Africa , where there are economic costs , be identified and that those identified costs be specifically and expressly addressed in any final agreement .
I think I have broadly answered your question but , as there is one more question on this issue , I will keep my comments for the last question .
I too am grateful to the Commissioner for his replies .
I should like to raise the subject of compensation for the third time , since the Commissioner said that the interests of the farmers should be given special attention .
He wishes to determine how they are affected by the Agreement , and is providing special assistance in order to find out .
It would therefore seem logical for compensation to be paid if the farmers are found to have suffered harm , but it is an extremely difficult matter , as we can see from the answers the Commissioner has given .
This brings me to my final question : if you want to help South Africa and the farmers , would it not make much more sense to extend the free trade agreement with South Africa to include the South African Customs Union ?
Well , Sir , you have raised the one-million-dollar question in the sense that we are trying to build a free trade area with South Africa ; South Africa is trying to build a free trade area with its neighbouring countries ; so the triangle logically implies that in one way or another we should be dealing with a free trade area in the region .
I share your approach , because it would be foolish on our part not to take into account the developments in the region .
So , our agreement with South Africa , whatever the final format , will have to have a clause on the progress of development of the agreement itself to take into account closer integration in the region .
One of the things which I and Vice-President Mbeki agreed on was that an evolving clause would have to be included , as well as a safeguard clause , to take into account the possibility of the train being derailed .
My name in Portuguese means God but it is just a name not a capacity , so we cannot predict exactly what will occur and we have to ensure that if things move away from our objectives , we have the capacity to get them back on track .
In that regard , I wish to reassure you that it is one of our concerns .
It is one of the technical difficulties but we are aware of them and we will have to take them into account in the final agreement that we reach with South Africa .
Mr President , my last comment is to ask you to keep up the pressure on this issue .
Question No 54 by Arlene McCarthy ( H-0912 / 96 )
Subject : Local and Regional Territorial Pacts for Employment
Given that , despite the fact that the UK signed up to the employment strategy at the Essen , Madrid and Florence Summits , both the UK Prime Minister John Major and the Employment Minister Gillian Shephard , have written to President Santer and Commissioner Flynn respectively stating their reluctance to implement the Commission 's Local and Regional Territorial Pacts for Employment , what steps does the Commission intend to take to persuade the UK to launch a pilot action programme .
In the event that the UK does opt out , will the Commission be repaying the Structural Funds from the deflator pro rata back to the UK Government ?
Does this mean that , at the Dublin Summit , the UK will be the only Member State not to have pilot action programmes for the Local and Regional Territorial Pacts for Employment ?
The Commission has had discussions with the Member States as to the nature and the composition of the territorial employment pacts and the ways in which they might be supported at European level .
The United Kingdom Government has expressed certain reservations about putting forward pacts as such but , nevertheless , it believes that the United Kingdom experience would be valuable for the other Member States and it is interested in sharing that experience , particularly at European level .
In the aftermath of the Dublin Summit , the Commission will be in touch with all the Member States about the arrangements for selecting projects which could form part of the European exchange-of-experience network .
I am hopeful that these contacts will lead to a consensus with the United Kingdom on the usefulness of the network and that there will indeed be United Kingdom participation in the network .
The question of the withholding of structural fund monies arising from the application of the annual deflator in the case of Member States opting not to participate does not arise .
The additional resources generated by the indexation are not conditional on the implementation of the pacts : they are allocated by the monitoring committees to measures in the existing programmes .
Commissioner , I think you have answered my question .
The issue is that there is an opt-out and it is wholly predictable that the UK has reservations , as you said in your letter .
In fact , I am sure you can appreciate that the current government is spending more time rearranging the deck-chairs on the Titanic than developing innovative approaches to employment .
I wish to quote from the letter that Gillian Shephard wrote to you in which she says : ' We do not wish to go down the path suggested by the Commission . ' It is very clear from this letter that the UK Government does not want any involvement of social partners or the issue of social partnership .
Commissioner , what is the value of a territorial pact without social partners and are we going to accept recycled projects that are not in the spirit of the confidence pact ?
How can the Commission help the social partners , the employers and the trade unions to get on board and run model action programmes ?
I would just like to respond that you have , in fact , answered the question yourself and you know precisely the reason why the United Kingdom does not want to be involved in this area .
It has a problem with the label insofar as pacts is concerned .
That raises questions about social dialogue and they do not want to be involved for that reason .
They seem to be particularly interested in sharing the good experience that they have insofar as local community initiatives of this kind are concerned .
I am not yet giving up on the fact that they might very well be persuaded to be involved in these matters .
But you will understand that it is not the Commission that will be selecting the pacts .
It is the Member States .
They will select the pacts and they will inform the Commission .
We will support the pacts in the network insofar as technical assistance is concerned , and there will be quite a number of those .
But it is a matter for the Member States to decide whether they will participate or not .
We cannot force any Member State to participate .
Unfortunately the position is not hopeful at the moment insofar as the United Kingdom is concerned , but who can tell what might happen .
Commissioner , what specific measures to tackle youth unemployment is the Commission planning for the immediate future , and what kind of support are you expecting from Parliament ?
You are quite right .
I think it is very important insofar as the integration of Europe is concerned for the social dimension to be understood .
I am particularly concerned about the level of youth unemployment .
At present there are about five million people under the age of 25 who do not have the passport to the labour market that a good qualification or indeed a good certificate or schooling would grant them .
We have to remember that about 30 % of the total population of young people are drop-outs from the educational system , so we have a real problem here .
That is the reason why at Florence , and at all the recent summits , we have sought a commitment to have three groups targeted for special attention .
These were also indicated at the Essen summit : the young unemployed , people who are long-term unemployed , and the question of equal opportunities .
Very importantly , the joint report has been agreed .
It is going forward .
Ecofin cleared it last week and so did the Social Affairs Council .
It is going forward to the Dublin summit .
It highlights two specifics : that there should be an investment by business now , because economic indicators are so strong in the Union ; also , that there should be an investment in human resources .
I would like to see a much greater investment insofar as human resources development for the young is concerned .
Question No 55 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0915 / 96 )
Subject : Measures to reduce alcohol consumption
The free movement of goods on the internal market also applies to a number of alcoholic beverages .
The extent of the free movement of alcohol for personal consumption , and the consequences this implies for consumption levels , are currently the subject of discussion between Sweden and the Commission on public health grounds .
It is important for the EU Member States to take uniform measures at national level to reduce alcohol consumption .
What is the Commission doing to encourage the Member States to take measures in this area ?
What have the European Union and its Member States done to reduce alcohol consumption by 25 % between 1980 and 2000 , in accordance with the WHO 's objectives ?
At European Union level , excessive alcohol consumption and the social and health consequences thereof have been identified as an important public health issue .
However , in conformity with the Council Resolution of 29 May 1986 on alcohol abuse , the Commission has to weigh up carefully the interests involved in the production , distribution and promotion of alcoholic beverages and the public health interests , and to conduct a balanced policy to that end .
The European public heath programmes , especially the action programme on health promotion , information , education and training , identify alcohol as a health issue and allow actions to be taken in this field whenever appropriate .
Coordination with measures already undertaken by the World Health Organization will be ensured .
The Commission obviously follows with great interest the implementation of the World Health Organization campaigns such as health for all by the year 2000 and the European alcohol action plan aimed at reducing the overall consumption of alcohol .
It is the task of both the Member States and the World Health Organization to evaluate to what extent these aims have been , or will be , achieved .
Thank you for your answer , Commissioner Flynn .
The connection between alcohol consumption and damage caused by alcohol does not need to be further demonstrated : we have proof of this from various sources .
By reducing consumption we would release great economic resources into society .
There is , in fact , a large hidden resource in reduced alcohol consumption .
We could use these resources instead to create employment and in so doing give our people a better quality of life .
The issue of alcohol is a health issue , which was pointed out quite correctly in Mr Flynn 's response .
Could Commissioner Flynn consider adopting the alcohol policy which we have in Sweden and reduce availability ?
This policy does work well .
I would just like to say to the Member that there is , as she quite rightly says , a very close link between the consumption of alcohol and public health , and that is very much taken on board by our new framework programme .
I have heard everything you have said in that regard and I note what you are saying in so far as the Swedish example is concerned .
That matter is also being considered in so far as the overall public health situation is concerned .
We are governed by that 1986 resolution which is still pertinent and very much to be supported .
Mr President , I should like to make an appeal to the Commissioner , since he comes from a country which produces one of the best alcoholic beverages in the world , namely an excellent whiskey - and I must leave it at that , since my wife is originally from Scotland , so I should not be advertising Irish whiskey .
However , I should like to point out how much the production and consumption of high-quality beverages - above all wine , beer and whisky - have contributed to European culture .
Given that the consumption of these beverages is a social event , or that they are consumed at social events , I firmly reject any kind of generalization whereby alcohol consumption is discussed in blanket terms and no distinction is made between social and excessive drinking .
In my opinion , it is also important for the Commission to disseminate culture and to promote diversity .
I should like to point out that Austria produces an enormous variety of wines and beers , which cannot be blamed without any qualification for the things which people dislike about alcoholic beverages .
I therefore vehemently oppose any kind of across-the-board discrimination - especially against wines and beers - such as that which is currently being imported from the United States and which is continually expounded by the ideologically dominated WHO .
The Member is quite right , it is a question of moderation .
It is with an excess of alcohol consumption that the problem arises .
There is a major problem in drafting a coordinated policy in that there is a lack of comparable data in relation to social and health problems with alcohol consumption and abuse .
So the health monitoring programme that I mentioned previously is seeking to collect all that data and have it more readily available so that we can get a better understanding of how to deal with the matter .
I have a question which takes us a little further forward and I am certain I will not get an answer to it .
For this reason , I am seizing the opportunity now .
I think that the two questions that we have so far heard show the cultural divide which the issue of alcohol raises within the European Union .
Of course this is a national responsibility but there is also a joint responsibility and interest in this issue and I believe that we should agree on it .
I would like the Commissioner to confirm , for example , that we can agree on the fact that drink and driving do not mix , that drink and pregnancy do not mix and that drink and teenagers do not mix .
This has nothing to do with culture .
This is an area in which we have joint responsibility in view of the increased movement of both goods and people which is apparent in Europe today .
You are right , of course .
The question of drink and driving is a problem we have right across the Union and very strong measures are taken in many Member States to deal with the question .
The threshold of alcohol in the bloodstream has been reduced very substantially in a lot of the Member States to deal with this matter .
Of course , as you quite rightly say , excessive alcohol in pregnancy is a very serious matter .
All of these things are considered in our health programme and I have taken on board the message that you are sending .
This particular question deals with Regulation 1408 on the coordination of social security schemes for migrant workers and it contains the rules which determine in complex cases , such as those quoted by the honourable Member , the Member State where the worker should be insured for social security , and also the Member State which should pay unemployment benefits if he or she becomes unemployed .
One of the basic principles of the regulation is that a worker is insured in the Member State where he or she carries out their professional activity .
However , there are special rules to determine where a worker is insured when he or she works in two or more Member States for an international transport company , such as a road transport company .
In such a case , the worker will normally be insured in the Member State where the company has its registered office .
However , if the company has a branch in another Member State , the persons employed by this branch shall be insured in that State , and that is done in accordance with Article 4 ( 2 ) , sub-section A of Regulation 1408 .
On the basis of the facts quoted in Mr Anderson 's example , and in accordance with the above-mentioned rules , the driver should be subject to the German social security system , since it seems that he is employed by the company 's German office .
If in fact the driver is employed by the office in Denmark , then the driver will be subject to the Danish social security system .
Normally , an unemployed person will be entitled to social security benefits in the country where he or she was last insured .
However , special rules come into play in the case of a person who , during their last employment , was residing in a state other than in the state of insurance .
If in the example given the lorry driver remains resident in Sweden , while his employment was based in Germany , then these special provisions contained in Article 71 , sub-section B of Regulation 1408 , will apply .
So according to these provisions , in the example that is given , the unemployed driver who resides in Sweden and returns there when he becomes unemployed may be entitled to Swedish unemployment benefits as if he had been last employed in Sweden .
Thank you for your answer .
It would appear that Commissioner Flynn is clear as to which rules apply , unlike the Swedish Labour Market Board which could not sort this out .
In this case , I would like to challenge the Commissioner to summarise , perhaps in very simple point form , these regulations and to distribute the information to the National States as it is obvious , despite what the Commissioner is now saying , that there is great uncertainty both amongst employees and employers on these conditions .
Yes , we can do that if it would be helpful .
We have had no complaint in this matter from the Member State .
When we get complaints of this nature an advisory commission of senior experts from all the Member States meets and they make an interpretation .
It is not binding legally but it has always been complied with .
But we have not had a complaint in this particular case .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Flynn for a good and detailed answer .
We have been asked these questions by trades unions back in Sweden , who have not been able to get answers to these difficult questions .
Coordination of social security systems is not easy , when people live in one place , work in another and are mobile between countries .
The answer from Commissioner Flynn is the clearest we have received so far and we will try to pass it on to those at home in Sweden who find themselves in this situation .
Thank you very much for your answer .
I have tried to make it as simple as I can .
If I can be of greater help , my office is available to give you more detailed information if that is required and it would be happy to be helpful in these particular circumstances .
Question No 58 by Anne McIntosh ( H-0926 / 96 )
Subject : European Union action against scrapie in sheep
Bearing in mind the recent public health scares related to cattle , what action has the Commission taken , or is proposing to take , to examine the causes of scrapie in sheep ?
Can the Commission confirm whether there is any scientific evidence of a link between scrapie in sheep and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans ?
Since 1990 the European Union has financially supported research activities on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies through its specific RDT programmes of the third and fourth framework programmes - that would be BIOMED , BIOTECH and FAIR , including research on Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and bovine spongiform encephalopathies as well as on scrapie .
In view of the risk of TSEs for human health the Commission has adopted a research action plan related to all of the TSEs .
That includes scrapie in sheep .
This action plan has been transmitted to the European Parliament and the Council and has been examined at a meeting of the Research Council on 5 December 1996 where an agreement was reached .
Scrapie is a TSE which affects sheep and goats and it was first described as early as 1732 .
It is widely distributed throughout the world with varying incidence and long term studies have been undertaken in the past to look at the possible relationship between the scrapie naturally occurring in sheep and CJD in humans .
There is no evidence , I have to say , from such studies of a risk of transmission , even in populations that consume material with high potential infectivity , such as sheep brains and offal .
Would the Commissioner care to comment if as a result of either programmes supported in the European Union or other programmes that have come to the knowledge of the Commission , we are any closer to knowing the causes of scrapie in sheep ?
That is the first question .
Secondly , is the Commission able to state categorically , as the Oxford studies have also proved in the UK , that there is still no conclusive evidence of the risk of transmission from cattle to humans .
I am slightly concerned that the conclusion drawn by the Commissioner is so categorical in relation to sheep and not as categorical in relation to beef .
That is the reason why I would like to tell the honourable Member that there has been a decision taken by the Research Council , as I mentioned , on the fifth of this month .
That research programme has been adopted and quite a sizeable sum of money has been applied to it .
It is going to deal with all the TSEs and that includes scrapie .
It will also deal with epidemiological studies to try and determine the situation finally .
I cannot say definitively that we know how scrapie originated in sheep .
It can be induced artificially .
Experiments are going on all the time on this matter and just today the Commission was discussing the whole question of specified risk material and the question of a Community-wide ban both in bovines and in ovines and in caprines .
We are going to have to await some further research before we can finally , hopefully , determine how these relate and how they are linked .
Question No 59 by Veronica Hardstaff ( H-0927 / 96 )
Subject : Lecturers ' conditions of service in the UK
Is the Commission aware that since Colleges of Education in the UK were taken out of the control of Local Authorities in April 1993 , those thousands of lecturers who remained on their transferred terms and conditions of service have been denied pay increases , promotion and staff development opportunities , and have also been made more vulnerable to dismissal or redundancy ?
Is this not in flagrant breach of European Law , and has the Commission any plans to follow up representations made to it to investigate this destruction of workers ' contractual rights ?
The question raised by the honourable Member concerns a problem relating to application of the national provision transposing Directive 77 / 187 in a specific case , rather than incorrect transposal of the directive into national law .
This means that it is for the competent national courts to take action in this particular matter .
The objective of the directive is to safeguard the rights of employees in the event of a change of employer by making it possible for them to continue to work for the transferee under the same conditions as those agreed with the transferor .
In any event , account should be taken of the fact that in accordance with the aforementioned directive as interpreted by the Court of Justice of the European Communities - I am talking here about Case 324 / 86 concerning ' Daddy 's Dance Hall ' - the rights and obligations under the employment contract or employment relationship may , in the context of a transfer , be altered with regard to the transferee to the same extent as they could have been with regard to the transferor , provided that the transfer of the undertaking itself does not constitute the reason for the change .
Since , according to information received by the Commission , legal action on this subject has already been started in the United Kingdom courts , the Commission feels that it must await the outcome thereof , in order to carry out a detailed analysis of all of the implications of the correct application of Community law which might possibly result from this particular case .
I am slightly puzzled by your answer in certain respects .
The compulsory changes in contracts which many thousands of further education lecturers have had to accept under great duress have resulted in those lecturers having to teach much longer hours to much larger classes .
In many cases , if they have shown reluctance to accept those changes or have supported colleagues who are reluctant to accept those changes , they have found that so-called performance related pay has been withheld and the normal increments that they could have expected under their previous conditions of service have not been paid .
At bottom is the threat of the hold-back of government grant from the colleges .
That is what is forcing principals down this path even where they would actually prefer to concentrate on meeting the educational needs of their students .
Does the Commission have the political will , when this has gone through the courts , actually to address this and ensure that this very large group of employees does not continue to suffer a very severe deterioration in their conditions of service ?
I would just like to say to the honourable Member that the question about transposition of the directive arose originally and there were some judgments at the Court of Justice concerning this matter .
They confirmed at that time that there was incorrect transposition into national law of Directive 77 / 187 .
Because of that there was further United Kingdom legislation and it was brought into line with Community law .
There do not seem to be any further problems concerning the specific point raised in the question .
There is an outstanding question about interpretation so far as worker representation is concerned and an Article 169 letter has been issued in that case .
But it does not refer to the point the honourable Member raised .
My understanding now is that the transposition on that point has been correct .
When these matters are now tested in the national courts and following on a judgment issuing therefrom , it would be my intention to carry out an analysis of the case and the point which you have raised .
We can revert to that at a later date .
That concludes Question Time . Questions not taken for lack of time will be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.35 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Internal electricity market
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0380 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C40457 / 96-00 / 0384 ( COD ) ) with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive concerning common rules for the internal market in electricity ( rapporteur : Mr Desama ) .
Madam President , firstly - and you will permit me to use a few seconds of my speaking time to this effect - I would like a formal record to be made of my protestation , as rapporteur , against the way things are organised by the bureaucracy of the European Parliament .
Debating one of the most important acts of legislation for two years , at 9 o 'clock at night before rows of empty seats , is frankly unworthy of a Parliament and I would like you to mention this fact to our President .
Now that has been said , I am not going to spend the next few minutes here recounting the story of the long odyssey of the Directive on the internal energy market .
I would merely like to say this : the common position of the Council is the result , in its current form , of a long and fruitful , though sometimes difficult and combative , cooperation between Parliament , the Commission and also , in fine , the Council .
At the start , the positions taken up were greatly opposed to one other .
Today , we are examining a common position which takes up no less than 80 % of the amendments voted in on the first reading in Parliament with , between the two readings , a modification in the position of the Commission .
This shows that the work we have put in on this piece of legislation , together , has been serious and careful .
Anyway , I would like to thank my colleagues in the European Parliament , particularly the members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , the European Commission and the successive commissioners who have had to get to know the dossier , from Mr Cardoso to Mr Papoutsis .
Finally , I would like to thank the Council which , in the last tight corner , managed - and it is known that this is not always easy for the Council - to find in itself the strength to reach a compromise which cost many countries a great deal .
So , as it stands , this common position is very broadly suitable to the European Parliament .
Indeed , we find in it a number of essential elements which we stressed in the first reading , at the forefront of which I would like to mention the public service obligations .
This directive on the internal market will , indeed , be the first act of derived law to establish obligations of public service .
In this area , we are going beyond , one might say , what has been done up to now .
I think that that is a good route to be taking , a step in the right direction . I think that if all of the partners stuck to this route for subsequent directives on the internal market , a balance between the will of the Commission and that of Parliament could be reached fairly easily , it seems to me .
The second point of satisfaction is the fact that this directive will open up the markets , without for all that forcing the Member States to liberalise their own systems .
Opening up the markets is a positive step , of which we are all in favour .
The liberalisation will , at least during the transitional period , be left to the discretion of each Member State , thanks to the application of the well-understood principle of subsidiarity .
In passing , let us also take note of a number of points which have been taken up directly from suggestions from the European Parliament .
I am thinking here of invitations to tender , for example relating to new production capacities .
I am thinking also of the possibility of giving priority to generating centres using renewable sources to supply the network .
I could continue with other examples , such as the progressive opening of markets , which goes along entirely with the wishes of the Committee on Energy , and finally , the famous ' negotiated access to the network ' , which really is a sort of invention which the Commission and Parliament have found together to avoid allowing generalised access by third parties to the network .
I could mention others , the transparency of accounts , for example , in short , a whole series of points on which Parliament is eminently satisfied .
This directive , this common position , is a good common position .
In view of this , why is the European Parliament not content to approve it as such ?
Because , as La Palice would say , if 80 % of the amendments appear in the common position , there must be 20 % which do not appear .
These are certainly not the most important ones , but there are still two points about which we do feel , I must confess , a certain amount of bitterness .
Firstly , there was no generalisation on the eligibility of distributors , and we understand perfectly the reason for this .
Generalisation of eligibility did indeed run into considerable political difficulties and it was , from there onwards , more sensible to leave it to subsidiarity , to the discretion of Member States .
But I think we will have to come back to that later .
Secondly , and on this our sense of regret is perhaps stronger , the directive is not specific enough on the matter of harmonisation .
On the subject of this , I would like to appeal to the Commission : if tomorrow , as I suspect - not to mention fear - most of the amendments , or even all of the amendments , do not pick up the qualified majority of this House , I hope that the Commission might strike up a dialogue with the European Parliament on the subject of harmonisation , which might result in a communication in which the Commission , in some way , defines the general lines of what , in two years ' time , will be the future directives on harmonisation which the Council will ask for .
As regards the amendments in their entirety , I will tell you that the rapporteur will support only those which have been voted for by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , and , particularly , you will have understood , the amendment dealing with harmonisation .
Beyond that , I will not support the other amendments , for which I can register my personal agreement , whatever sympathy they inspire in me , firstly because they have not been voted for by the Committee on Energy and next , because they certainly will not gain the majority of the House .
I remain grateful to all those who have enabled the achievement of this directive and I think that , tomorrow , if some of these amendments are voted in , then tomorrow we will be asking the Commission for its opinion on them .
I shall pass on your comments to Mr Hänsch , but I have to say that this is always the complaint on Tuesday and Wednesday evenings .
We do indeed always have important things on our agenda , but this is a matter for the political group chairmen , who discuss and decide on the agenda .
I would therefore ask , if this situation occurs again , that you draw attention to it in good time in the political groups , but this is always a sore point and I can understand that it is being raised again now .
Madam President , whatever the outcome of the vote on the amendments tomorrow , we have to recognize that the common position as it now stands represents a considerable advance on the original text , and we would like to pay tribute to Mr Desama 's work in this respect .
The debate , of course , has taken something like six years , but that is because we are working within the extremes of those that want the full monopoly position and those that want full liberalization .
It is something of a miracle that we have managed to bring the two together somewhere in the middle , though not as much in the middle as some of us would like .
We have to remember that electricity is a vital component in our economy .
Demand for it is actually rising faster than the overall demand for energy .
More of our citizens are connected to an electricity supply than are connected to a gas supply .
So that is another reason for its importance .
Because of the link with the public , standards of public service , the issues of environmental impact , are of direct concern to all of our citizens .
The compromise that has emerged from the Council , and which the electricity industry has broadly welcomed , represents a somewhat restrictive benefit of economic liberalization to the large-scale consumers .
The domestic consumer has rather been pushed to one side in this text .
Moreover the industry has lobbied very hard and , one must say , successfully , to limit its public service obligations and to resist harmonization in environmental standards , social protection for the workers in the industry , and in the field of taxation .
It has been successful in trying to maintain as much of its monopoly position as it could for as long as it could .
However , we regret that in the vote in our committee the EPP group did not support the cause of the smaller consumers and ignored the many social and public service concerns .
There are clear matters of national interest in the electricity supply industry .
Not all the countries have abundant energy supplies .
Some have no primary energy sources at all , so it is understandable that national governments should have powers to determine the balance of primary fuel use .
This is not contrary to the principles of an internal market provided equal treatment exists for each fuel sector .
It is for those reasons that the Socialist Group will support Amendment No 11 .
Whatever the outcome of the vote the Socialist Group will continue to press the issues of public concern through all the avenues that are open to it .
We look to the Commission for support in that endeavour .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a happy outcome is worth waiting for , as the saying goes .
Perhaps we can say that here too , or then perhaps not .
We shall have to see .
What is the point at issue here ?
It is that energy supply in Europe should become more integrated , that market structures should slowly be put in place , and that consumers should gradually secure more rights than they have had in the past .
It has certainly taken a long time - nine years - and it will also take a good while longer , another eight years in fact , including implementation .
I should like to mention three points .
Firstly , I would pay tribute to our rapporteur for the tremendous amount of work he has done and his considerable success , and also compliment the Council in particular on what is a skilful compromise .
Why a compromise ?
Quite simply , because a variety of starting positions on the ground in the 15 Member States had to be coordinated : some quite liberal , others diverse but monopolistic , as in my country , and others structured in an entirely different way .
Why skilful ?
Because there has been give and take on all sides .
That is the essence of a compromise .
Something is happening as regards consumers ' rights and the opening-up of the market : these are already actually in place under the Treaties , but now they are to be officially applied , first in small doses of around a quarter to a third of the market , then to services in the general public interest .
These are recognized , but now they will be transparent and verifiable .
That is a step forward . They should be limited where it proves impossible for them to be performed by competitors , and in any event the Member States must meet the quota for opening up the market .
The third important point is access to the system .
Here , the proposal to opt for two models is a sound one .
The single buyer concept is a new idea which has succeeded in reconciling ownership and the need for competition .
I would point out that this also accommodates the difficult situation with supplies to eastern Germany , for example , where it has been possible to mobilize high investment in the short term , whilst still complying with the directive .
A fourth point is the freedom of the Member States to proceed further with liberalization .
This is not obstructed , but made possible by a protective clause on what is termed negative reciprocity .
Much has also been done for the environment .
The directive will lead to a drive for innovation and thus encourage more efficient plant .
It also promotes electricity production from renewable sources , combined heat and power systems , and waste .
Producers of energy from renewable sources are given preferential treatment when it comes to authorization .
The directive also does much that makes sense in terms of subsidiarity , with two systems of access and two systems for procuring new capacity on the purchasing side .
All in all , there is a little more competition , a little more awareness of cost and a little more European common ground , so this is a step in the right direction .
Unfortunately , the same cannot be said of the amendments .
These fall into four groups : those which are unnecessary ; those which are based on misunderstandings ; those which are destructive ; and those which have no place here at all , because they have nothing to do with this legislative project .
Since time is short , I shall just say a little more about the third category - what I describe as the destructive amendments - which actually show from what a variety of directions a compromise has been constructed here .
This applies to the amendment on distributors , for example , of which I personally would be in favour and which I advocated for many years , but which I do not support here , because it destroys the compromise .
The same goes for the amendment seeking to allow only partial opening-up of the market .
It is unacceptable , because the compromise is destroyed .
The same applies to the over-extending of the concept of ' services in the public interest ' .
The arguments are the same there too .
For all these reasons , my group has decided not to table any amendments , nor to vote for any , but to help to make the compromise achieved in the Council a reality .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , this is the second reading of the electricity directive , which is designed to create an internal market in electricity .
The Liberal Group welcomes the moves to open up the market , but it is striking that a number of governments are doing their best to delay the creation of an internal market not just by one or two years , but by nine .
It is also striking that the Council has asked Parliament not to exercise its legislative powers when we are engaged in the codecision procedure on this dossier .
But if we fail to use our powers to make good legislation on a subject which is so crucial for the whole of Europe 's industry , will we not then become the toothless tiger that people so often accuse us of being ?
The Liberal Group has decided not to let itself be manoeuvred into this corner .
The Council often takes little heed of Parliament 's powers , but history has taught us that democracy is something to be fought for .
The Liberal Group therefore supports two amendments which substantially improve the Council 's common position .
Firstly , there is Amendment No 12 , tabled by my group , which concerns the position of the distribution companies on the electricity market .
The distribution companies need to be recognized as full parties in the market in every Member State , and if the internal market is to work effectively , equal players must have equal rights .
The distribution companies are in a position to stimulate initiatives at a decentralized level , such as obtaining energy from renewable sources and co-generation .
All the Members of this House , regardless of their political leanings , expressed their support for creating renewable energy sources during the recent debate on the energy White Paper .
But when it comes to voting and legislation , none of the major groups is ready to stand up and be counted .
Now that legislation is to be introduced , we should finally put our words into action .

Next there is Amendment No 5 by the Committee on Energy , which allows priority to be given to the production of electricity from renewable sources and co-generation .
The Liberal Group also supports this amendment .
Cogeneration plants undoubtedly contribute to the efficient use of energy , thereby saving money , increasing the competitiveness of our industries and - an important consideration - protecting the environment .
Those who oppose the liberalization of the electricity market forget that healthy competition is the only way to ensure that production units are used efficiently .
As a production factor and therefore a cost element , energy can give firms a competitive edge , even over rivals in America .
Energy cannot and must not be allowed to distort the operation of the market .
The Liberal Group is very much in favour of both continuing to use existing energy sources and starting to use alternatives .
We are convinced that with the discipline of the market , with everyone in the Union competing on a level playing field , a balance could be found between the various energy sources and alternative energy would be given a fair chance .
In one of the Dutch newspapers , Mr van Velzen of the PPE Group called for the Liberal Group 's support to ensure that the Council 's position would be adopted unamended .
There is little chance of us responding to his advances .
Madam President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Desama on his excellent work but also have to place on record the observation that one of the problems posed by the structure of the current European economic model , backed by Maastricht 's neoliberalism , is the considerable number of contradictions it contains .
In this way , the proposal to harmonize and liberalize the electricity sector may be wellintentioned but , by not taking account of the important social and political aspects involved , its consequences are serious .
The three most significant of these are as follows :
First of all , the threat to jobs and the productive structure of the sector in countries which contribute with a large supply of autonomous energy - as is the case in Spain with the mining-sector contribution of coal from the coalfields in the regions of León , Palencia , Asturias , Galicia , Andalusia , etc .
Hence our amendment to the effect that this percentage should increase from the 15 % proposed to 30 % .
Secondly , the threat to the public-service character which the supply of electricity must have if a large percentage of its distribution is left in the hands of market forces , as a result of which sectors of the population in a deteriorating situation might see their position placed in jeopardy .
And , thirdly , the paradox which arises when calling for a reduction in electricity prices , since consumption will automatically increase and , at the same time , we shall be contributing to atmospheric pollution on a large scale , which runs counter to undertakings made at the Rio Conference , thereby distancing ourselves from the model of sustainable development we so earnestly advocate .
It is on these grounds , therefore , that we believe the most sensible procedure would be a global reconsideration of this proposal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , competition is a good thing when it leads to greater efficiency and is not damaging to the environment .
No one wants to keep the present status quo , with energy supply consisting of monopoly structures .
The Greens are in favour of competition based on the provision of environmentally friendly energy services .
So far , however , the European Parliament has not taken the opportunity of starting to restructure the internal energy market on ecological lines .
Unfortunately , this directive will not break up the monopolies and produce environmentally friendly competition - quite the opposite .
The directive creates a ' light ' monopoly , a ' soft ' monopoly , and the processes of concentration in terms of energy supply will be intensified .
There is a great risk that the local and regional energy suppliers will fall by the wayside and become the puppets of the large energy monopolies .
Consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises will also fall by the wayside , since the proposal for a directive allows for cross-subsidization and they will have to be prepared for high energy prices , while major industries are subsidized with energy at dumping prices .
Competition breeds on diversity , however , and that is what we are trying to say with our amendment on distributors , as many political groups have done .
Our main criticism is the lack of ecological guidance .
The political signal that we must give is to create an ecological framework for competition in the internal energy market .
If such a framework is not established , we shall meet our ecological Waterloo .
The proposal for a directive will lead to dumping prices for energy .
Dumping prices increase demand for energy and lead to it being wasted .
This will mean that we fail to achieve our climate policy objectives and result in a climatic disaster .
To stop this happening , we urgently need to balance the situation with an energy tax , as the Green Group in the European Parliament is recommending .
In principle , we welcome the fact that the proposal for a directive still allows the Member States some scope , which must be exploited in ecological terms .
Denmark has provided us with a good example of how the directive can be framed sensibly and ecologically .
And the German law on energy saving is clearly supported by the proposal for a directive .
However , this ecological room for manoeuvre has not been established clearly enough for it to stand up to pressure from the industry .
The European Parliament must set a course for ecological energy reform .
It is therefore regrettable that co-generation and renewable energy sources are not being given even greater priority , since they are where the future lies .
A study commissioned by the Dutch Government has shown that failure to exploit the EU 's energy saving potential and its renewable sources of energy is costing between ECU 45 and 80 billion every year .
That is why it is so important for us to establish integrated resource planning .
This figure makes it clear that we need a political signal - not a ' light ' monopoly , but a move towards an ecological restructuring of the internal energy market , with competition based on the provision of environmentally friendly energy services and on a sustainable energy policy .
The European Parliament has to take this opportunity .
We need to give a clear signal .
A new system of competition in the energy services sector must pursue three objectives : climate protection , ecological energy supply , and a strategy of energy efficiency .
Madam President , the common position which is presented to us today is the result of a difficult compromise within the European Union which , in this area as in others , reflects a considerable heterogeneity .
My group recognises and salutes the impressive work of our colleague Claude Desama , who has made a great effort over the last few months to bring closer together differing points of view on the subject of electricity .
We have here the result of a hard battle fought in the European Parliament , which has made it possible to emerge with the least evil compromise even if , viewed from France , it may appear bitter to some .
Indeed , we wonder if the fragile equilibrium proposed to us does not present a real threat , in the long term , to the concept to which we are deeply attached , that of a real European public service in the key sector of electricity .
We consider that there are areas , in particular energy , for which the Union must detach itself from an ultra-liberal approach .
Energy is the basis for all economic and industrial development .
It is essential for the progress of the life of society .
It is a source which cannot be reduced simply to market forces .
On this matter we have reached the limit of what we , in Europe , can stand .
Competition in the electricity sector is inconceivable in anything other than homeopathic , controlled and regulated doses .
The French government , for example , cannot be allowed over the coming months , on the basis of this directive , to begin to challenge and dismantle Électricité de France , a publicly-owned company which , over the fifty years of its history , has proved its dynamism and competence .
Madam President , today my country is unhappy .
Why , in the name of what , upon what ideological whim should a system which works and which produces some of the least expensive electricity in Europe be changed ?
How are we going to explain to the European workforce in this sector that liberalisation is a positive move , when it brings reductions in workforces everywhere , the loss of job security and a reduction in the quality of services ?
It is questions like these that we should all be confronting , irrespective of our groups , in our own countries and these are my concerns for France , when transposition of the directive we are examining today is the order of the day .
Consequently , I will naturally remain vigilant , in order that the public service of electricity may remain , in France and in Europe , a model for social and economic development .
Madam President , chance has it that this week , in addition to Mr Desama 's report , we are also going to discuss Mr Herman 's report on telecommunications .

What is beyond chance - we might also have added pension funds - is that all of these matters have something in common , in that they are tremendous gold mines , tremendous sources of profits and in that , obviously , the multinationals of industry , services and insurance want , under the cover of deregulation , efficiency , privatisation and other ideological smoke screens , to lay their hands on this gold mine .
In the domain of electricity , this has given rise to an eight-year war to open 30 to 35 % of the market over nine years .
Two theories were known to be in opposition : either the electricity sector should be opened to all , or electricity should be considered a specific product - Mr Sainjon was saying this just now - which deserves different rules .
Mr Desama , we could talk about technical things , the single buyer , the opening of the market segment by segment , access of third parties , even about the eligibility of distributors which was rejected by two votes in the committee , as has been the case , moreover , with the whole of this text .
It is indeed a coup de force of the chairman of the Committee on Energy that we are discussing this text at all , since it had been rejected by 12 votes against 12 .
Having said that , the matter needs to be considered from the point of view of policy , of policy on energy and of policy on the independence of Europe in terms of energy .
Do we or do we not , in twenty years ' time , want electricity to be generated wholly from gas , Algerian gas or Russian gas , because , financially , it is more profitable ?
It takes 30 or 40 years for a nuclear power station to pay for itself , as it does a hydroelectric power station or a coal-fired power station .
The transportation costs are the same , while a gas-fired power station , on the other hand , pays for itself much more quickly , for much lower sums invested .
Hence the proliferation of this type of power station .
The same reasoning holds true for the cost structure : 100 Ecus of gas-generated electricity represent a 20 % investment for 80 % of fuel , while , for the other types , the proportions are the other way round .
In the end , financial motivations will lead to a Europe covered with gas-fired power stations , which is already the case in Great Britain .
In this way France , in particular , will lose the independence with respect to energy that it has won with great difficulty .
And I say this also for environmentalists : we will have to give up traditionally-generated , tidal , windgenerated and other kinds of electricity .
In other words , electricity is the property of us all and is virtually a common heritage of humanity .
This is what the idea of public service conveys , it does not arise from privatisation .
I have had the opportunity of saying this before : we do not privatise fairies , they belong to us all .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , unlike the previous speaker , I believe that this directive is overdue ; unless we reach a political compromise here , the Court of Justice will decide , and then many of those who have spoken against the directive here in the House will have a rather sorry look on their face .
I should especially like to thank Mr Desama , who has worked towards this compromise for many years ; it is a sensible one , as he and many others before him have said .
The directive is only a first step , however .
I actually take the view that technical change will tend to speed up liberalization in future . In five or ten years , when fuel cells are on the market , when transporting electrical power over long distances involves fewer losses , or perhaps when one or other of the renewable sources of energy is more competitive , we shall be talking about access to the system in quite different terms from today .
We could see a similar development to that in telecommunications , where technology has actually forced a change in the structure of the system .
It should also be pointed out here , however , that the directive will have substantial effects which we may not welcome quite so much .
The pressure to reduce costs will speed up concentration .
Large businesses will swallow up smaller ones .
Smaller businesses will have to combine with one another to achieve cost advantages , and natural gas - as has rightly been said - will penetrate further into the power supply market .
In some Member States , the directive will certainly be used as an opportunity to increase competition , even though the directive itself does not require this .
However , it does leave the Member States a considerable amount of scope .
Finally , I would return to the question of eligible customers , where it is indeed a very strange thing that customers have to be eligible .
I think it is actually part of the philosophy of our Treaty that one is always eligible to be a customer .
This directive takes a rather different line on the matter , however .
It provides for distributors to be eligible only where the Member States wish them to be so .
We have tabled an amendment on this point , which I would ask the House to support .
The reasoning behind it has already been described .
I would just make one further comment to Mr Mombaur , who rightly said that the amendment in question was sensible , but perhaps an awkward one in tactical terms .
He takes the view that it destroys the compromise .
The compromise is not the result of action by the Council alone .
Ultimately , it is produced by Parliament and the Council , and if we make it our rule to see a compromise reached after difficult discussions in the Council as immutable , then we need not campaign for any extension of Article 189b to other areas .
So I would ask you to reconsider whether you cannot vote for this amendment after all , since we do agree on the matter .
Madam President , I should like to begin by offering the rapporteur , Mr Desama , my warmest thanks .
The Council adopted several of Parliament 's suggestions after the first reading , and he has managed to make even more progress on a number of points .
He can congratulate himself on the result .
His task at second reading was anything but easy , and I know how much effort he has put into preparing this report .
It usually happens with compromises that no one is entirely happy with the result .
My group too hesitated for a long time about tabling amendments , but finally came to the conclusion that the most important thing was to have a directive to regulate the electricity market after seven years , and it has therefore decided to approve this fragile compromise , warts and all . Half a loaf is better than no bread .
What would be in store for us if the Council 's common position were not adopted tomorrow ?
Firstly , we would be plunged into a conciliation procedure with a very uncertain outcome , and with the risk of eventual rejection by the Council .
What would happen then ?
The liberalizing trends in various Member States would continue , opening far too many doors for the dominant players on the market , and private investors such as the banks would come to play an increasingly important role .
Transfrontier joint ventures would be launched , and of course the Court of Justice would produce its rulings .
In the short term , there would be no kind of market regulation at all at European level , and there would be a considerable risk that people 's security of supply would be jeopardized , not to mention all our ambitious plans for giving renewable sources of energy - which are too expensive at the moment - greater priority in terms of electricity production .
We can forget them all .
I should therefore like a clear statement from the Commissioner this evening that he still fully supports the Council 's common position , and that he will resist any attempts to undermine this fragile compromise .
Although I very much appreciate all that Mr Desama has done , I have to say that I think a number of his amendments are still far too premature .
Even Amendments Nos 3 and 8 on public service obligations go much too far and are not acceptable .
Amendment No 12 by Mrs Plooij seems very appealing in the Netherlands context , but even the Liberal Group should know that it is simply placing a time bomb under the whole compromise .
Do you want to saddle the Dutch presidency with a major problem like this even before it starts ?
If so , I shall be interested to see what happens in your group 's constructive talks with the Minister for Economic Affairs .
The gas directive , which is something the Dutch presidency is interested in , might also have to be written off , since it is based on much the same principles as the electricity directive .
This directive is like a bottle of ketchup .
It takes a long time before anything comes out , and you have to give it a good shake and be patient .
That is what we have been doing for the last seven years .
But once it starts , then things move very quickly .
Madam President , it should be noted that since the establishment of the single market , strengthened by the Maastricht Treaty , public companies have been in the sights of the European Commission and the governments of Member States .
Indeed , they constitute undeniably poles of resistance against the liberalisation and deregulation which arise from the choice of society which gives primacy to competition and the quest for profit , to the detriment of the public interest and the satisfaction of the needs of citizens .
The electricity sector is not spared , with the adoption of the common position of the Council on the directive opening the electricity market up to competition to a tune of 32 % in the year 2003 , which in France would lead to the destruction of Electricité de France , which has proved its efficiency .
The only beneficiaries of this would be the large consumers , essentially the large industrial companies , to the detriment of small firms and domestic users , following the example of what has happened in Great Britain .
This exposure to competition is , moreover , in danger of causing massive redundancies , aggravating regional inequalities , compromising security of supply while limiting the capability of States to make long term investments and intervene in choices of energy .
Favouring the short term , investments giving the quickest profit will be favoured , namely gas-fired power stations , to the detriment of other sources of energy .
Now , in the energy sector , a short term vision could very quickly become a source of concern and present serious problems with respect to the environment and exhaustion of existing reserves .
The directive undermines the will of States to ensure that they are independent in terms of energy , going as far as to limit arbitrarily their possibilities of having their own energy resources .
It also opens the way for the questioning of some public service obligations , notably honesty of price , guarantee of supply , equal treatment of users , and the evening out of prices .
All of these matters have led our group to propose a rejection of the Council 's common position , a rejection which is backed up both by Article 92 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , which recognises the freedom of each State to depart from the rules of competition in the organisation of its public services , and also by the principle of subsidiarity .
The latter should enable one to recognise the specific nature of electricity , which is not a commodity like any other , but rather a resource which belongs to the whole of mankind , and which , therefore , should not be subject to free competition .
Our group feels strongly enough to contribute , in association with trade union organisations , employees and user associations , to the failure of this draft directive , to contribute to the defence and renewal of public companies so that they can fulfil entirely their mission of public service , responding to the interests of users and employees , enabling harmonious integration into their environment and facilitating cooperation within the European Union and internationally .
Madam President , liberalizing the internal market in electricity sounds wonderful and may be a good thing , but how can we talk about competition when we exclude one section from the outset and do not allow it to take part , namely the small producers ?
How can we talk about competition on equal terms , when there are unequal systems of taxation ?
I would simply point to Sweden , Finland and Denmark .
In our view , this is a frontal attack on renewable energy sources and energy efficiency .
In the base-load sector - and that is where the cherries will be picked - we shall see deals at dumping prices , which is exactly the opposite of what we want , namely energy savings .
There will be a great disparity between urban and rural energy prices .
That will also lead to heavy losses for the small and medium-sized enterprises which we actually wish to support .
Ultimately , this proposal as it is framed here - with no priority for renewable energy sources , with no priority for energy saving - is unacceptable .
Nor do I see how , with this directive on the internal energy market , we shall make any progress at all towards the goals we set ourselves for Rio , Berlin and using renewable energy sources .
We shall achieve precisely the opposite .
As the directive stands at the moment , it produces nothing .
Madam President , the Commissioner should be congratulated on the fact that this common position finally includes guarantees of compliance on the part of the public sector and of social and territorial cohesion , as Parliament and its rapporteur , Claude Desama , whom I sincerely congratulate , have been demanding .
However , many of us are still doubtful that these measures will genuinely lead to price reductions for everyone and to job creation .
In fact , we rather fear the opposite .
There is no transparency in terms of costs .
In the Spanish case , using the announcement of this directive as an excuse , the government is justifying the virtual disappearance of national coal supplies and therefore depopulation , increased unemployment and the impoverishment of the Spanish coal-mining districts .
Using this directive and the argument of the cost of transition to a competitive market as a pretext , the electricity companies have arrived at an agreement which is extremely costly to consumers , which has excluded the other players from the market and which enables them to eliminate financial costs and maintain the benefits of inefficient investment as if they were genuinely profitable . All of this is a crystal-clear abuse of an exclusive and dominant position reinforced by government actions and a situation which requires the European Commission to ask exactly what is going on .
The Spanish oligopoly - companies and banks - is being reinforced and , curiously , it has sufficient excess profit to acquire , in connection with the privatizations which are being announced , everything still in government hands in the energy and telecommunications sectors .
Consumers are losing out and will have to pay for the operation although they are being told that they will enjoy a small tariff reduction . This is nothing but a smokescreen .
All those living in the coal-mining areas are losing out .
Commissioner , Madam President , at Christmas , we in the European Parliament ought also to be generous of spirit , so I would ask all Groups , especially the European People 's Party , to vote in favour of the amendments calling for increased use of autonomous energy sources , even if this is only to eliminate the justification claimed by the Spanish Industry Minister who is taking refuge in this directive in order to increase unemployment in many Spanish regions .
This is the request submitted to us by town councils , led , by the way , by the Fuenteovejuna town council - elected members from the Spanish People 's Party are well aware of what Fuenteovejuna signifies .

Madam President , I also have to commend Mr Desama for the very reason that I was a witness , a very direct witness , of the efforts he has put in to achieve this common position and , as he has so correctly stated , this common position is a good thing - it is a good thing on account of the work done by a great many people in this House .

Admittedly , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we would all certainly have preferred something different , but this is the first step on the road forward , a very important first step which , a year ago , ladies and gentlemen , we would have put our names to because we were not sure that it could be achieved .
Admittedly we would like environmental protection - which is currently lacking in the electricity sector - to be gradually incorporated and energy efficiency to improve . This is a subject we are constantly talking about , but words are not being followed up by deeds .
However , I am convinced that we will shortly see the fruit of our labours .
I listened to Mrs García Arias and it seemed to me that she was in the wrong House and the wrong country , because I did not understand any of what she said .
It seemed like a fantasy to me - and not a heroic one , either - and this saddens me because I regard her as a friend . She has an astute mind but I do not know what she was referring to .
Perhaps she was referring to the fact that the socialist government , whose party she belongs to , was the one which caused the loss in Spain of 25 , 000 coal-mining jobs and the fact that the current Industry Minister is attempting to salvage what he can from the socialist government 's disastrous energy policy .
However , since we are not here to discuss national policies but an exciting project - Union , the internal electricity market - I would like to say that my Group will not be supporting any of the amendments except for those relating to coal use .
The directive points out that economic preference may be given to coal because all the coal which the States have and require can be used to the extent of 15 % of primary energy .
In Spain , coal currently accounts for 18 % of primary energy - 10 % comes from domestic coal and 8 % from imported coal .
With 15 % , therefore , there is still a 50 % buffer to which economic preference may be given .
Yet we also envisaged support for the amount being 25 % - that at least is what I am requesting .
Why ?
Simply to help calm down those who have become overexcited .
We have added to an amendment which speaks of 25 % - which would be two and a half times the amount of national coal Spain currently uses - the fact that Member States might be able to apply these measures as a function of their requirements , in accordance with transitional arrangements .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for your attention .
We will be supporting only these amendments , not the others , because we want the single electricity market to begin operation as soon as possible .
Madam President , let me begin by making it clear that while , on the one hand , the opening-up and partial liberalization of the internal market in electricity is a crucial step towards full achievement of the single market , we have , nevertheless , to understand that the Council 's common position is a stage that has , as other honourable Members have said , to be viewed as the starting-point for further developments rather than the final position for this most important of sectors .
Other members of the EPP Group have already explained the reasons why we are in favour of supporting the text without amendment , even though we should have very much liked to have seen more substantial progress in many areas .
These concern , for example , the role of the distributors , such as the companies taken over by the municipal authorities , to give an Italian example ; the special procedures for access to the liberalized market for consortia and small and medium-sized companies - another very important aspect that has not been considered ; enhancement of the role of those producing their own electricity and independent producers and , finally , to give another very important example , liberalizing further transfrontier trade in electricity .
Although introducing amendments to the directive at this stage would have involved the risk of undermining the work of eight years , the European Parliament will have , in the near future , to make an effort in this area and - once the directive has been adopted - urge the Council and the Commission swiftly to take further measures to liberalize the market with the obvious advantages anticipated for the competitiveness of European production and for consumers generally .
Finally , I wish to say that it is particularly important for some Member States , such as Italy in which the market in electricity - previously not really a proper market at all - is about to be extensively restructured , that the directive be issued rapidly .
The fact is that unless we have a secure - albeit minimal - legal framework of the kind offered by the directive , which we hope will at any rate be transposed in Italy with further improvements of the kind I briefly mentioned , we shall be able neither to get the recently established regulatory authority for the sector up and running properly nor to achieve effective and satisfactory privatization of ENEL , the national electricity board , although those measures , along with financial reorganization , are vital if we are to bring Italy into step with the rest of the European Union .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the motion we are debating today at second reading , which concerns the completion of the internal market for electricity , is the outcome of a truly prolonged procedure .
After eight years of discussions , both by the Council and in Parliament , it now seems possible to reach a solution acceptable to all interested parties .
First of all , then , I would like to stress the importance of the work carried out by the rapporteur , Mr Desama , whom I want to thank most warmly for his excellent work over 6 years - if I remember rightly - on behalf of the European Parliament .
I think , then , that in the ways you have indicated and with your personal work , we have managed following the decisions by Parliament 's Committee on Energy to come before theHouse today to debate the second reading of this most important directive .
This common position by the Council expresses the large degree of agreement and compromise established between the Member States , as Mr van Velzen too stressed in his speech , and also the compromise achieved between the European Union 's institutional bodies .
This is an important agreement which opens up new paths towards energy policy in Europe , as Mr Soulier characteristically stressed a short while ago .
And as you will have noted , the common position includes most of the amendments adopted by the European Parliament at first reading , as Mr Desama reminded us when he said that 80 % of the European Parliament 's amendments had been accepted and are now included in the common position .

The common position is based on the establishment of common rules , in other words basic principles pertaining to the internal electricity market .
Rules which all the Member States must incorporate in their national systems and abide by .
The Directive does not impose an identical system all over Europe , but allows for some degree of subsidiarity and flexibility for Member States in the way they apply the rules , while at the same time avoiding excessive regimentation .
This is reflected in the Directive by the ability of Member States to choose between various models and alternative solutions .
And in answer to Mr Pompidou , I would like to say that from the European standpoint , national differences in the way the policies are implemented will emerge as of lesser importance .
If the Directive is approved and implemented , it will introduce a minimum but common level of deregulation and competition for all the European Union 's electricity systems , which all Member States will have to respect .
The Directive will permit market forces to operate in the electricity industry .
Personally , I am convinced that it will substantially improve the position of the European industry in the face of international competition , as Mr Scapagnini pointed out in his speech .
It is also a very important step in that direction , as many speakers have stressed , especially Mr Linkohr and Mrs Estevan Bolea .

The electricity market and all its respective sectors , as stipulated by the Directive , may be subject to the obligations of public services , obligations which the Member States can impose on electricity companies in their market to the benefit of general economic interests .
Those obligations can be defined separately by each Member State within a Community framework .
The Member States must define the obligations of public services in detail : those obligations must be objective , transparent , they must not create discriminations , and they must be verifiable .
They must be published under one of the five categories agreed at the Community level , namely security of supply , continuity , the quality and price of electricity supply , and the protection of the environment .
Those obligations must be notified to the Commission , which will examine them in relation to the orders of Community law .
That mechanism will make it possible for the Member States to balance competition with public services , in cases when this is considered essential for the general public interest .
A balance which , I recall , Mr Gordon Adam referred to very clearly in our debate and stressed the need for .
This solution , which was approved unanimously by the Council , is the outcome of discussions among the Council which lasted many years .
I also want to stress that every word chosen in the wording of the common position 's text was weighed very carefully .
Ultimately , the decisions were taken at the highest political level possible .
Agreement on this issue was really a very difficult process .
And in answer to Mrs Ludivina García Arias and Mr Marset Campos , and Mr Sainjon as well , I want to stress that Article 3 of the draft Directive has achieved a correct balance between the demands of competition , on the one hand , and the obligations associated with the provision of a public service on the other hand .
For that reason , I would ask you not to disturb the fine balance we have achieved .
Some of the amendments tabled in the European Parliament attempt to introduce the social dimension to a greater degree in the common position .
You all know that the Commission is actively trying to promote the social dimension in the European Union .
Yet , so far as the specific issue is concerned , we need a broad and not sectorial approach .
We must avoid trying for a sectorial harmonization of the social conditions in the electricity industry .
We believe those matters should be solved at a broader level .
And here , I want to stress that it will be possible to talk about social and other matters related to the implementation of the Directive within the context of the Advisory Committee on Energy that the Commission is setting up with agencies from the energy sector , including of course the unions .
Let us not forget that one of the main objectives of the draft Directive is to improve the international competitiveness of our industry , so as to give new and powerful impetus to job creation .
Some other Parliament amendments intend to stress the environmental dimension .
While stressing both energy efficiency and renewable energy sources , personally I share the view that we ought to provide more support for renewable energy sources , as stressed by Mrs Plooij van Gorsel and Mrs Breyer .

However , in answer to Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz as well , I would like to say that as you know , the Commission recently approved the Green Paper on renewable energy sources , which we have indeed put before the European Parliament .
In our opinion , that is the initiative which should constitute the framework for defining an appropriate strategy for the support of renewable energy sources , and not the Directive on the internal electricity market .
I ask you , therefore , to follow that approach .
Besides , the basis of that initiative was inspired by your own proposals , the European Parliament 's proposals , as presented by Mr Mombaur in the excellent report he put before Parliament on renewable energy sources .
Some other amendments cover proposals to extend harmonization in the electricity sector , which is essential for the proper functioning of the internal electricity market .
Madam President , the Commission agrees with the view that further harmonization may be needed , especially in the areas of environmental protection and taxation .
My services have already started working on those subjects and a first study on the determination of possible needs for harmonization is already making progress .
To answer the question Mr Desama asked me , I would like to assure you that the Commission does indeed have the political will to make progress in the matter , and that as soon as possible , we will be bringing a related statement before Parliament and the Council , as you have asked us to .
For this reason , I would ask that we await the results of that analysis and not pre-empt our future proposals , because that could affect the Commission 's right of initiative . In the face of the great debate currently taking place in the context of the IGC , I believe that Parliament too would not wish to restrict the Commission 's right of initiative .
I ask you once more , therefore , not to insist upon the point .
Madam President , the Commission has accepted the Council 's common position , firstly because we believe it reflects the European Parliament 's concerns and secondly , we believe the agreement reached safeguards the Union 's interests in the best possible way .
For that reason , the Commission would like Parliament to adopt the common position as it stands , so as not to disturb the fine balance achieved after prolonged and difficult negotiations , and also because we believe it is of prime importance to get on quite quickly with the final version of the Directive , in order to eliminate the uncertainty that burdens our industry and to realize the benefits for Europe 's citizens , a thing that the branches of electricity production and consumption support and await with eagerness .
If the European Parliament does in the end adopt any amendments - and here , I would like to reiterate again our political will and disposition to see the common position approved as it stands , without amendments - the Commission will examine them carefully and , after tomorrow 's vote , we will state our position .
I also want to assure you that I will be here when the vote is taken .
Ladies and gentlemen , your vote on electricity will have an important influence on developments towards opening the internal market , not only for electricity but for natural gas as well .
I hope that effect will be positive , and that tomorrow the European Parliament will give out a positive message so that we can make further progress in our discussions about the directive on the internal market for natural gas .
In closing , I would like once again to thank Mr Desama and all the Members of Parliament involved with this issue for their constructive cooperation throughout these past months , and in past years with my predecessors with responsibility for the energy sector .
If the common position on this directive is adopted tomorrow , I believe that would be a great success for the European Parliament and for the Commission too .
Because we have reached this point together after a prolonged joint effort - one that has taken several years .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Competition in telecommunications
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0402 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C40469 / 96-95 / 0280 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directives 90 / 387 / EEC and 92 / 44 / EEC for the purpose of adaptation to a competitive environment in telecommunications ( rapporteur : Mr Herman ) .
Madam President , my dear colleagues , my task will have been much easier than that of Mr Desama , in view of the fact that Parliament and the Commission came to agreement on a position which was , moreover , largely dictated by the extraordinarily rapid technical developments which our operators have had to face .
And they have had to recognise the fact , rather quickly , that the maintenance of monopolies was something untenable .
This is not the same as the case of Electricité de France or other public monopolies .
Here , there was no other way , unless one wanted simply to be marginalised and disappear .
I am proud to note that , within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , there was no dissension when it was a case of presenting a series of amendments from the first reading again , which had been partially rejected by the Commission , even if the Commission had largely taken them into account .
I would quickly like to review the five points on which there still exist some small differences of opinion .
The first is Amendment No 5 on the definition of leased lines .
It seems to me that , taking account of the objections of the Commission at the first reading , we have reformulated this amendment in such a way as to remove any ambiguity .
The second point concerns number portability .
We have had experience of the fact that , in two countries in which competition has been established , number portability constitutes a fundamental problem in that , even if a competitor offers lower or more attractive tariffs , consumers hesitate to change because that would mean for them a change of number , which is not a great problem for an individual , but represents on the contrary an expensive operation for companies which distribute a great deal of printed matter , publish notices , or which already possess a whole range of documents bearing their number .
This is why number portability is an important matter .
We stress a problem of a much more political nature , which is the independence of regulatory authorities which you have left to be national bodies .
Once that route , which is much more perilous and less secure than the other , has been chosen , it should at least be ensured that these regulatory authorities are independent and that they are not simply the fig leaf applied to appease the wrathful regard of the commissioners , but which , in fact , constitutes a disguise for the national operator .
I am not going to give examples , but everybody - and by your smiles , you too - knows what I am talking about .
Other , second problem : the financing of universal service .
We all agree that we need a universal service .
The Commission has made some interesting suggestions on the subject , which some of our friends feel do not go far enough .
We , for our part , feel that the proposal that you are making is relatively moderate and likely to gather a large consensus , but of course it is not enough just to declare a service ' universal ' , it is also necessary to be able to say who is funding it .
Today , we are seeing , as if by chance , that there are a number of countries who would give maximum scope to universal service , because they well know that the nature of this would be to prevent competition arising , with some certain that they would be supported by their State , and others , their competitors , having to fend for themselves .
This would reduce the impact of liberalisation , and it therefore seems to me imperative that the Commission should draw up a directive , perhaps even a regulation , on the funding of universal service .
Finally , we ask , without deluding ourselves greatly , because the Commission no longer has the courage it once had , we ask for a supranational European authority which would ensure the constant jurisprudence of these national regulatory authorities .
Whether it would be the Commission or an institution under the authority of the Commission , we do not much mind , but if we do not set up a European authority with responsibility for seeing that these regulatory authorities do not just do as they please , we will finish up with what we want to avoid , that is fifteen markets which will remain separate .
We therefore need uniform regulation , it seems obvious to me , or at least a uniform supervision of regulation .
Madam President , my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Herman , on his report which the Socialist Group will be supporting .
I want to emphasize and reiterate some of the points that he makes .
The question of the independence of the national regulatory authorities is one on which this Parliament has commented on many occasions .
The Commissioner will probably recollect that with the previous voice telephony report , which was the first one to go into the post-Maastricht conciliation procedure , it was on the question of both the independence and the resources available to those regulatory authorities that the negotiations between Parliament and Council foundered .
It seems a self-evident truth that unless the bodies are independent - and , if I could echo Mr Herman 's point , it is actually easier to find examples of lack of independence than independence , let us be blunt about it - and unless they have the resources to do the task that the Commission rightly lays upon them , then we are setting up legislation which is almost bound not to work .
I would appreciate the Commissioner 's comments on the Commission 's intentions about a European regulatory authority and how he sees the interlinking between a proposed European regulatory body and national regulatory bodies .
It is true that in the past we have not managed to get the legislation right in this important area .
There are understandable reasons why that did not happen .
What is very clear in this proposal and many others is that we have less and less time , not only the self-imposed target date for liberalization , but less and less time for this industry in Europe to be able to survive and compete with the United States of America and Japan .
I have this evening come from a meeting with representatives of the information technology industry in Europe . I can understand their feelings of apprehension and frustration .
I would like to ask the Commission - and I know you may not be able to answer now , but I will write to you on this point if I may - if he could give this Parliament an indication of how much of the existing telecommunications legislation has been formally transposed by the Member States and also how many of the Member States really are implementing that legislation and what steps the national regulatory authorities have taken .
If we could have an indication of the answers to those questions , and Members involved in this area know some of the answers , that would go a long way towards making the case for a European regulator .
May I say to the Commissioner that it does not seem to me to be right - other Members of this House may take a different view - to set up a European regulatory authority just because national regulation is not working .
There are tasks that ought to be carried out at national level and some that need to be carried out at European level .
The Commissioner 's comments on this , and on Mr Herman 's excellent report , would be illuminating for this House .
Madam President , from 1 January 1998 free competition will apply to the telecommunications market .
Right from the very first discussions on the 31 May , the liberal group have raised the importance of thorough preparation and legislation to facilitate the orderly functioning of this new larger market .
This has been made possible by the 1990 framework directive .
But for the market to function it is necessary for the different players to maintain separate roles .
First and foremost the national regulatory bodies must be competent but they must also be impartial and independent .
They must be independent of all organisations and companies which provide telecommunications networks , equipment and services .
Our group supports the essential points of the report with particular emphasis on the proposal for an advisory telecommunications committee with representatives from the national regulatory bodies .
It is important that users , the consumers , are well represented on this committee .
We assume that the committee 's meetings and documents shall be made public .
The Commission and the advisory committee must carefully monitor and report on developments to the national regulatory bodies and to the players in the market .
If this happens properly , I do not think that a special European regulatory body will be required .
In the previous discussion , Parliament accepted the majority of the proposals from the Economic Committee for amendments in legislation and definition of the requirements for general service etc .
The Commission also approved a number of amendments .
Information is not just a matter of technology - it is equally a question of democracy and of giving all groups equal opportunities .
Education is one requirement for this , but telecommunications companies and authorities must also ensure that remote regions and sparsely populated areas in our Member States are also covered .
Madam President , Mr Herman is right that we are having to deal very quickly with changes to directives that we adopted only a few years ago .
The ONP framework directive was adopted in 1990 , and the directive on leased lines as recently as 1992 .
However , this is something that will probably be a feature of our work in the coming years .
The only consolation I can draw from this is that I shall frequently have the pleasure of reading reports by Mr Herman .
It is true : technical progress will be made so quickly that much of what we have adopted in recent years will soon be virtually obsolete .
I should just mention one key word here which will further occupy us in the coming months , namely convergence - the bringing into line of the previously varying services in the telecommunications sector which is encouraged by the technical resources available .
Differences which we still accept as a matter of course between telephone services , television , radio and other applications will increasingly become obsolete , and the legal requirements which are now being created to deal separately with these services will be quite radically altered .
Unfortunately , therefore - or thank goodness , depending on how you see it - we shall have to deal with changes in the coming years .
We have no great difficulties with one another in this context .
Of the seven amendments tabled by Parliament , the Commission is able to accept four , but not the three others .
I shall explain why in a moment , but let me first say something about the amendments we are accepting .
This concerns in particular Amendments Nos 4 and 6 , or at least some parts of them , where the regulatory authority is called for .
Mr Herman knows that it is not because of any lack of courage on our part that we recognize in the first instance the reality of the situation , as one might put it , which is that so far , not a single Member State has taken to this idea .
The Commission is certainly able to make things happen , but we cannot just take over from the Council if it is unwilling , as everyone will appreciate .
However , we have ensured that the present situation does not produce chaos .
We have laid down principles which require the national regulatory authorities to be independent .
We have laid down principles for their decisions ranging from the general - transparency , non-discrimination , and so forth - to the particular , where specific issues such as licensing are involved .
This means that the present situation , in which these national authorities are operating , will not be without a European framework , and we shall of course monitor this , Mrs Read , since whenever European legislation is adopted , the Commission has to monitor the application of these laws and intervene where necessary .
We also have a precise list of what has been transposed by whom .
I cannot recite this to you off the cuff , and I only looked at it this afternoon , but in general the transposition rate is very reasonable .
As always , we have some candidates who are lagging behind , but I am sure they will make up the ground .
If they fail to do so , however , that is not a disadvantage for those involved .
According to the case law of the European Court of Justice , a directive which has been adopted but not transposed is an adequate legal basis for claims by third parties .
So if someone fails to obtain a licence , for example , because a particular directive has not yet been transposed in a certain Member State , they have a legal claim which they can pursue if necessary .
This means that even where there is some shortfall in transposition , it is not a disaster for the individual parties concerned .
We can probably say in advance that , in the light of our experience in the coming years , there will be some kind of European agency , or whatever it may be called , by the year 2000 , because what all the speakers here have said is absolutely right : there are some things which can be dealt with nationally and others which cannot , because the scope of such a decision extends beyond national borders .
However , the more we first allow the Member States to learn the hard way , the less they will be able to criticize the Commission and Parliament for once again seeking only to acquire new powers .
That is really not our problem !
The problem is that we have to work out appropriate solutions .
We have of course already been working on this question of universal service and how it should be costed and financed .
We have published a communication on the subject , and so we would prefer not to deal with this problem here in the context of the amendment of the ONP directives .
It is a general problem .
It arises with ONP , it arises with interconnection and so on , and that is why it is better for us to have a general rule for universal service .
You know our views here : we are ready to open up financing possibilities for the Member States , if they think they need them .
Personally , I am convinced that some Member States will not have to finance the universal service from public or additional funds .
We shall be able to discuss the details shortly in a different context and I shall then say more on the subject , since the communication is the next item on the agenda .
The idea of a single , consolidated legal text - as put forward in parts of Amendments Nos 4 and 6 - is one I find very attractive .
I have considered with my colleagues whether we cannot introduce the principle of codification in the telecommunications sector ; in other words , we would adopt a collection of previously adopted legal texts , and only what appeared in that collection would then be valid .
It would be an enormous help to all users if they could find the valid form of any given legal text through codification .
As yet , our legal experts have not brought themselves to accept this idea , since it does of course mean a double legislative decision , if you like .
First the text is adopted , and then a decision is made to include it in the codified version , and that is a new procedure .
We shall have to consider how to handle this .
As an alternative , we could publish a kind of legal jungle , in other words include everything valid in a collection without legislative force .
We shall probably have to do so in any case , if we pursue this problem of convergence , since that will oblige us to review and possibly amend virtually everything we have adopted so far on telecommunications .
Those are , I believe , the issues we have to discuss here .
I am grateful for your cooperation in effecting these changes , and I think that with the active help of the Dutch presidency , we shall be able to celebrate final adoption by the middle of 1997 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Universal telecommunications service
The next item is the report ( A4-0389 / 96 ) by Mrs Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 96 ) 0073 - C4-0205 / 96 ) on universal service for telecommunications in the perspective of a fully liberalized environment - an essential element of the information society .
Madam President , my dear colleagues , in the journey towards liberalisation of telecommunications which is being undertaken within the European Union , the text upon which we are to pronounce today comes along very late .
It comes late and its legal value is uncertain .
We liberalise rapidly by directive , and we regulate late in the day - let us hope not too late - by communication .
Now , universal service in the telecommunications sector cannot be considered an appendage to liberalisation .
It is an element which gives balance .
It is the only thing which allows for consideration of environmental integration , equal access for all , economic and social cohesion , employment .
Europe needs , the citizens of Europe need , public services , services in the public interest .
This should be written into the Treaty of Rome , it should be stated sector by sector , and in the telecommunications sector , the interests of citizens do not boil down simply to the reduction in costs which , in principle , liberalisation should bring about .
Beyond public regulations , which define obligations legitimately in terms of public freedoms or preservation of the environment , the market cannot take account of everything .
It is the opinion of the operators themselves that no regulatory system , including the market , has proved its efficacy to this day .
We must , therefore , establish the legal framework for an industry which is gaining strength every day .
Concerning the scope of universal service , the Commission is proposing to us a minimum definition , which would not prohibit Member States wishing to go further from doing so .
We think that it is in the interests of citizens and of operators to have the widest definition of universal service at the level of the European Union .
The best of the practice of each nation should be taken up for the enrichment of all .
This should be accompanied by a communitylevel definition of the notion of affordable price .
This is also in the interests of operators , who are not against the definition of a European framework , provided that it is defined for them - it is not up to them to do it and they will not do it - but who dread having to localise their services in accordance with differences in national legislation .
Geographical uniformity , which should permit a balance between all areas of the territory of Member States , should also fall within the province of universal service .
The Commission 's communication is too timid , it seems to us , for the liberalisation of telecommunications to result in equal access for all to the information society .
This is the central problem .
From today , public access for schools , libraries and hospitals should figure in the basic list for universal service .
Surprisingly , the Commission says on this that it does not wish to follow American legislation which refutes the liberal approach .
We have taken up the concept of liberalisation , but primarily to allow us to win internal struggles in this emerging sector .
With regard to funding , we must have a figure in our heads to start with .
Universal service represents a cost which is estimated at between 4 % and 8 % of the turnover of this sector in the future years , depending on the scope given to the notion of universal service .
It is our wish that all operators who will stand to gain from liberalisation , under certain threshold conditions , in particular , which remain to be defined , should contribute to the funding of the said universal service .
I will give just one example .
The current situation means that new operators benefit from infrastructures paid for yesterday by public operators , the copper wire installations .
If we want to change over to optical fibres tomorrow , who will finance the installation of these if all of the operators benefitting from liberalisation are not funding the universal service ?
The Commission 's communication anticipates that , where Member States wish to , they may define a broader notion of universal service than that retained at the level of the European Union .
But they cannot finance it by means of the funding mechanisms set up for universal service .
We hope that the definition retained at European level will be so wide that this mechanism is not necessary , but should it be so , then the universal service defined at the level of the Member State must be financially viable .
The feeling of your rapporteur - but I must admit that on this point , he has not yet convinced the majority of his colleagues - is that this mechanism is not realistic .
Under the system proposed by the Commission , how are these actions to be financed ?
By the operators holding responsibility for the mission of universal service ?
This is completely hypocritical in a liberalised environment .
From the budget of Member States ?
That is equally hypocritical when one knows the state of our public finances .
We must beware of a mechanism which leads operators to work towards liberalisation .
This liberalisation leads to changes in the balance of the assumption of certain responsibilities , in terms of training and environmental integration for example .
Then , these operators turn round to the Member States to ask them to finance the operations which they do not want to pay for .
That cannot work .
So , Commissioner , we want to see you in the years to come , and I think that , from that point of view , we must ensure the coherence of the texts which we are adopting .
We want to meet with you at the end of next year , and we ask you to give us some clear proposals as to the scope of a universal service to serve a better information society and as to the contribution of new operators to the funding of universal service .
Let us hope we can prevent a tremendous technological success from turning into a human failure .
We want nothing to do with a minimum service for the less privileged .
We want a universal service , if it must be called that for telecommunications , for social cohesion and to spread progress for a democratic society .
Madam President , Commissioner , I am afraid that the spirit of cooperation between the Commission and Parliament , which marked the first half of this evening , might dissipate during the second half .
In the space of two minutes and in the name of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I will tackle just one question : subsidiarity .
It is quite true , it lies at the heart of the very debateable logic you are proposing to us .
Let us look at this in three parts .
Firstly , you are proposing a minimal definition for universal service , minimum , minimorum .
You acknowledge this yourself , by comparing this definition with that ruled in the United States , which includes obligations relating to the public services of education , social services and regional planning .
Second part of your argument : you justify this conception of minimal universal service in the name of subsidiarity , with Member States free to add to this basic universal service additional obligations which they consider useful .
Up to here your reasoning is acceptable .
But , third part , you specify that these additional obligations , I quote ' cannot under any circumstances be funded by mechanisms put in place to bear the cost of universal service ' and they will therefore be borne by national solidarity , i.e. taxes .
This subsidiarity , which leaves the definition of additional obligations to Member States but refuses to fund them , is quite remarkable .
The truth is , Commissioner , that you really mean to impose an ultra-liberal definition upon universal service and you are refusing to give any substance to the obligation of public service .
You have a right to hold a narrow conception of solidarity , to sacrifice the notion of universal service lightly to the sacred law of market forces .
But do not hide behind the argument of subsidiarity .
That legal subterfuge is not worthy of the Commission .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I must first express my sincere thanks to Mrs Berès , who has taken great pains over this report .
It is undoubtedly true that a comprehensive universal service for telecommunications in the perspective of a fully liberalized environment is an essential element of the information society .
This calls for equal opportunities for customers in all regions of the EU , in terms of both access and prices .
Affordability must in each case take the groups and regions with the lowest incomes as the point of reference .
The costs not covered must be spread among all operators of telecommunications services .
So far , so good .
That is why I would actually prefer not Mr Bangemann , but Commissioner Flynn to be sitting opposite me here .
On behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , I would like to draw particular attention to the following points .
Firstly , the universal service does not meet the requirements of the handicapped and users with special needs .
I would therefore call on the Commission to include special services for these groups in the universal service and to keep the procedures as simple as possible .
Secondly , liberalization and the introduction of new technologies not only create new jobs , but also have a cost ; in this context , women occupy a high proportion of jobs in areas that are under threat .
Social acceptability must therefore be given special attention .
Thirdly , access to training and further training in the field of information technologies must be provided for workers , particularly women .
Fourthly , lower costs must be passed on to final users , Commissioner , and not treated as shareholder value .
The Commission must therefore also keep price developments in the telecommunications sector under constant surveillance .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I am not speaking on behalf of the Committee on Culture , which was what I understood was said , but for the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
The committee welcomes the calls by Mrs Berès for a broad interpretation of the concept of universal service , so as to avoid dualization between groups of people and regions and to enable as many people as possible in Europe to have access at affordable prices to the infrastructure , technology and information channels involved .
Guaranteed access for schools , health centres , libraries and so on will break down barriers and help to ensure that fewer people are left by the wayside on the information superhighway .
Our committee urges that all operators on the telecommunications market should contribute to the financing of the universal service , and we would refer here to the resolution adopted by Parliament in May 1995 , which calls for the establishment of a public service fund , ' these funds being contributed by all operators of infrastructure and services in proportion to their respective market share and the gross profitability of their revenues ' .
Some colleagues would like to exempt providers of information from these contributions , on the grounds that they would be at a disadvantage compared with other providers outside the Union .
We doubt whether this would be the case .
It usually depends on how the contributions are paid .
Easy access to the new communications facilities , if possible or necessary with preferential rates for risk groups , will probably eventually result in a higher turnover for all operators , provided that more people also make greater use of the new technologies .
We therefore wholeheartedly support the amendment on a public access strategy , but we would urge the Commission not just to do what the operators say here , but also to listen to the consumer organization and , not least , the trade union in this sector .
Madam President , the continuing reduction in technology costs in the telecommunications sector , together with the huge and dynamic developments that are taking place , make it difficult to decide what the universal service should involve in the long term .
We must not forget that the universal service is already widely available in some countries as a result of liberalization , and this is why it must not on any account be abused to protect the positions of the dominant players on the market .
We must find a balance between the need to allow the market to develop naturally and without too much strict regulation , and the justified concern that every citizen should be offered a package of telecommunications services at a reasonable price .
It was for this reason that the Group of the European People 's Party decided to support the level of universal service currently proposed by the Commission in the review of the voice telephony directive .
Make no mistake about it , this already offers a great deal , with every citizen having a basic telephone , a fax line and the possibility of connection to the Internet .
It is also encouraging that the Commission is thinking about the disabled .
We would ask it to introduce a system of regular reviews of the basic list , since it is only to be expected that new technologies will eventually become so widely available on the market and so cheap that they should be included .
But the emphasis must always be on the fact that every level of universal service has its price .
Developing objective cost models would keep the whole debate transparent , and I would ask the Commission to consider this idea .
Given the need for balance which I mentioned earlier , the PPE Group takes the view that the new serviceproviders and publishers of directories should not have to contribute to the universal service at this stage .
We would ask the Commission to examine when they should be made to start contributing , in the light of how the telecommunications market develops .
To insist on payments now would be particularly damaging for many young firms currently providing services in telecommunications and new electronic services .
However , we feel that providers of mobile services should not be exempt from contributing to the universal service , a view which the Commission shares .
The EU must ensure that people have access to new , advanced services .
This is a responsibility we all share and one which comes under our education and social policies .
Making all telecommunications firms pay now for all schools , libraries and so on to be connected to advanced services would put them at a great disadvantage compared with American rivals who do not have to meet such requirements on their home market .
Every obligation involves a cost of some kind , which above all the new , smaller telecommunications companies in Europe and the new service-providers with many young staff really cannot afford at present .
This is a responsibility which the Group of the European People 's Party cannot and will not accept .
Madam President , technology can never be better than the man making it .
The information society gives unparalleled opportunities for people to fulfil their deepest needs and wishes to be able to talk to , express oneself to and communicate with other people and with the surrounding world .
The development of TV , radio , mobile telephony , e-mail and the Internet has come a long way very quickly , and development will continue .
But there are also risks , the risk of division into the haves and the have nots , those that can and those that cannot , those with the means and those without , those living in such sparsely populated and remote regions that they are out of reach of the service or where it is worse than elsewhere .
Many of these issues are national issues but communication is international and therefore requires national , European and international regulations for us to be able to live up to the principle goal that everyone must be given the same opportunity to enjoy the benefits of the information society .
Prime responsibility for achieving this goal must rest with the Member States but this is to be in conjunction with EU bodies , European organisations , companies and international organisations .
Naturally , the liberals support the main principle of basic services for all at a reasonable cost .
Most important , perhaps , is that everyday communication via local calls can be at a low tariff .
I am personally dubious about establishing new control bodies , models and funds at EU level .
Consultation and cooperation goes a long way in this respect and is , as I see it , a better way forward .
If funding is required to cover the cost of the provision of society wide services then this should be determined and administered at national level .
Madam President , I should also like to stress how important the decision on universal service provision will be in the short term .
As Mrs Berès says in her excellent report , it seems likely that in the long term these services will tend to become cheaper , so that it will also be easier for citizens to gain access to them .
It is not possible to say much in such a brief intervention , but I particularly wish to stress the fifth paragraph of Mrs Berès 's report , which recommends that the EU institutions should also seize the opportunity to exploit computer networks and thereby increase the transparency of their own actions .
I should like to know whether Mr Bangemann has considered how the use of computer networks could increase the transparency of the Union institutions .
It has been said here that the institutions ' official documents ought in principle to be available to all citizens free of charge through the Internet .
This is an excellent idea , and in its own way it is linked to the idea that the universal service should be guaranteed to all .
Madam President , as other speakers have already emphasized , the liberalization of the telecommunications sector is not only an economic and financial problem , but a deeply cultural and social one as well .
Unfortunately , Europe has closed its eyes to this development .
When you think that in the United States , more than 60 % of schoolchildren and over 90 % of students already use telecommunications in the course of their studies and would probably no longer manage to prepare their work without them , you can imagine what this difference in the use of telecommunications means for pupils in Austria or other European countries .
The liberalization of the telecommunications sector therefore means that the education system in Europe , which was created with great effort and organized to be the same for everyone , is suddenly no longer what it was .
There are some school pupils and students , children from well-to-do families , who have very good access , and those from other families who do not have such access , because of the high telephone costs .
If things continue in this way , a form of inequality will develop among the next generation which sets us back a hundred years in education .
A special problem in this context is the fact that in Austria above all in recent decades , the profits from telecommunications have been used to fill other gaps in the budget .
The result is that in Austria today , we have a completely outdated telephone system , and a business which lags behind with debts running into billions .
It is now easier to make a telephone call in Austria through an international communications network than to use our own national system .
I therefore appeal to all those responsible to pursue and support modernization as quickly as possible , and in the course of this to facilitate access to communications for the next generation in particular .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Berès on her report , which is very comprehensive and a good piece of work .
I want to speak briefly about three points : firstly , the liberalization agenda , which has set the need for universal service ; secondly , universal service itself ; and , thirdly , to say a bit more about the definition and how that definition should develop .
The reasons are obvious : price , competition and the desire to lower the cost to industry , so as to make Europe more competitive against our competitors , both in North America and in Asia .
It is clear as well that governments cannot afford to do everything and , therefore , a liberalization agenda is required so that we can combine both public and private capital in order to improve the information society that we are developing here in Europe .
Clearly , where there is competition around , price becomes important .
But , clearly as well , there are going to be unprofitable services and the question is how we can ensure that service levels are maintained and , indeed , improved .
The universal service definition which the Commission has come up with is a good start , but it is not the end of the story .
We need the basic services that are there , but we also need quality , which it refers to as well , and we particularly need affordability , given the problems we face here in the European Union with social exclusion .
I agree with the rapporteur that we need a European definition for affordability , and that means , as far as I am concerned , a formula we can apply to each Member State , in the light of its economic condition at any moment in time .
We also need to take account of changing technology and what may be the norm in differing Member States : what is the norm in Sweden is not necessarily the norm in Greece or in Portugal .
Therefore , we need to adopt a timetable - maybe a differing timetable for each Member State - because of the level at which technology is being introduced , the level of universal service that they may have .
It is at this point that I wish to distinguish between universal service and universal access .
When the telephone was introduced , everybody had the option to go out and use a public telephone in the street somewhere , and that was all that was available until the market became saturated and most people had a telephone in their home .
What we have in Europe at the moment are areas which have universal access and universal service , particularly amongst the developed states , but also some areas of the Union where we still do not have universal access .
For that reason , a timetable needs to be set in each Member State , and the Commission , in consultation with Parliament , should do that .
I agree with the rapporteur that the definition should be broad .
I also agree on the public amenity areas ; but we also need to look at private institutions that are caring for people who are socially excluded - such as prisons and private nursing homes - to ensure universal access for these people as well .
Again , I totally agree with the rapporteur that we need to ensure that the definitions and the technological solutions we come up with will help these favoured users , whether geographically or socially excluded .
I agree with the rapporteur about the haves and the have-nots .
We want to ensure that this is a universal service for everybody .
I commend Mrs Berès 's report to this House .
Madam President , Commissioner , liberalizing competition in the field of telecommunications is an important element in European competitiveness and enhanced development of technology .
At the same time it is vital to ensure that core services are equally available to all at reasonable prices and with a reasonable standard of quality .
Free competition alone is not enough to guarantee universal telecommunications services .
Clear , separate provisions must therefore be laid down concerning each of them , and they must be funded jointly .
However , it is important that universal services should be administered neutrally from the point of view of competition , without distorting the latter .
It would not be right just for certain operators to be saddled with obligations : a common system is needed which will create balance on the market .
Universal services are often considered purely from the point of view of particular groups .
The strong monopolies which exist in the field and the general lack of development have resulted in rather a rigid conception of universal services .
There are big differences among the EU countries in this field .
From the point of view of the rapid development of the field , the problems of the future also need to be considered .
Universal services will not become any less important , but the nature of their significance is changing quite rapidly .
A good example of this is access to public information , including EU information , through libraries and computer networks .
It is therefore essential to establish a durable and flexible funding system for universal services , which is a difficult task .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the use of means of communication will change radically in the future .
Today , over a billion people use the telephone for a few minutes a day .
Tomorrow , there will be over a billion people using the Internet for an hour or more , to talk to each other , to find things out or in connection with their businesses .
This calls for a further wide-ranging adjustment of communications policy at European Union level , and of the pricing policy which is part and parcel of it . The prices for data communications - despite the present universal service model - are far too high in terms of local tariffs .
This means that the citizens and businesses of the Union cannot make adequate use of the new opportunities in communications .
Prices have to fall dramatically , Mr Bangemann .
The thinking on affordability is something which concerns me most about the present blueprint for universal service .
It is totally inadequate in its present form .
Moreover , we need to reform the concept of voice telephony , rewording it as a matter of urgency to include data communications .
This concept is leading to confusion , because we are constantly having to explain that as well as voice telephony , it also covers data transmission by fax and modem .
We need a new plan - as my colleague Mr Hendrick pointed out - to supplement universal service , whereby every citizen must be given access to the network .
For this , there needs to be integration with libraries and public authorities .
Every school must be connected to the network , so that the pupils can exploit the potential of the information society .
To achieve this , we need a new plan at European level in the coming year , and also a financing plan .
The present one for the universal service - and here I agree with the Commission - cannot be expanded to include this sector .
But we shall have to produce a model at European level .
We cannot leave this to the Member States alone .
One final point : the Americans have set themselves the goal of connecting every school to the network by the year 2000 .
I believe that should be our goal as well .
Madam President , I rise in support of Mrs Berès ' report and want to draw just two or three points from it .
But just to put the whole debate in a global context , I think it is important to remind ourselves that worldwide the vast majority of people never have made a telephone call and never in their lives will make a telephone call and it is important not to forget information poverty on that scale .
Mrs Berès is right to include in her report references to a Treaty change in recognition of public service .
At a time when many citizens are showing signs of losing faith in the European Union this is a very clear example of how we can demonstrate that there really is something in Europe for every man , woman and child who lives in it .
Universal service is also important , less and less in terms of geographic deprivation , but more and more for those citizens who live in the poorest areas of our inner cities where the telephone operators are less and less willing to provide telephones and telephone services .
This matters in many ways , not least because in modern society use of , and access to , the telephone is a necessary part of life .
Looking for jobs , taking part in civic society , acting in a democracy - all is predicated on having access to , and use of , a telephone .
Universal service is also important because it is one of the very few ways in which the European Union institutions can exercise some real control over this hugely profitable sector of industry .
There is universal access and universal demand .
We should never lose sight of how far the economic developments in this sector have very little political accountability or control contained within them .
My final point : others have mentioned the importance of reviewing what citizens should be entitled to .
What is different about telecommunications as opposed to water , gas or electricity is that technology is going to mean extending the possibilities very considerably and we do not know the time-scale of that .
Therefore it is very important for both the Commission and this Parliament to recognize that we need to build in , not only to this report but to legislation - I am the rapporteur on the voice telephony and universal service report - periodic reviews of entitlement that are realistic and achievable .
Madam President , I should like to confine myself to issues where the Commission differs from what has been said here in the debate ; in other words , I do not wish to highlight all the areas of common ground and thank the rapporteur in doing so , but just to try to explain what we had in mind with this communication , since I think that is necessary and will continue to be so , because there are in fact two different conceptions here .
First of all , telecommunications are more than the telephone was in the past .
Telecommunications are a factor in the economy , and have become a production factor .
Of course , they are important for individual citizens as well , but we should not forget that the scale and cost of using telecommunications will determine the competitiveness of European industry .
The worst thing which struck us a few years ago , when we compared our situation with that of the USA , for example , was that data transmission costs were ten times higher .
We recently presented another report on the competitiveness of European industry .
We have fallen further and further behind because of inputs , the heavy burden of inputs in sectors like telecommunications - as well as energy and services .
This means that those who have a traditional conception of social policy - I am trying to be restrained in my comments here , since last time Mr Caudron complained that I expressed myself too plainly .
I would not rule out the possibility of Mr Caudron being right on occasion , and now I am trying to put this very carefully .
The traditional conception , which shows through in the case of the rapporteur , Mr Cot and others , including sections of the ELDR Group , is as follows : we have social problems which we can only finance through funding from the state , and we shall do this by placing a burden on a performance generated by the economy .
That is the traditional concept in a nutshell .
The modern conception is completely different , and I shall tell you why .
First of all , it begins with the idea of public service .
There is such a thing as public service , and the Commission acknowledged that only recently in a proposal , but not everything done now and in the past in the area of public service has to coincide with the requirements of universal service .
The rapporteur and others talk as a matter of course about how these two concepts coincide : public service and universal service are the same thing .
That is completely wrong !
In an extreme case , access for individual citizens to telecommunications services could be organized without any kind of public service , and I am surprised that Swedish and Finnish Members are chiming in here , since both countries are an example of how such services and universal access can exist perfectly well in a system of competition - and why is that possible , Mr Cot ?
I shall try to explain why by referring to the particular laws of this sector of the economy : someone who operates services basically earns his living from providing those services to as many people as possible .
That is why he has a personal interest - quite selfishly , but this then has a social effect - in as many people as possible having access .
You can see that everywhere .
Moreover , ladies and gentlemen - I nearly said brothers and sisters of this traditional group - when did prices fall ?
Mrs Mann tells me that prices have to fall .
They only fell when we liberalized the sector , when we did away with the monopolies and when we introduced competition .
I am not one of those who ask everything from the market .
What makes me happy is not delivered by the market , but I know one thing very well : competition and the market is better than a monopoly every time - and not least for providing universal services .
That is just the point .
We have also discussed this communication in a wide-ranging debate , in which trade unions and consumer groups have also been represented , and from which a fairly broad consensus has emerged , not least in the Council .
The consensus regarding our proposals is considerably greater in the Council than here in Parliament .
That does not necessarily mean anything , I am simply mentioning it now .
It may be that when one is in agreement with the Council , it is a sign of being in the wrong ; I am prepared to concede that , but it is not always the case .
I now turn to the definition of the concept of universal service .
If you read the communication , we have recognized Parliament 's view that this is a concept which is going to change .
In other words , what is perhaps defined today only in terms of simple access - as Mr Hendrick rightly said - may have to include whole areas of services tomorrow or the day after .
We recognize this , which means that this definition of universal service must be kept under constant review .
It is a dynamic and developing concept .
On the question of affordability and funding , people may now say that this is taking subsidiarity too far , but we have chosen this approach for two reasons .
Firstly , the situation in the various Member States is really very different , and imposing a general , across-the-board European solution on it now would be completely mistaken .
Secondly , precisely because we wish to avoid an excessive burden being placed on those who provide this vitally needed service , we have proposed a funding model with two variants , but at the same time limited the services which can be included in this funding model .
Now , I do not know why a school which is equipped with desks and chairs and many other things from public funds should not also be provided with a connection and computers .
I cannot see that at all .
Surely one can ask that a modern school should have these things .
Why should it be imposed on any of the operators ?
This is ultimately an original service , which should be paid for from a budget .
That is our position , and I think that if we pursue this , we shall see - and I am quite sure that this will happen - that this universal service actually dwindles into a minor problem .
However , there will be a problem with regard to technical facilities for disabled persons , for example .
That is a real problem .
We need to clarify some particular issues , such as those regarding public documents - I cannot remember who it was that raised this point .
The Commission already has a home page on the Internet , that is something which we offer .
We should be very glad to set up a joint information service with Parliament and the Council .
Unfortunately , this has always fallen through , however , because everyone has their own ideas about it !
That does have to be said .
We ourselves are prepared to agree on a system with Parliament and the Council , even if it is not our own , but so far we have not made any progress in these working groups .
To sum up , this is an important problem for us today .
We are convinced that , with our definition , the problem can be overcome , and in a few years ' time it will not be a problem any more , because all the operators have a considerable interest in covering everything completely .
You can watch this happening in all kinds of areas , for example with this question of decoders which has been exercising us a great deal - not that this involves telecommunications , but it does have to do with the media - and which is disappearing , now that some pressure is being brought to bear .
They are all aware that if they can reach everyone , then they could even give the users a decoder , because it is using these services which brings in the money , not the hardware .
If you would just consider that for once !
You are always calling on the Commission to consider things .
We do that all the time , and that is why we look so tired and pale !
No , I would simply ask you to think a little about your traditional positions .
I can see that Mr Caudron is starting to have some thoughts already - he has a much more open expression than I have seen before .
In any event , we should not be applying the conceptions of the past to such a modern technology , or to modern times .
That would certainly lead us to failure !
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Competition in the postal sector
The next item is the report ( A4-0388 / 96 ) by Mr de Brémond d 'Ars , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission draft notice ( SEC ( 95 ) 0830 - C4-0551 / 95 ) on the application of the competition rules to the postal sector and in particular on the assessment of certain State measures relating to postal services .
I should like to know why the Commissioner who is responsible for postal services is not staying with us !
This is really not to show any disrespect for Parliament or to underestimate the importance of this subject , but the only issue here today is a draft notice for which my colleague Mr Van Miert is responsible .
I have already presented this notice three times here in the House .
I have done that .
Mr Van Miert has yet to do so , and I should now like to give him the pleasure of explaining for himself what he had in mind with it .
Mr Bangemann is right , it falls within the competence of Mr van Miert , this evening .
Madam President , Commissioner , seven years will have passed , more or less , since the first requests of the European Parliament and Council for the Commission finally to formulate some proposals relating to the postal sector .
This fact is very revealing of the enormous complexity of the subject .
We are talking about one of the most developed public services in some Member States , which , over and above its natural vocation , fulfils other functions , particularly of a social nature and regarding regional planning .
Because of this it escapes largely from laws on competition , taking account of the non-profitable nature of service to sparsely-populated areas .
Some harmonisation is nevertheless necessary , because of the development of wildcat competition which is making the activity of some postal services , already threatened by technological evolution , lose money .
In December 1995 , two texts were submitted to Parliament : a proposal for a directive on which it expressed its opinion at first reading last May , on the basis of a report by Mr Simpson , on behalf of the Committee on Transport , and a draft communication on the application of the competition rules to the postal sector .
Today 's debate relates to this second text .
Two texts .
Parliament was not expecting so many .
It has been asking for a directive on the postal sector , based on Article 100a , for a long time , and that would broadly-speaking have been enough .
The simultaneous publication of these two texts is moreover strange and unprecedented .
Logically such a communication would not have been envisaged unless , if necessary , after the adoption of the draft directive .
What is more , in the case of telecommunications , the Commission 's communication came after two prior directives .
Why was that not the case this time ?
In this case , the Commission has several times threatened to adopt its draft communication , whatever the state of progress of the legal procedure relating to the directive .
If it carried out this threat , it would create a constitutional problem for the Union 's legislator , which is the Council and Parliament which , since 1988 has , I repeat , constantly requested a directive based on Article 100a .
The opinion of the Committee on Economic Affairs is however qualified .
It is in some way the synthesis of the opinions of Mr Jean-Pierre Cot for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Mr Marcus Ferber for the Committee on Transport .
The Committee on Economic Affairs , like the two committees from whom an opinion was sought , does not deliver its opinion on the provisions contained in the draft communication , only on its appropriateness and its legal nature .
The Committee on Economic Affairs asks you , Commissioner , to withdraw your draft communication provisionally . ' Provisionally ' means that the committee asks you to await the results of the legislative procedure which is in progress .
At the same time , it asks the Council to give its opinion quickly - there must still be some other meetings - and to rule upon its common position on the draft directive .
I hope , Commissioner , that the Commission pays more attention today to the wishes of the European Parliament than it has done up to now , in particular by withholding only a limited number of Parliament 's amendments to the directive .
This attitude is not likely to make agreement within the Council any easier .
If it has taken seven years for it to formulate some proposals , the Commission ought to wait the time it takes for Council and Parliament to legislate on such a sensitive and complex question .
Madam President , Commissioner , we were facing a problem of coordination of a directive and a communication concerning the same subject : the postal service .
Since the failure of the Council of Ministers on telecommunications on 28 November , we have been faced with a constitutional problem .
Does the Commission have the right to adopt as it is the communication which has been submitted to us , in the absence of a directive ?
I would say not both for legal and political reasons .
Legally , the Commission cannot blow hot and cold .
It cannot consider that there is cause to harmonise legislation by a directive based on Article 100a at the same time as it resorts to its own power drawn from Article 90 ( 3 ) to arrive at the same result .
There is a general principle common to our internal rights : ' electa una via ' .
If two procedures are possible , one must be chosen , but one does not have the right to pass with impunity from one procedure to another , and less still to use one as a threat to put pressure on the other .
This would be a patent case of procedural misappropriation .
Once you consider the directive to be necessary , you must stick with the directive .
The communication and the specific decisions made in accordance with the Treaty can only be decisions relating to application , not an alternative route .
Any other course of action would be politically unacceptable .
We are talking about competition policy .
Whoever talks about policy is talking about appropriateness of decisions , power of appreciation .
It has taken you yourselves thirty years to decide to apply the rules of competition to public services .
There is nothing automatic about the methods or the schedule for application .
Parliament , with a very large majority , amended the Commission 's proposal for a directive on these points .
The Commission rejected all of these amendments , and thereby contributed to a deadlock of the situation in the Council of Ministers .
The Council was divided , even though a qualified majority could undoubtedly have been released upon our positions .
And today the Commission would like to use this paralysis , which it organised itself , to go steaming through !
You will in this way open up a constitutional conflict , the consequences and the timeliness of which , on the eve of the inter-governmental conference , I would ask you to consider .
Your stubbornness on this sensitive matter which is lacking in political support gives an argument to those who would like to reduce the Commission 's powers .
I do not want , myself , to be forced reluctantly to prove them right .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism on this draft notice , I have the difficult and considerable task of performing a balancing act between the urgent need to ensure efficient and affordable postal services in the long term and the question of the legal basis on which to do so .
As regards the legal basis , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has always taken a clear stance , namely that a balanced and lasting solution can only be achieved by means of the codecision procedure .
It is therefore important for the Council to do its homework and finally adopt a common position , as we in Parliament have also done .
Leaving that aside , we naturally have to establish rules on competition - and it must be acknowledged that the Commission has the right to do so - because several cases have already been brought and are pending before the Court of Justice .
However , we cannot accept the competition rules which have been presented to us and which you have drawn up , Commissioner , for the following reasons .
Firstly , the legality of the notice vis-à-vis the directive has not been demonstrated .
It was a political compromise in the Commission , which is overstepping its competence .
The notice is not consistent with the proposal for a directive : the Commission is presenting two documents - a proposal for a directive and a notice - whose contents are not at all consistent with each other .
Secondly , we cannot understand the Commission 's thinking .
We in Parliament made a number of basic comments at first reading .
Our first point was the changing of the timescale for liberalization .
We deleted the provisions on open access , because this is not feasible in the postal sector .
There is a difference between post and telecommunications in this respect , and we called for a universal service to be safeguarded through the creation of a reserved sector .
All these things would be overturned by such a notice .
Indeed , even the safeguarding of a universal service is called into question by the notice , which leaves the door wide open to unregulated liberalization throughout Europe .
I really do wonder if this is the road which we in the European Parliament can take .
I would therefore ask the Commission to withdraw this notice and to submit a new draft which is consistent with Parliament 's proposals .
We surely need to bring some pressure to bear on the Council , which must finally get to grips with this issue and adopt a common position .
But the price for doing this must not be total chaos resulting from unchecked liberalization .
Madam President , one of the main problems currently facing the European Union is related to bringing the people closer to its institutions , making them feel that they are at the heart of our concerns , that it is for them that we are labouring , that we represent them according to the basic principles of democracy and transparency .
At a time when we are making such an effort to help European citizens feel part and parcel of the Union that we are building , in which special programmes are being launched - such as CITIZENS FIRST - to enlighten Europeans and bring them closer , win them over , the Commission is proposing that , against the will of the elected institutions - the European Parliament and the Council - decisions be taken over the process of liberalizing one of the sectors closest to our people , a sector that they feel to be theirs , namely the postal services .
I know that legally speaking the Commission is able to do so .
However it is politically unacceptable that it should be able singlehanded to liberalize the postal sector .
I think that to do so at a time when we are working on a draft directive is an act of hostility , arrogance and disrespect for the will of the people which will do nothing the strengthen the new European model or make it more attractive , where liberalism and technocratic practices prevail over solidarity and a spirit of cohesion .
The European Parliament and the Council alike are in favour of liberalizing the postal sectors but we reject the terms of the Commission 's communication .
We should work jointly on the draft directive which the Commission has drafted and on which the European Parliament has already approved an excellent report .
The Commission is not entitled to act without transparency , democracy or popular support .
Let us have a dialogue and find the appropriate solutions .
If the principles of a universal service and democratic control are ensured , and if the report we are considering takes account of these principles in its final version then it will undoubtedly deserve our support .
Madam President , Commissioner , I have here a letter which took five days to get from Belgium to the Netherlands .
This is what the postal service is still like in some areas of Europe .
It is a sad state of affairs , but it seems that the Council has reached deadlock on the entire postal sector dossier .
At the last Telecommunications Council on 17 November , it appeared that the Member States could not reach agreement on the draft directive , which means a further delay for the liberalization of the postal services market and no further progress in a sector which is so vital for the Union 's competitive position .
All this is most regrettable , but at the same time I realize that the social climate in some Member States is very tense at the moment , and we must be careful not to take too drastic measures .
In some Member States the postal sector fulfils a special function , such as in rural areas , and we cannot simply ignore this .
I also entirely agree with Mr de Brémond d 'Ars that the draft notice that we are discussing today cannot simply be accepted as it stands , particularly in view of the legal basis .
A communication is not a binding decision , but is simply intended to explain existing Treaty law .
We therefore have to recognize that the Council and Parliament are both democratically empowered to take decisions on the postal sector .
But we also have to recognize that the Commission has its own responsibility under Articles 85 , 86 and 90 of the EC Treaty .
The fact is that at the moment some postal companies are abusing their dominant positions and are imposing unnecessary conditions or charging excessive tariffs , as we can see from the many complaints addressed to the Commission .
The lack of progress on the postal sector dossier is also encouraging some postal companies in Europe to invest in other areas of the world , which is bad for our competitive position , bad for the investment climate in Europe and bad for employment .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner what he intends to do now , following the Telecommunications Council in November .
Does he intend to put forward a new proposal or to use Article 90 of the Treaty ?
I think we have got ourselves into a tight spot at the moment , but we still need to be very clear about what the eventual aim of the whole discussion is : to create a harmonized and largely liberalized market in postal services , guaranteeing an affordable and high-quality service for everyone .
The people of Europe deserve this from the Union .
Here we have the latest chapter in the never-ending saga of the postal sector .
What does Parliament really want ?
Do we want the Commission to stop doing its job ?
Mr Cot has already given you the answer to that question .
What you are asking for is absolutely impossible .
What you want is for the Commission to renounce its responsibilities .
Whenever the Commission has the courtesy to tell us what it intends to do in accordance with its mandate , you want to be able to say that that is not what you want .
Would you really like the Commission to renounce its responsibilities under the Treaty ?
Actually , I would .
I think that the people of Europe have a right to a proper service , as Mr van Velzen has just said .
But I think that when six complaints have been made and the Court has already found against La Poste in France for unfair competition , it is absolutely wrong to say that the Commission is not obliged and entitled to carry out its responsibilities under the Treaty .
For us in Parliament and the Council to say that we do not want it to is not the right way to set about things at all .
This is plainly what we do want .
For me , it is quite clear that the Commission must do what it is required to do under the terms of the Treaty .
Mr Van Miert told you this in Brussels , and he is here this evening to defend the fact that the Commission has its own job to do .
If you wish to dissuade him , then you must be honest about it , and not just produce a report telling the Commission to withdraw its communication .
You simply have to say that you do not want the Commission to do its job .
But none of us should have to say this : it should be the Commission that says it .
Madam President , it is important to note that the Council on telecommunications of 28 November did not result in an agreement on the directive relating to postal services .
Unquestionably , the mobilisation of trade union organisations and employees , which our group prides itself on having represented before the governmental and European authorities , played an important part in this .
Liberalisation thus suffered a setback once more , but the threat survives because basically , the disagreements of the Member States relate more to the way it should be carried out than to the fact of liberalisation itself .
The defeat of 28 November , however , did nothing to dampen the ardour of the Commission for deregulation , and it still brandishes its draft notice like the sword of Damocles which it threatens to let drop in the absence of any directive .
This ' notice ' , based on Article 90 ( 3 ) of the Treaty , would permit the competition rules to be imposed upon the postal service , without consultation of either the European Parliament or the Council , and this is unacceptable .
This totally undemocratic procedure would hold the authority of the European Parliament up to ridicule and would only serve to increase the famous democratic deficit of the current construction of Europe .
As the joint communiqué of the postal services of the European Union highlighted , this communication opens the way for deregulation which would be prejudicial to the interests of the majority of European citizens , to the profit of economic pressure groups which want to appropriate the most profitable postal market segments .
These groups already exert a pressure which is difficult to accept .
Thus , the American postal company UPS grants employees of the Commission a reduction of 50 % on items of private mail .
I have here the memo giving details of this favour .
What is more , for the last year and a half , the Dutch Royal Mail , KPN , has delegated its specialist in international postal traffic to the Commission .
For three years , this person will participate in this way in legislation on the liberalisation of the postal market .
This is the kind of expert which the Commission is consulting to work out its directive .
This expert justifies all our concerns , concerns which can only be reinforced by the accession of the Netherlands to the presidency of the Council , given that they have been champions of deregulation in the postal sector for years .
I have a press cutting about it here .
Confirming the European Parliament 's majority vote in October 1995 , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy asks the European Commission to withdraw its draft communication , which contradicts totally the amendments adopted by this Parliament on 9 May this year to slow the liberalisation process down seriously .
Our group is very pleased that the Committee on Economic Affairs has taken up this position , but regrets that the adoption of certain amendments should have lessened its impact by involving them in liberalisation .
That is why we will be presenting some amendments to strengthen the text and come up with a firm condemnation of the position of the European Commission .
At the same time , it will be a case of remaining vigilant at the level of every Member State , in order to prevent governments from implementing measures in anticipation of the application of the directive .
We have made up our minds to continue our action in association with the sector 's trade union organisations , employees and user groups , to secure a high-level harmonisation of the postal services which respects the status of their employees , ensuring the maintenance and development of a quality service founded upon equal treatment of users , and favouring cooperation between the national operators .
Ladies and gentlemen , rightly or wrongly - but Mr Wijsenbeek is no longer here - politics does not simply consist of reacting to the needs of the moment .
The Commission 's role cannot be discussed separately from the underlying political concept .
The aim must surely be for us to have flexible , modern and effective services for everyone as free and equal citizens , and the point is not to open up new areas for exploitation by capital , where a few private businesses are then able to reap profits .
Against this background , I share the views of Mr de Brémond d 'Ars .
We need a directive .
We do not need the draft notice presented by the Commission .
We need a clear legal basis , as requested by Mr Ferber - Article 100a and not Article 90 ( 3 ) - and tomorrow we must reject the unacceptable amendments , in particular Amendment No 1 which would make the report mean just the opposite .
Madam President , with the examination of Mr de Brémond d 'Ars ' report , we are again confronted with the difficulties of the basic dossier of the postal services .
Without a doubt , in relation to the postal services , the Commission is very single-minded .
This would be rather a good thing if its ideas , when implemented , were not of the kind to destroy public service .
Parliament has had to exercise its quite relative authority to get the Commission to present it with a directive on the postal services .
The rapporteur reminded us that it took almost seven years .
The directive was adopted by the European Parliament with some amendments , none of which has been retained by the Commission .
We know today not only that the Commission rejected the amendments , but also that it is proposing a communication , the text of which departs totally from that of the directive and , what is more , aims to undertake an irreversible and uncontrolled process of liberalisation from which the users and employees of this sector would never recover .
It is therefore essential that this draft communication is purely and simply withdrawn .
And if there is no question of contesting the Commission 's ability to produce a communication , it should still remember that the text should be consistent with that of the directive .
Personally I attribute these inconsistencies to the sudden haste with which the Commission now intends to liberalise the postal services .
Ultra-liberalism is now charging ahead , and public service is in danger .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should firstly like to congratulate Mr de Brémond d 'Ars on his report .
It provides a good basis for developing a coherent European policy on the postal sector .
We all wish to see a properly functioning postal service of high quality for the citizens of Europe , with affordable prices and a guarantee of universal service .
In Parliament 's debate and vote on the proposal for a directive - and here I am quoting the exact title - on common rules for the development of Community postal services and the improvement of quality of service , we have already established that the notice on the competition rules issued at the same time is unacceptable and entirely superfluous .
It contradicts the title of the proposal for a directive , as well as many other points in a text which was also produced by the Commission , after all .
We are therefore continuing to call for the notice to be withdrawn .
A directive means legislation , and a notice can only supplement , not replace it , let alone introduce rules which contradict the directive .
The notice takes no account of the need for a universal service .
It looks as if the Commission would like to introduce a form of liberalization for the sake of ideology , an unbridled liberalization which ignores the needs of Europe 's citizens .
Since August , the Commission has had before it the study which Parliament requested on the job situation in postal undertakings .
This has so far been kept secret , no doubt because it states in black and white : if the competition rules enter into force , then 20 to 40 % of jobs across Europe - between 300 000 and 600 000 of them - will be lost .
That is not a pleasant prospect , given the state of unemployment which we have already .
The pressure of time which the Commission is exerting on the Council and Parliament in terms of taking a decision on the directive is completely inappropriate , as has already been pointed out .
The Commission itself took seven years before finally publishing the proposal for a directive .
It is certainly annoying that the Council has not yet been able to agree on a common position ; that is why we are calling on the Council to reach agreement as quickly as possible , taking account of Parliament 's position , and on the Commission to withdraw its draft notice .
Madam President , Commissioner , my dear colleagues , there is no more time now to return to the constitutional debate , especially since Jean-Pierre Cot did it with such brilliance .
I would like nevertheless , in turn , to stress the seriousness of this situation , with a draft directive blocked by the Council , making way for a communication from the Commission which is far removed from the positions expressed by Parliament on the subject of the postal sector .
In my opinion , there are indeed serious and irreversible risks associated with deregulation , which many of us here have condemned .
And I would like to take a couple of minutes to highlight three points particularly .
My first point is that the absence of agreement in the Council means the absence of the possibility of a real universal service ; it is the intolerable risk of seeing no European postal service , no universal service anywhere in the Union , no equal service for all businesses wherever they are located , no universal service for all consumers irrespective of their situation or wealth , and no simply adequate intraCommunity postal service , exist at all .
My second point is that it is not right , and I am saying this to you , Mr van Miert , that Europe should open itself up to the rest of the world , and particularly to the United States , without some reciprocity .
Do not forget that in the United States there is a postal monopoly .
My third point , finally , is the problem of employment .
Apparently the Commission launched a study some time ago .
We are waiting for precise , proven , discussed and written results .
As far as we are concerned , we are afraid that between 300 , 000 and 600 , 000 jobs will be lost .
I would like this to be denied , but today I am recording this formally .
So this evening , Commissioner , my dear colleagues , I want to salute the important and sensible work done by Mr de Brémond d 'Ars , but I want to express my concern .
I would like to be reassured , but above all I would like the Council of Ministers to listen to Parliament very soon and lay down a common position in agreement with our wishes .
Madam President , firstly I am anxious to thank the rapporteur , who had the difficult task of trying to bring together some fairly conflicting points of view .
That is a situation which we have experienced for years , in Parliament , in Council , and within the other European institutions , which explains why it has taken years to come up with some proposals .
You knew , therefore , when you insisted that the Commission should make some proposals , that , in view of the arguments which there already were at that time and which continue to exist within the European Union , it was an almost superhuman task .
For the rest , the document we are discussing today is not a directive , and many interventions demonstrate not only ambiguity but also , and worse still , lack of understanding .
To be specific , we are talking in this case about a text which claims only to render transparent the application of rules relating to competition in the postal sector , and nothing more .
You persistently demand transparency .
Well , for once , let us apply it .
We are being criticised and you are asking us to withdraw the document .
I declare that this is unacceptable from a constitutional point of view , because this is a case in which the Commission is exercising its responsibility in a sector in which its responsibility is clear , and is confirmed by judgments by the Court of Justice .
If you demand the withdrawal of this document meaning then to change the Treaty - and that is certainly what you want : that the rules of the game should no longer apply in matters of competition - obviously you are asking the impossible and , as Mr Wijsenbeek said , at the end of the day , that amounts to asking the Commission not to do its work any more .
That is what this is all about !
It is indeed regrettable , now , that the Council has not been able to agree on these directives , but I am sorry to tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that none of you has got it right with respect to the Commission .
Have we really put forward a proposal for full liberalisation ?
No we haven 't , have we ?
Even if that situation exists in several Member States , we have proposed in our directive that Member States who wish to can maintain the basic activity of their official postal service under monopoly .
Yes or no ?
Yes , right !
So , do not make out that the opposite is true , Madam , do not make out that the opposite is true .
Read our proposal .
What is being discussed in the Council of Ministers is the matter of whether it will indeed be possible in the years to come to liberalise certain activities such as mail advertising , at the appropriate time , and by whom these will be carried out .
Moreover the conflict within the Council is on this matter .
Please , do not then say that the Commission is proposing the privatisation of state postal services , full liberalisation for tomorrow : it is not true , it is not correct and it is not worthy of Parliament to doctor a debate like this !
Now , to the notice . It is , I repeat , an effort at transparency - and not , Mr Cot , a case of resorting to Article 90 .
You are mistaken , that is wrong - .
It is quite simply a case of describing , on the basis of concrete cases , how the Commission will do it .
May I remind you that we have already received , in respect of the postal sector , many complaints along these lines , which it is the Commission 's duty to deal with .
So , do not ask me to withdraw a notice which is trying to clarify the debate , to specify the methods of application of the rules of the game on the basis of specific cases !
Unfortunately , because of the fact that agreement has not been reached within the Council , I am expecting even more complaints , because some countries have already liberalised certain activities , such as mail advertising .
In seven Member States , there is already complete or partial liberalisation , not because the Commission has imposed it , but because these governments have come to this decision about it .
That is the reality .
As far as the notice is concerned , we are of course going to take account of the debate in Council .
Since it has not been possible to reach agreement on the dates for liberalisation of mail advertising and incoming mail , nor on the methods and schedule , we are going to withdraw from the notice everything relating to dates because effectively , as long as there is no agreement on this point , we cannot refer to it in the application of rules relating to competition either .
We put it in at the time because the notice was harmonised with the Commission 's proposal , such as it was , but logic requires that we withdraw the mention of dates from the notice .
We are effectively going to stop at explaining in a series of hypotheses and individual cases how we intend to apply the rules in relation to competition .
There , Mr Cot , I cannot eliminate the possibility that there will be complaints on the basis of Article 90 .
That is already the case at present and you know how the situation in the postal sector can at times be anachronistic .
The final prices differ so much that you can end up with some unbelievable situations .
You send things to third party countries , you accept them back and there are still people who make money on that .
So there really are some strange situations in the postal sector !
Accept the situation and the reality , all the same !
We are going to try to put it all right but , because of the situation , there are already a large number of complaints and there will be more to come .
Consequently , the Commission has a duty to deal with them , otherwise the complainants can bring us before the Court of Justice .
Time has already been lost because , until now , I had agreed to postpone the Commission 's approval of this notice from my department until the end of the year in an attempt to see the debate more clearly .
Things are a little clearer , but sadly , not clear enough , but account will be taken of a number of matters which have arisen during the debate .
My department is currently in the process of preparing , tidying up and modifying the text , condensing it in some way , but explaining how the Commission will deal with individual cases in a series of hypotheses , from the point of view of competition policy .
One example is mutual subsidisation .
Complaints have already been made , in France , Mr Cot , as you know .
Private insurers have complained to the Commission about the fact that La Poste has entered the insurance market , a sector liberalised ages ago , using a certain number of privileges which , obviously , the authorities granted to La Poste .
Mr Wijsenbeek recalled a recent Court of Justice ruling which , actually , was given against a situation which benefitted the French postal service .
So you see , we are still in a community of law , in which the rules of the game as they exist must be enforced .
That is why , while accepting some modifications , Mr de Brémond d 'Ars , and accepting some of your amendments , moreover , we are going to rework our text , but not withdraw the notice .
We owe it to all of those active in the sector to be clear regarding application of the rules in this matter .
That is our responsibility , and it has been my pleasure to explain myself on this subject to you tonight .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 12.04 a.m. )
Mr President , I seem to remember that , following what might be described as injudicious television broadcasts , the Bureau decided - among other things - to prohibit the televising of Members signing in .
I now have to inform you that a Swedish television crew is outside , doing precisely that .
So I wonder what the point of the decision was .
We have asked the journalists not to set up television cameras .
The relevant department is seeing to the matter , Mr Dell 'Alba .
Mr Giansily , if it is art it is not pornography and if it is pornography it is not art !
Mr President , I tried to revert to the minutes before you moved on .
Yesterday I was the last speaker before the vote and there was pandemonium in this House with people walking in and out .
I made a proposal in my speech which was not recorded because I had not realized that the Vice-President had asked for silence and I went on speaking .
I would like that proposal to be minuted .
It concerns the last two paragraphs .
For the reason that I had tabled the amendment to the motion for a resolution in Mr Fabra Vallés ' report calling for the rotation of all information officer appointments at Grade A level in Parliament 's offices in national capitals , I asked the Secretary-General , the incoming President and the Vice-President to examine the case of rotating the Grade A staff around the cities of Europe on a four-year rotation basis .
It is a very fundamental part of the contribution I made but because of all the noise in Parliament , it was lost on that occasion .
On a final point , I believe that the quaestors asked you to take those signing-in sheets inside Parliament but that you refused .
Maybe as a last act you might do it before you leave that chair .
We will look into the matter you have raised .
The Secretary-General is still considering it and nothing has been decided yet .
The idea of moving the registers inside the Chamber is in fact not a new one .
Mr President , on a point of order in the broadest sense , I want to make a request that could be , so to speak , the culmination of your beneficent term of office here .
Could you not arrange for there to be a counter serving organic food in all our canteens ?
That kind of food is better and healthier .
It would be good for all of us and also benefit the producers .
This really would be a major achievement .
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , since it is nearly Christmas I will include your request in my Christmas list .
Mr Cornelissen , do you have another point of order or are you perfectly happy ?
Mr President , yesterday we received two verbatim reports of proceedings , one from Monday 's sitting , which was excellent , and one from our sitting in Brussels on 27 November .
That means , Mr President , that we received it twelve days after the sitting .
Upon investigation I discovered that the verbatim reports of proceedings in Brussels take at least one week to be produced .
I wonder , Mr President , whether you could investigate this and do something to ensure that the verbatim reports of our sittings in Brussels are produced just as quickly as those of our sittings in Strasbourg .
We will look into that .
You are quite right , Mr Cornelissen .
Mr President , it was a point of order from earlier on .
A number of Members were objecting about the filming of signing-in .
I want to say that , as far as I and a number of other Members are concerned , we have no objection whatsoever to being filmed signing in .
This should be an open chamber and we do not object to it .
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
The next item is the vote on objections concerning the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Following the vote on the objections to Item V , ' Nuclear weapons '
) Mr President , I would just like to complain in the strongest possible terms that the majority in this House did not seem to understand how important it was that the European Parliament allowed their voice to be heard before the UN General Assembly when a very large majority decided in favour of commencing negotiations on the abolition of nuclear weapons .
I think it is shameful that the European Parliament was not mature enough to say that we wanted our views heard !
European Council on 13 / 14 December in Dublin and the situation in Serbia
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on preparations for the European Council meeting in Dublin on 13 and 14 December 1996 including the situation in Serbia .
Mr President , in two days ' time the European Council will meet in Dublin for the second time in the past six months .
These have of course been the six months of the Irish presidency of the Council of Ministers and they have been both busy and eventful .
At the same time those Irish Ministers who have been involved in the Council of Ministers , including myself , have had their domestic responsibilities to attend to .
Such domestic responsibilities mean that I must begin this morning with an apology .
Due to pressing government business in Ireland which includes assisting in our preparations for the European Council , I must unfortunately leave this House immediately following my intervention this morning .
My colleague Minister Gay Mitchell will remain in the Chamber until the end of the debate .
In my address to this House last July I outlined the priorities for the Irish presidency .
These included economic and monetary union , employment , the intergovernmental conference , internal security and the management of the Union 's external relations portfolio .
These will be the main issues for the European Council .
But we also have another priority . This was to be efficient and effective in our conduct of the business of the Union .
The final and most significant test of this priority will start at 10 a.m. on Friday , when the European Council begins in Dublin .
The momentum of progress towards the third stage of EMU has been maintained throughout the Irish presidency .
Our aim is to present substantive conclusions at the European Council on three issues - the proposed stability pact , the new exchange rate mechanism and the euro - and that this outcome will further underpin confidence that the third stage of EMU will begin on schedule .
There is now consensus that Member States will be obliged to submit either stability or conversion programmes .
Member States participating in EMU will submit stability programmes that are intended to ensure that Member States stay within the Maastricht deficit criteria over the course of the economic cycle .
Member States that are not in EMU will be expected to submit conversion programmes .
These will help ensure that there is greater convergence of economic performance within the EU and that exchange rate trends do not disrupt economic development .
Very substantial progress has been made on this , but as you are aware , not every detail has yet been settled .
Ecofin Ministers will meet in Dublin tomorrow to look again at the possibility of completing the package .
The Ecofin Council reports that the key elements for the new exchange rate mechanism are agreed , although finalization of this process awaits the establishment of the European Central Bank in 1998 .
As far as legislation for the euro is concerned , the progress made by the presidency is in advance of that called for in the change-over scenario agreed at Madrid .
This is important because people require reassurance on such matters as , for instance , continuity of contracts .
The European Council will be able to record virtual completion of this work , even if adoption of the actual regulations must await the creation of the European Central Bank in 1998 .
We have all shared interest in the creation of employment and this interest has been recognized in the priority which successive presidencies and European Council meetings have accorded this issue .
It is now recognized that action at Union level must complement action taken at national level to address the unacceptably high levels of unemployment in all Member States .
The European Council will review progress in the Essen Strategy , the package of restructuring measures designed to increase the job-creating capacity of the European economy , on the basis of a report on employment , jointly produced by the Ecofin and Social Affairs Council meetings as well as the Commission .
The European Council will also have the opportunity to note developments in the pact of confidence on employment which was proposed by President Santer .
As this House is aware , some elements of the pact , especially those involving large extra expenditure , did not find favour in the light of the current necessity for fiscal restraint .
Nevertheless , there are a number of elements which have been developed and it is these which we will be looking at during the European Council .
A key priority of the Irish presidency has been the chairing of the intergovernmental conference .
At Florence the European Council indicated that it expected at its meeting in Dublin this month to mark decisive progress towards completing the intergovernmental conference by the middle of 1997 .
To that end it requested the presidency to prepare a general outline for a draft revision of the treaties .
We have organized the work of the conference with a view to fulfilling this ambitious mandate .
The conference met at foreign minister level on a monthly basis , and the work of the foreign ministers was prepared by a group of their representatives which met on an almost weekly basis since last August .
I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge again the essential on-going input which the European Parliament is contributing to the work of the conference .
The outline draft treaty , which has been prepared on the presidency 's responsibility , reflects that input and the ambitions for Europe which the European Parliament is bringing to bear on the negotiations .
The outline treaty will be submitted to the European Council in Dublin this week .
It reflects in a balanced way the discussions which have taken place at the conference , as well as the necessity to maintain an adequate level of ambition in relation to the aims set by the European Council .
The draft presented by the presidency could be said to address five main challenges .
First , the development of a Union in which people 's fundamental rights are fully respected and in which they can live without fear of threats to their personal security .
In this regard we have proposed very significantly strengthening the means at the disposal of the Union in the fight against international crime , including terrorism , drug trafficking and offences against children .
We have also proposed the introduction of Community methods as appropriate in the areas of free movement , asylum and immigration and have suggested an overall target date of 1 January 2001 to complete the establishment of an area of freedom , security and justice , in which the free movement of persons would be ensured .
As regards respect for fundamental rights , we have proposed texts which would reaffirm that the Union is founded on the principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the rule of law .
We have made proposals which would allow the Council to take action to prohibit discrimination on grounds including sex , race , age and disability .
We have also proposed strengthening the treaty significantly with a view to ensuring respect for the principle of equality between men and women and have suggested that gender-neutral language should be incorporated into the treaty .
Secondly , significantly strengthened treaty provisions on a number of issues which affect citizens in their daily lives and how they perceive the Union and its institutions , including employment , environment , consumer protection , transparency and subsidiarity .
Thirdly , the development of a coherent , consistent and effective external policy for the Union in all its aspects : the common foreign and security policy , including its security and defence dimension , and strengthening the Union 's ability to act in external economic relations .
Fourthly , the promotion of efficient and effective institutions which are visibly democratic and firmly rooted in public acceptance .
We have proposed a streamlining of the co-decision procedure and that Parliament should be placed on an equal footing in that procedure .
We have argued for an extension of the co-decision procedure by reference to accepted criteria as suggested by the Commission and Parliament itself .
Fifthly , consideration of how the treaty should be amended to allow for the development of what has come to be called flexibility or enhanced cooperation which is certainly one of the most important issues at the conference .
In almost all cases our proposals are in the form of draft treaty texts , the exceptions being those areas where we have accepted the general view that it would be preferable not to put forward treaty texts at this stage .
In such cases we have emphasized the importance of the issues and have dealt with them in detail including setting out options which a view to the further work of the conference .
The draft outline treaty is a presidency document .
Delegations are not asked to sign up to it in all its detail .
In the presidency 's view it represents a good basis for further work with a view to seeking final agreement under the Netherlands presidency at the Amsterdam European Council on a treaty which would equip the Union to address the challenges ahead and to respond to the aspirations of citizens .
We are very encouraged by the positive reaction to our document by Parliament and to its ambitions for Europe .
The security of the citizen and especially personal security is a matter of vital importance .
This was brought home in a horrific manner when terrible deeds in Belgium were made known to us all .
Sometimes it can take the unspeakable to prompt swift action and as the presidency we have been determined to put in place arrangements which will allow for effective cooperation between the Member States and wider international cooperation to prevent the trafficking in persons and which would assist in combating child abuse .
The Justice and Home Affairs Ministers took rapid action and agreement was quickly reached on a number of joint actions to enhance police and judicial cooperation in combating organized paedophilia as well as the trafficking in women for the purposes of sexual exploitation .
The Irish presidency placed strong emphasis on the fight against drug trafficking and drug addiction .
The European Council will be able to record very substantial progress on the action programme on drugs , including measures to protect the external borders against drug smuggling and the adoption of the Community programme against drug dependence .
The presidency also sought to foster a sense of common purpose in the fight against drugs , both within the European Union and among its international partners .
I am confident that the European Council in Dublin will give strong evidence of that shared will .
It will also discuss stepping up the fight against organized crime and seek to give an impetus to cooperation between the Member States in this vital struggle .
I also expect that it will call for the early ratification of the Europol Convention by the Member States by the end of 1997 at the latest .
In addition the common challenge of combating international organized crime , in particular in relation to drug trafficking and trafficking in persons will be the focus of the discussions with the associated countries of Central and Eastern Europe together with Cyprus at their meeting with the European Council on 14 December .
Each presidency has a particular role to play in the conduct of the Union 's external relations .
The external challenges and responsibilities which the Union must address have become increasingly complex and demanding over time and each presidency is challenged to respond .
It is also the one which is most difficult to plan .
While many issues were the subject of action in this area under our presidency , three particular matters will be the focus for discussion at the European Council and it is to these that I now turn .
The special meeting of the European Council in Dublin on 5 October discussed how the European Council could further enhance its role in and support for , the peace process at the time of heightened tension in the Middle East .
In the meantime the Union has considerably intensified its efforts in this regard .
I travelled to the region directly after the October meeting in Dublin and a full troika visit took place from 10 to 12 November .
Ambassador Moratinos has been appointed as the Union 's special envoy to the region with a broad mandate to engage with parties and has now taken up his duties .
The presidency has also hosted both President Arafat and Prime Minister Netanyahu for discussion on progress in the peace process .
In Dublin this week Heads of State and Government will have an opportunity to review the latest developments in the region and to maintain the clear impetus for a constructive and substantive role for the Union in the search for peace in the Middle East .
During the current presidency the international community faced a further crisis in the Great Lakes region , this time in Eastern Zaire .
The ensuing return of hundreds of thousands of Rwandan refugees to their homeland brought about a radical change in the nature of the crisis and in the parameters for the deployment of humanitarian assistance with appropriate military support under UN Security Council Resolution 1080 of 15 November .
The Union responded to all stages of the crisis in full cooperation with the UN , the OAU , regional leaders and other members of the international community .
As we speak , the situation continues to evolve .
The temporary multinational force for humanitarian purposes sanctioned by the UN resolution with Canada as the lead country is currently setting up its headquarters in Kampala , Uganda .
A phased , progressive and flexible plan for deployment has been worked out and agreed by participating countries .
Under this plan the MNF 's role will evolve to match the changing circumstances in Eastern Zaire and its deployment will proceed on a step-by-step basis in the context of the overall objective of facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance and the orderly , voluntary repatriation of refugees and displaced persons .
The MNF is liaising closely with the international humanitarian agencies under the leadership of the UN humanitarian coordinator in ensuring that it plays its full part in assisting the agencies and their work in Eastern Zaire .
The critical challenge remains to ensure the delivery of health in the best and most effective way possible to those still in need in Eastern Zaire and to facilitate the orderly voluntary repatriation of refugees and displaced persons .
In light of the rapid pace of developments on the ground , it is right that the means by which this help is delivered is re-evaluated on an on-going basis .
The European Union will seek to play its full part in the humanitarian tasks which lie ahead , notably through ECHO .
In that regard , I would recall the joint action concerning the contribution which the EU could make to the efforts which the United Nations has made to resolve the crisis in the region and the Council decision requesting the WEU to elaborate and implement aspects of that joint action .
Other major challenges lie ahead in the Great Lakes region . These include inter alia the reintegration of hundreds of thousands of returning refugees in Rwanda , rehabilitation and the promotion of reconciliation in that country , the continuation of the process of democratic transition in Zaire , the development of the peace process in Burundi and the rehabilitation of those areas , including Tanzania , which have hosted refugees in such large numbers for the past two years .
The European Union will play its part in the addressing of these enormous challenges .
In this regard , I welcome the Commission initiative in undertaking to draw up a strategic and comprehensive plan of action for EU assistance to the Great Lakes region covering a broad range of areas .
I welcome and commend also the continuing efforts of our special envoy to the Great Lakes region , Mr Ajelle , who is playing an important role on the Union 's behalf in the region , in particular in terms of conveying the Union 's support for the efforts of the region itself to resolve its problems .
It is widely recognized in the context of the Great Lakes region that a humanitarian response alone represents no solution to its problems .
A broad-based comprehensive approach is required .
That is why , in tandem with the efforts to meet immediate humanitarian needs , the Union has been supporting the early convening of an international conference under the joint auspices of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity which within a global approach can address the root causes of the crisis .
This is the right approach to ensuring a durable lasting settlement to the problems which have beset the Great Lakes region for far too long .
The Dublin European Council will take place exactly one year after the signing in Paris of the peace agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
It is timely on this significant anniversary that the heads of state and government should review the peace process to date .
Substantial progress has been achieved towards the implementation of the peace agreement though difficult challenges remain .
The recent London meeting of the peace implementation conference has established a detailed programme of action aimed in particular at accelerating the implementation process in areas where progress has been slow .
The European Council will consider the further contribution which it can make to this process .
There will also be an opportunity to discuss developments in the other countries of the region in particular the worrying situation in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
The dynamic of the Union 's relations with the applicant countries of Central and Eastern Europe and with Cyprus has been maintained and strengthened during the past several months , both at the multilateral and bilateral levels .
The European Council meeting in Dublin will provide a valuable opportunity to review progress with regard to the Commission 's ongoing preparations for enlargement .
As we speak , the first WTO ministerial conference is continuing in Singapore .
This meeting is a significant milestone on the road to the greater globalization of trade and we attach importance to its successful outcome .
I should mention also that an EU / US Summit will take place on 16 December in Washington .
It is expected that this meeting will assess progress on the implementation of key priorities under the EU / US action plan as well as the overall development of EU / US relations .
When I addressed this House last July I said that the Irish presidency coincided with a time of great challenge for the European Union .
That challenge continues .
The European Council in Dublin on Friday and Saturday will be stepping stone toward meeting this challenge .
Finally , I should like to take this opportunity to thank the European Parliament for its constructive engagement with the Irish presidency of the Council of Ministers during our term .
It is fair to say that both our major institutions , Council and Parliament , are engaged in the same process .
Our aim under the Treaty is to ensure the ever closer union of the peoples of Europe .
By our constructive engagement together we further that aim .
I pay tribute in particular to you , Mr President .
You have ensured that our business has been conducted in a very constructive manner .
I mentioned earlier that in the context of the discussions of foreign ministers at the Dublin European Council , I envisaged an exchange of views on the worrying situation in Serbia , in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
I am aware of Parliament 's request for a statement of this matter and in response I can report that on behalf of the Union , the presidency has issued three declarations on the situation there , most recently on 4 December , expressing our concern over the undemocratic annulment of some local election results by the authorities , deploring the authorities ' action in silencing independent broadcasters , demanding that Serbia respects the rights of the people to protest peacefully and urging that restraint be exercised .
On 6 December the General Affairs Council decided that in light of developments in that country to postpone the extension of the autonomous import regime to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
The Council firmly believes that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia must eventually take its place amongst the international community of nations for the sake of stability and prosperity in the region but it cannot do so unless it observes basic standards of democracy and human rights .
I should like to reiterate again today that it is view of the Council that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 's attitude towards the issues of respect for human and minority rights and the observance of democratic norms will be the key factors in determining the Union 's future relationship with that country .
( Loud applause )
Thank you , Mr Santer .
We come now to the debate .
The first speaker is Mrs Green , on behalf of the PSE Group .
Mr President , if anyone ever doubted that a small Member State of the European Union could perform a world-class act then the Irish presidency has dispelled that doubt .
The Irish Government has performed what many people thought was an impossible task : they have produced a draft treaty in time for the Dublin II summit meeting this weekend .
Not only have they produced a draft paper , but it is lucid , persuasive and has a clear eye to making the case for closer European integration in a language and style which is accessible to and has resonance for the peoples of the European Union .
My group congratulates the Irish presidency on its very significant efforts .
This Parliament must now spend some time examining and analysing the 140 pages which make up the draft proposals , which will be formally presented to our government leaders on Friday , taking account , of course , of the outcome of that meeting .
I want it to be clear that any response which my group makes today must be seen as an immediate political response to the document .
I make it without prejudice to the detailed critique which will follow in the coming weeks .
Having welcomed the publication of the draft , can I urge subsequent presidencies to continue the most appealing form in which it is presented ?
The Irish presidency has clearly learned the lessons of the débacle of the public debate on the Maastricht Treaty .
With each suggested change in the Treaty there is a justification written by way of introduction and , above all , written in plain , easy-to-understand language .
Gone is the stiff , turgid , legalistic approach of Maastricht .
Socialists welcome and applaud this , which will inevitably help the public understanding of just why changes are required and suggested .
My group wants , as well , to welcome the positive elements in the draft proposal .
We specifically draw attention to the inclusion of an employment chapter which aims to give the same political priority to the issue of job creation in the European Treaty , as the Maastricht Treaty gave to EMU and a single currency .
Of course we want to ensure that this competence has real bite and is not mere pious words .
Frankly we have had enough of them already .
But we are encouraged that the concept of the separate chapter on employment is clearly established and enjoying overwhelming majority support .
We particularly welcome the all-embracing definition of non-discrimination .
This is as we want it and is a strong statement of intention that this European Union will not suffer or tolerate those who purvey the politics of hate .
This Parliament has led the campaign against the resurgence of racism and anti-semitism .
It would be a most powerful first positive message for reform of the Treaty if the Dublin II summit were to reach immediate agreement on this new competence , designed to demonstrate that our Europe respects citizens or residents whether white or black , Christian , Jew or Muslim .
We have learnt the lessons of our history and we believe all decent-thinking people in Europe share that desire for tolerance with us .
Mr President-in-Office , I am sure you would expect us , in this House , to express a balanced view of the draft proposals , and I will not disappoint you .
In expressing considerable criticism of what is not in the draft , I want to make clear that this is not to denigrate the considerable feat of actually producing it .
It is rather in sadness as we recognize that , despite the energy which has gone into it , the draft treaty in omission demonstrates the difficulties with which the Union is faced .
First and foremost , my group sincerely regrets that there is no mention of institutional reforms in any depth , so necessary to make the Union work more effectively and efficiently .
What is it that has determined the need for this IGC ?
It is not some overweening urge to put each country through a further tortuous debate on just where Europe is going , not a slavish devotion to an unthinking dash to Euro-federalism , as Euro-sceptics would have us believe , but rather , the absolute imperative to enlarge the Union to bring in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , Cyprus and ultimately the Baltic States .
It is nothing short of the fundamental bedrock underlying the lives of millions of our people ; that is , peace and stability on our continent .
If we are serious then we have to ensure that our Union is ready for enlargement .
That means making sure that the institutional issues which govern decisionmaking in the Union are streamlined and made ready for a bigger Union in the relatively near future .
That the Council is unable to demonstrate any serious degree of consensus on this issue nine months after the opening of the IGC is a cause of great concern .
On issues of practical importance to our citizens there is scant mention : the environment , public services , the real development of European citizenship and greater openness and transparency .
We suspect that the ambiguity which currently blights the second and third pillars in terms of democratic accountability will be increased rather than lessened by proposals in the draft paper .
Not only is the right of democratic control , which is exercised by elected parliaments throughout the world , not further extended in the draft , but the logic of the text would appear to weaken Parliament 's budgetary rights on the second pillar on a common foreign and security policy and , by the proposals for a hybrid arrangement on the third pillar on home and justice affairs , confuses rather than clarifies and simplifies decision-making processes .
We hope that at Dublin our governments can come together and seek a higher level of ambition for the European Union and its future .
Mr President , ' Die Politik ist keine exakte Wissenschaft ' .
Please forgive my German accent , but I would not dare quote Bismarck in English .
If politics were an exact science , the United States of Europe would already exist as the logical culmination of the aims of the Founding Fathers of the European Union , providing security and prosperity for its citizens and exercising a benign but powerful influence on the world stage .
But , regrettably , politics is not exact and we are here today discussing a measure which is more practical than ideal .
The proposals of the Irish presidency under the title ' Outline for a draft revision of the Treaties ' are the distillation of views and opinions gathered from a myriad of discussions , debate and seminars at political and official level with academics , NGOs and social partners , a process that began under the Italian presidency and gathered momentum during the last six months .
The document should therefore command a consensus if it is an accurate reflection of these views .
In theory , nobody should be against it but I suspect there is much disparity in some areas , especially under the third pillar .
Therefore , consensus may be difficult to achieve .
The principle of consensus , however , should never mean surrender and I commend the presidency for pushing for real progress in such areas as Treaty status for the fight for employment and growth , the fight against drugtrafficking , with extension of the remit and powers of Europol , measures to combat serious crime , extension of the CFSP , simplification of decision-marking and transparency , fundamental rights , the sustainable environment and freedom to travel .
The first priority - the plight of the unemployed - is also our first priority .
The European Council must again address this issue in Dublin .
Whole communities in our countries are being destroyed because of widespread unemployment .
A wholehearted response is required .
I believe that Dublin should provide us with a separate and comprehensive statement of the European Council strategy to strengthen the fight for growth and employment .
Politicians can be broadly divided into pragmatists and idealists .
The pragmatists are those who know what can be attained and have to endure the frustration when this is less than they would like .
The Irish presidency and members of governments generally find themselves in this category .
I have no doubt that the Irish presidency is only too well aware that its draft document is embarrassingly weak on the vexed question of the veto and qualified majority voting .
I know it is in full sympathy with the views of this Parliament but it sees the draft document as a realistic or pragmatic acknowledgement of what is politically attainable at this stage .
When to debate a sensitive topic - when to make it an issue - is always a fine judgement for the pragmatic politician but for politicians who can afford the luxury of being idealists - and many in this Parliament are in this category - there are no such inhibitions .
Our job is always to pursue the unattainable goal , dragging our pragmatic colleagues with us as far as possible towards this goal .
That is why we must call for the end of the veto .
The veto is a roadblock on our route to Union .
If it is not removed our great movement will come to a halt because any one Member State can say : thus far and no further .
If this happens Europe will stagnate and eventually fall apart as Member States pursue their own individual aspirations , no longer having a common goal .
We are approaching - if we are not already there - the watershed of the history of the Union .
Those who do not believe in the federal Union foreseen by our Founding Fathers must consider whether they are entitled to bring this movement to a halt and ultimate collapse or whether they themselves should go .
It is perhaps a pity that this draft of the Irish presidency does not pose this question for it needs to be faced and , I would say , sooner rather than later .
I believe , therefore , with the European Parliament , that the veto should go , and should go quickly .
The democratic deficit must also be ended .
We want to see an extension of codecision and a more democratic and effective third pillar .
I also endorse the use of qualified majority voting to achieve an effective common foreign and security policy , and the incorporation of the WEU under the European pillar .
To those who would say that this is an unreasonable approach - and there will be some - let me quote the wisdom of a fellow Irishman , George Bernard Shaw . ' The reasonable man adapts himself to the world : the unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself .
Therefore all progress depends on the unreasonable man . ' I would like to think that this Parliament is firmly on the side of the unreasonable man .
Let me conclude by warmly thanking the Irish presidency for the courtesy it has extended to the Groups of this Parliament and to Parliament itself and for taking on board the concerns of this Parliament .
I sincerely wish it all success in Dublin and in its concluding days .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with the Dublin summit about to start , the situation in Europe is somewhat paradoxical .
On the one hand , the European Union , the Union of Fifteen , continues to exercise great powers of attraction for the European peoples not yet part of it but who aspire to join it .
Is it not highly symbolic , ladies and gentlemen , that the peaceful and silent demonstrators marching in huge numbers in the cold and snow of Belgrade to show their commitment to democratic values which are the raison d 'être of our Union wave the flag with twelve gold stars ?
Will we listen to their appeals and can we respond wholeheartedly ?
On the other hand , Europeans who are members of the Union , are full of doubts .
While the scourge of unemployment is continually spreading , increasing the social breakdown threatening our society ; while acts of terrorism continue to spill blood in our towns in France , Spain and Northern Ireland ; while drug traffickers , paedophile rings and organized crime continue to weave their murderous fabric through inadequate coordination of our judicial and police systems ; while all this is happening , the citizens of this Europe of Fifteen are beginning to question the very trustworthiness of the Union .
Europe is experiencing a kind of crisis of weariness and is in danger of getting bogged down in debates that are too technical , like those about the best exchange parities between the future single currency and its component currencies , or the still more impenetrable debate about the future stability pact .
Our fellow citizens are weary of quarrels between experts , which they suspect are in fact being used as an alibi for refusing to look the facts in the face , particularly the rejection of solidarity without which any union is only a pretence .
Our citizens expect the Heads of State and Government meeting in Dublin quite simply to breathe new life into the Union .
It is more than ever necessary to reaffirm the main objectives : more prosperity , more jobs , more security , more consideration for the preservation of our environment and for the values of freedom and democracy on which our society is built .


The European Council should , as it has been invited by the joint Kohl-Chirac letter , release the resources needed to achieve these objectives and should commit itself to doing so , as it did in the past when the future single market and economic and monetary union were being mapped out . It should also commit itself to the enhanced cohesion without which there is no Union .
Basically , what we expect from the Heads of State and Government , who form the European Council , which is the authority with the greatest democratic legitimacy in Europe , is that they map out the prospects for a democratic , generous and prosperous Europe , guarantor of internal security and world peace , corresponding to the vision of the peoples wishing to join us .
It is precisely because these peoples have been too long deprived of what today is the basis of our pact and our values that we must preserve and reinforce this heritage so that we can share it with them to better advantage tomorrow .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Minister , the great achievement of the Irish presidency - which must be wholeheartedly congratulated on it - was to produce a text all the more accurate in that it reflects an unsatisfactory situation .
Little progress is made by it , and the examination of important points is put off until later .
I should like to raise the question of the aims of the common foreign and security policy and of enhanced cooperation .
How can we hope for the support of European citizens without reminding them that the Intergovernmental Conference is to be used for drafting a treaty to be the legal basis of an objective to be reached ?
That of the Treaty of Rome was to ensure peace through a European Community uniting yesterday 's victors and vanquished .
The Single Act strengthened the institutions and set up the single market .
The Maastricht Treaty , despite its weaknesses , organized the stages and the implementation of the single currency and required , in an article referring to Article B , the full preservation and development of the Community 's achievements .
Could not the ministers of the fifteen Member States recover this splendid consensus to remind people that the European construction is at an important crossroads in its history , that it will show itself worthy of the hopes that it still inspires in public opinion by setting up a fair , solidly-linked and democratic society , that it is in the name of these principles that it should open itself to countries asking for admission , that the instruments necessary to succeed in this great design are efficient and democratic institutions .
The fact is that there will be no common foreign and security policy without sufficient relaxation of the unanimity rule , in other words , without the abolition of the veto .
Without that , we shall continue to be the most generous contributors , leaving others to gain the political credit for their actions .
In such circumstances , how will a member of the CFSP handle the task of making the policy more visible ?
Enhanced cooperation , as your text reminds us , Minister , is one of the most important questions for the conference .
The majority of the European Parliament shares that opinion .
It is important , however , to clarify its conditions in order to avoid ambiguities .
These conditions are - and I quote - the maintenance of the internal and external coherence of the Union 's action , the safeguarding of all Community achievements , respect for the Union 's objectives and opening up the Union under the same conditions to all Member States who so wish .
I will add just one more condition : its implementation cannot be dependent on unanimity .
I just have time , Minister , to thank you again for the quality of your presidency in the face of the difficulties you have encountered and to wish you good luck in the further actions you are sure to be taking in the period to come .
Mr President , our Group , which is made up of unpragmatic elected members , would like to make known its great concern regarding the forthcoming European Council meeting in Dublin .
We duly acknowledge the endeavours and successes of the Irish presidency over the last six months but we have been disappointed by the extensive document relating to the review of the Treaty which is being presented at the Summit .
There are undoubtedly novel and positive approaches , such as the increase in judicial and police cooperation , the fight against racism and discrimination , new environmental protection requirements in Community policies or the increase in transparency on the part of the Council when it legislates .
But there are many aspects in respect of which it falls short or remains silent .
There is , in the proposal , no mention of the objective of full employment nor any reference to the means necessary for the application of common jobcreation policies .
Nor is there any mention of safeguarding public services and , much to our surprise , there is no proposal for the introduction into the Treaty of the protocol on social policy , while consolidation of citizens ' right to free movement is put back until 2001 without there being a reference to the Union becoming a party to the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Attempts are being made to make progress in the areas of defence and military integration without a simultaneous advance in matters of foreign policy .
Of all the aforesaid , the most worrying aspect is the impasse in institutional matters , with the risk that decisions are taken at the last minute , with no transparency whatsoever and without citizens being informed in advance .
European public opinion has responded in a negative way to this situation , which is not improved by joint decisionmaking on the part of the French President and the German Chancellor .
Its proposals aside , what seems to be appearing is a hard , influential core capable of imposing decisions in preference to promoting the development of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Regarding other points on the Dublin agenda , our Group supports the fight against crime and drug trafficking , but firmly rejects the adoption of the ' stability pact ' , which goes beyond the current requirements of Economic and Monetary Union and the derived system of possibly fining Member States . This would undoubtedly give rise to a deterioration in the social and economic conditions of countries which already have other problems .
We are also critical of the confirmation of the model and the time periods relating to the single currency and we would ask the European Council to embark upon a public and wide-ranging debate in which all the various positions are included and a dialogue to discuss this single-currency model and its consequences , particularly with regard to employment .
Mr Santer himself spoke to us about the deteriorating employment situation .
We could define employment policies along the lines of the old saying : ' from defeat to defeat up to final victory ' .
At the moment , we are in the defeat stage as regards employment policies .
Mr President , such debates cannot continue in the same elitist manner , amid central-bank directives or via opinions in the press given by former Heads of Government or former Presidents of the Commission .
It is absolutely essential that the conditions necessary to enable citizens to acquire in-depth information and to take part in the institutional system be established .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is Advent , it is the time when children write to Father Christmas , the time to picture the following scene : it is Christmas Eve , there is a large package under the Christmas tree , the package looks wonderful , it makes the child feel very hopeful ; it is so big that it would have room for every wish on its Christmas list .
Then the child begins to unpack it , to unwrap it , and to go on unwrapping it .
Inside one box is another box , the child goes on unpacking more and more desperately and it becomes more and more clear that the package is empty , there is nothing inside it .
It consists of nothing but empty boxes .
That is every child 's nightmare , and what is happening with the revision of the Maastricht Treaty is the same kind of nightmare .
When I read the Council 's proposals for the Dublin conference I feel like the child I have been describing .
These plans and projects are not the answer to our wishes .
What we wrote on our wish list was : more transparency , more democracy , more rights for the European Parliament .
What happened ? The opposite , for the Dublin documents contain not more but less transparency because the Council wants to continue its absolutist reign of power and secrecy .
They contain not more but less democracy because they reduce the rights of the citizens to wishes , because although they refer to anti-discrimination , in fact they create an even more hierarchical system , because for the Council certainty is never legal certainty , for how else could freedom of movement be deferred to the next millennium and Europol be equipped with operational powers without any controls ?
They contain not more but fewer rights for Parliament because they drastically widen the gulf between the single market and the second and third pillar , because the proposal on foreign policy does not once mention the European Parliament but instead refers ever more frequently to WEU and because in foreign and domestic policy we , the European Parliament , are to be deprived of our budgetary powers .
These proposals contain not more but less Europe .
And what is far worse is that the package is not just empty but is doom-laden .
That is not the fault of the Irish presidency .
I wish us all a happy Christmas and , I hope , a better New Year !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank the Irish presidency for having fulfilled , in a very reasonable time , the mandate it was given during the informal European Council on 5 October and for having produced a readable and well-written document which takes stock of the state of negotiations .
I also take this opportunity to protest against the cynical attitude to the text shown by leading representatives of certain governments , and not minor ones either , who have strongly criticized the Irish presidency 's document , when they share the responsibility for the lamentable situation in which the IGC finds itself .
Having said that , the document leaves much to be desired , even though the Irish presidency puts forwards courageous proposals about jobs and the environment and even dares to propose the abolition of the third reading in the co-decision procedure , which amounts to putting the European Parliament on the same footing as the Council : an excellent initiative .
Firstly , at institutional level , there is total blockage which is a bad omen for the preparation for enlargement : no concrete proposal is made for the extension of majority voting or for the extension of the co-decision procedure .
And it is the same for the composition of the Commission and the weighting of votes in the Council .
Are we not heading for disaster if the great institutional package , which should give the Union effective decision-making powers and the capacity to function after the next enlargement , is postponed until the end of negotiations , with all the dangers that a grand final bargaining session at the last minute can create ?
Then there is the CFSP , our poor old CFSP .
Do Member States really believe that the Union will gain credibility by making an official , however highly placed he may be , the centre of the European Union 's foreign policy ?
The proposals aimed at strengthening the status of the Secretary-General of the Council are clearly unacceptable , unless , in the matter of the external representation of the Union we wish to be treated in the same way by our partners and our Commissioners and members of the Troika also to be received by an official .
Furthermore , is it acceptable that a new method of veto should be introduced for national political reasons in areas where majority voting is now possible ?
There is obviously considerable backsliding over the foreign policy proposals .
This contrasts with the clear political will to make concrete progress in the defence field , a will that we appreciate .
But allow me to question the implications of rapid development in defence and military integration without simultaneous progress being made in foreign policy .
In conclusion , Mr President , I am personally happy to see - and on this point I go along with President Santer - that the question of enhanced cooperation will henceforth be at the heart of the Conference debate , as was not the case when my group began to fight for it at the time of Mr Bourlanges 's report .
I am still convinced that the possibility of enhanced cooperation will nevertheless have to remain open , by being compatible with the Union 's objectives , and by respecting the Community 's achievements and the single institutional framework .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the six months of the Dutch presidency ending with the Amsterdam summit will be of vital importance for the Union .
It is up to our governments to decide whether to equip the Union with institutions capable of making an enlarged Community capable of functioning or , on the contrary , to condemn Europe to paralysis .
And it is Parliament which has the distinction of reminding the presidency and governments of this .
Mr President , I am not going to talk to you about the problem of unemployment which , I imagine , helps to keep you awake sometimes .
Neither am I going to talk about the IGC , nor about enlargement to the East , nor about the necessity for the veto - being personally convinced to the contrary - nor about the right to secession .
What I am going to talk about is the budgetary stability pact .
This pact provides mechanisms for punishing peoples whose budgetary conduct is not good enough .
A country like France could therefore be made to pay a penalty of FF 30 billion , a sum which would allow it , for example , to increase the salaries of all its schoolteachers by FF 30 000 .
I shall not spend time discussing whether such a mechanism is valid , but merely observe that for fifty years you yourself were happy to make a practice of Keynesian deficits .
We therefore ask ourselves why you are changing .
What is certain is that , with this stability pact , you are nursing a German neurosis .
Germany , having experienced the Weimar Republic , fears inflation .
But just because the grandmother in a family has diabetes it does not mean that all the children have to go without sugar : a treatment aimed at curing the illness of one cannot be applied to everybody .
With such a stability pact , with whose help you hope to create a single currency and a single budgetary policy , we shall end up with a situation in which it will be impossible to compensate for different economic levels between States by adjusting either the budgetary or monetary floodgates .
The only thing left to adjust , apart from unemployment , will be the tax floodgates , and this will lead States to practise competitive tax reductions , already used by Luxembourg in connection with income from property .
And that is what Germany is about to do by abolishing its tax on capital and reducing its marginal rate of income tax .
I have said to you before and I say it again : align yourself with Germany .
We have a ruling from the Karlsruhe Court of June 1995 which is based on the freedom of taxpayers to act to determine whether such and such a tax is too high .
Include the single currency and the single budgetary policy in your revised Maastricht Treaty , and include a ceiling on compulsory deductions , like the Karlsruhe Court is in the process of doing for Germany .
At least the IGC will then have served some useful purpose .
I have received fourteen motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure : seven motions for resolutions relating to the European Council and a further seven relating to the political situation in Serbia .
Mr President , Europe 's citizens are noting with surprise the fact that many of their hopes are failing to materialize .
Many of the questions raised by the Maastricht Treaty have never been answered and we have now reached the point when European citizens are undergoing a crisis of faith in the very structure of Europe .
Unless this climate is reversed , that mistrust will lead to more general problems which will threaten the vision of those who created this truly unprecedented experiment that we call the European Union .
The mandate given to the Irish presidency in Florence was to submit to the IGC a first general draft Treaty .
It should be stressed from the start that the Irish have done this very effectively , and all of us here in Parliament should congratulate them without gainsaying their achievement .
When one takes into account the way and the conditions under which the Irish were working , it is natural for imperfections and disagreements to exist .
However , we are in the middle of the IGC and there is still a long way to go before the Amsterdam Summit Conference .
A basic factor for the success of the IGC is that the new Treaty should be acceptable to Europe 's citizens .
The doubts raised by the Maastricht Treaty must be dispelled , and the aspirations and concerns of Europe 's peoples must be addressed .
Our peoples want the Union to become deeper and to develop .
We need a model based on the principles of democracy , equality for all and for every country , whether small or large , and one which will strive to fight unemployment , social exclusion , racism and xenophobia .
A Europe without discriminations , without different speeds of development , would be a Europe which respected its citizens .
It is necessary to broaden the legitimation of the Union 's constitutional framework .
The upgrading of the European Parliament and the strengthening of its role in more sectors of Community action are aims which will secure more effective citizen participation in developments .
However , we must be careful to see that the costs of institutional changes are not borne by the small countries alone .
Before concluding , I want to mention the gradual development of a European identity in the area of defence and security .
The guarantee of territorial integrity and the protection of external frontiers , will give impetus to the CFSP and promote the principles of cooperation in that context .
However , we cannot all advance together if some European citizens feel that the Union will not be behind them if they encounter dangers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank President Santer and the President-inOffice of the Council for their statements , but also for the work that has been done to bring the Intergovernmental Conference up to this point .
When we evaluate the Irish document it is only fair that we do not expect to find results before us at this stage ; instead it intelligently reflects the negotiations to date and I must say that in some points that are of particular interest to the European Parliament it even goes a little further than the negotiations to date .
I find what the Irish presidency of the Council said about the co-decision powers of the European Parliament particularly interesting .
This document clearly states that in future there should only be three decision-making procedures and that the co-decision procedure should be the general rule for legislation .
Obviously some questions of definition and delimitation remain to be clarified .
But on what is perhaps the key question for the European Parliament , it now creates a basis on which it will be easy to continue negotiating under the Dutch presidency of the Council .
The need to expand the system of qualified majority decisions was also addressed .
I am especially glad that in their letters President Chirac and Chancellor Kohl stated that qualified majority decisions would be the rule in the Council , that certain exceptions could be made but that majority decisions would be the rule .
If we regard these as key areas in relation to achieving greater democracy , transparency and ability to act and in preparation for enlargement , then I think this combination may really have given us a chance to make progress in this area at the IGC .
However we in Parliament must also say that there is still a whole range of questions in relation to which we are certainly not at all content .
I think very little progress has been made so far on the whole question of foreign and security policy or on the role of the decision-making procedures ; constructive abstention is merely an alibi and does not resolve the problem of a destructive country being able to block decisions .
This immediately takes us to the question of the dual voting mechanisms . Policy in general is decided unanimously , its implementation by a majority decision .
We already had that in the Maastricht Treaty and it did not work .
That means that we have to give considerably more thought to the question of decision-making procedures and foreign and security policy than what is reflected in the documents and negotiations to date .
But we must also say that it would be unacceptable to Parliament if the institutions could not deal with new areas , which may be transferred from the third pillar - and thank God it is the third pillar - to the first pillar fully and exactly the same way as the classical first pillar areas .
That is why we have to reject the idea of a Pillar 1B or whatever it is called and demand full participation by the Commission , Parliament and the European Court of Justice here in order to have genuine constitutional and democratic controls .
I find it intolerable that we have not yet made any headway on the budget question .
The directly elected European Parliament has no direct influence on 50 % of the budget .
If it comes to the point where , against every rule of logic , the areas of the second and third pillar are also designated as compulsory expenditure , in order to reduce or even obviate any chance of Parliament having decision-making powers there , then I must tell the Member States that in this regard I would say that in Parliament 's view an intergovernmental conference that came to that conclusion would not have come to a satisfactory conclusion .
In regard to employment , foreign trade , the integrating effect of consumer policy and environmental policy , the Irish presidency of the Council has produced outstanding proposals .
We should ask the Dublin summit to give the Netherlands presidency of the Council a special mandate to simplify the Treaties .
The Irish presidency of the Council has produced a good structural basis for the further negotiations .
I would like to thank Noel Dorr for chairing the Group of Representatives in such an excellent , professional and humane manner .
I hope we can continue to work on this basis in order to obtain what is best for the Union .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank the President-in-Office and the President of the Commission for the contributions they have made here today .
I wish to offer my very sincere thanks to the presidency for the draft document for the IGC which is an excellent document .
It will be a solid and worthwhile base for continuing discussions in the IGC to conclude at Amsterdam .
The summit in Dublin this weekend must address the key issues confronting the Union at the present time and set down guidelines for the work of the institutions on these issues for 1997 .
First and foremost it must restate the commitments to establish a single currency in 1999 and the advantages which this currency will bring to most of Europe 's citizens .
This year has seen strong progress by the opponents of a single currency who have succeeded in raising serious concerns about the effects of a single currency in many people 's minds .
The heads of state and government must first of all allay the fears which have been raised and in this regard the efforts to develop a stability pact are welcome .
I hope that such a pact will reassure those who are concerned about the effects of a single currency on their jobs and businesses and on their savings .
European leaders must accept that it is perfectly reasonable for people to be concerned about the possible impact which the abolition of the currency in their pockets and its replacement by an unknown and so far non-existent euro will have on their personal circumstances .
These concerns should be comprehensively addressed in 1997 because there will not be any single currency unless it has popular support in all of those countries whose governments now aspire to join the euro-zone from day one .
Governments must remember the message from the debate on the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty , which is that the general public , acting through the ballot box , are the ultimate decision-makers on the pace and extent of European integration in all policy areas , including monetary policy .
The electorate in nearly all European countries are increasingly concerned about personal safety and security and much of the crime that we read about is associated , correctly in my view , with the use of illegal drugs .
The trade in these drugs is multinational in nature , as is the laundering of the vast sums of money involved in this trade yet the response of the multinational organization best placed to tackle this problem , the European Union , is seen to be virtually non-existent .
The Maastricht Treaty allowed for the creation of Europol as an intelligence-gathering agency on the illegal drugs trade .
This agency must be equipped with the resources to undertake this task .
The IGC is putting forward proposals to eliminate controls at the Union 's internal borders .
If this is to happen then it must be accompanied by a commitment to increase the resources available to secure the external borders against the activities of the drug smugglers .
The Union must orientate its activities to initiatives such as this if it is to respond to the needs and issues of concern to its citizens .
The creation of a single European market has largely removed the restrictions on the free movement of capital , goods and services throughout the Union .
However , as far as the free movement of people is concerned , there has been little or no real progress to date in removing border restrictions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Minister Mr Hervé de Charrette has spoken of the mediocrity of the Irish draft .
I think the minister should set his own house in order : the Franco-German document , for its part , is hardly conspicuous for its ambition .
In particular , everybody can see the complete lack of any response to the expectations of society , especially as regards employment and social cohesion .
Thus , the French statements about the European social model and about the defence of public service appear simply to be empty boasts .
In fact , the Irish presidency has done what it could within impossible terms of reference .
The Intergovernmental Conference is meaningless because it is not exploring the objectives of society or the objectives which would create an ambition for Europe in the world .
And the Conference is meaningless because governments hold on to their positions of power , barricade themselves behind their privileged positions of power and mean to continue managing Europe without its citizens .
Institutional reforms are then given what amounts to a facelift with simple procedural modifications and rearrangements of the prerogatives of power .
Making closer contact with citizens means responding to the problems of employment , security and solidarity .
We have an insignificant chapter on employment when we need policies for lasting development and a common economic power in the European Union .
For its part , security should be communitized and I approve of what the Irish text says about this .
But for communitization to be as strong as possible , we must put fundamental rights , both civil and social , in the forefront within a framework of freedom of movement .
Lastly , cohesion : monetary union with a hard core is dividing the European peoples .
There is a risk of enhanced cooperation being introduced with the same outcome .
We want Spain and Italy in the European Monetary Union and enhanced cooperation must be cooperation between those who wish to advance along the path of progress for society and for civilization , without being hindered by enthusiasts for the most aggressive competition who are contemptuous of solidarity .
Ladies and gentlemen , I want to talk about Serbia , which is indeed also included in the terms of reference of this debate .
I believe that the European Union - both the Commission and the Council and Parliament - can and must play a key role in the democratization of Serbia .
We must make it clear to the opposition and the government in Serbia that a process of democratization , which must be linked to reconciliation both with Bosnia and with Kosovo , offers the only chance of concluding association agreements with the European Union .
We must totally convince Belgrade of the value of the European ideal .
There can be no democratic future for Serbia without reconciliation with Bosnia and Croatia , without democratic civil structures and without rights for all the minorities in Serbia .
Once the opposition and the government realise that , this region will have a future that is marked not by war and hatred but by cooperation and mutual respect .
To that end it is important to speak out clearly in Dublin , to avoid any misunderstandings in this region on which the war has left such a heavy mark .
So I hope that at its Dublin meeting the European Council will come up with some better ideas for the revision of the Maastricht Treaty than what we have been offered so far .
Mr President , in this , my twenty-first year as a Member of the European Parliament , I detect a very strong mood of optimism .
That is fairly new and I think we owe it a lot to the Irish presidency .
If ever anyone personified the philosophy of ' small is beautiful ' it must be the Irish presidency .
Here we have the tiger economy of Europe with an enormous growth rate so it is rather appropriate , as we are engaging in the EMU discussion , that it should be Ireland that has been leading us for six months .
There is a tremendous negative attitude in the United Kingdom , the state to which I reluctantly belong .
It is growing , it is dangerous and it is not usually based on reason .
On EMU the pessimists talk about the loss of jobs , without ever explaining what jobs will be lost .
I suggest jobs will be gained .
We congratulate Mr Spring for his foreign policy efforts , for putting employment into the Treaty and for the unique openness of this document , so that the whole of Europe knows where we are going from here .
Mr President , after four weeks of popular demonstrations , marches , sit-ins and strikes by students and workers , four weeks of unrest and protest by an entire country , with the streets and squares seething with people of all conditions and ages , it is as if a spectre is hovering restlessly over the whole of Serbia - the spectre of communism , which seems to have vanished for ever if we are to believe the press and television news that we have the pleasure , or displeasure , of reading and hearing , at least in Italy .
Supposedly , these powerful mass demonstrations originated solely from the cancellation of the results of the local authority elections , and the Serbian people have taken to the streets solely in order to have those results reinstated .
And our own Foreign Ministers , the Heads of State , the leaders of the centre and left parties , when they talk about the Serbian situation will use any word , any term , any turn of phrase , any analogy to avoid uttering one particular word , that word , one term , that term , one definition , that definition , which would make things clearer and more obvious to all .
That little word that they cannot bring themselves to pronounce , because apparently they become tongue-tied and dry-mouthed when they try to bring it to their lips , well , I shall reveal what it is , and I trust that all the world 's hypocrites and pedants are not going to hold it against me : the word is communism .
Honourable Members , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , are we or are we not going to say that the Serbs are protesting against the communist regime , that their burning desire is to see the communist Milosevic sent packing , that their hope is to see the most fundamental freedoms , freedoms violated by the communist government , becoming the heritage of the entire Serb people ?
Or perhaps you think it undignified to attack an ideology which has been discredited by those same historical processes which , according to the utopian scientific theories of Marxism , should have standardized and collectivized the whole world ?
We of Alleanza Nazionale believe that we should call a spade a spade , to avoid confusion and misunderstanding and to show the younger generations that the word ' liberty ' is irreconcilable with the communist idealogy , because of its totalitarian nature and its repression of any individuality which does not fit and cannot be made to fit .
That said , it is important that the European Union should send a clear , unequivocal message to the communist regime in Belgrade , a message as clear as those it once sent to the apartheid government in South Africa or to the dictatorship in Chile : all trade relations will be broken off until such time as the sacrosanct rights of opposition are recognized and the fundamental democratic freedoms reinstated .
Mr President , I wish to thank President Santer for his speech here today , and also Mr Mitchell and Mr Spring .


I have seen at first hand the good and sound work that the Irish presidency has put in and I wish to join with those other speakers who have congratulated the Irish presidency - and rightly so - on the hard work which has resulted in the draft Treaty before us now , a Treaty which has been produced on time .
There is a lot in it that I can certainly agree with , and I know the difficulties the framers had , especially in dealing with the obstructionist policy of the current government of one Member State .
However , there are areas in the document which I am a bit worried about .
I am delighted to see the inclusion of an employment chapter in the draft but I am very disappointed that the chapter only talks about a high level of employment : it does not talk about full employment and that , to me , is very significant .
It seems that the concept of full employment , work or employment opportunities available to all who want to work , must remain at the heart of European policy .
Indeed , in its recent report on global employment trends , the International Labour Organization said that full employment is still an attainable goal , so I do not know why that wording is not used in the draft Treaty .
In Ireland we have seen the benefits flowing from adherence to the Maastricht criteria in terms of our public sector finances .
A similar set of criteria on employment policy can only be good for Ireland and for Europe .
We must work to ensure that the employment chapter in the Treaty has real teeth and actually delivers results .
I would also like to know - maybe the Minister can help us on this in summing up - why certain governments were so reluctant to step up European cooperation in the fight against organized crime and drugs .
Do they not realize that this is a struggle we can only win together ?
Can we afford to wait and let drugs and crime wreak havoc on the fabric of European society ?
I am also uneasy about scant references throughout the document to poverty and social exclusion .
I could only find one reference , on page 46 of Chapter 5 , to social exclusion .
I appreciate that there must be , and there is , a good emphasis in the document on security and safety of the citizen , but we also need sound social policies at European level to alleviate the misery of the everyday life of many of our citizens .
John Cushnahan spoke about Bismarck .
Well I can quote a great contemporary leader who says : ' We must not only be tough on crime but tough on the causes of crime . '
So let us hope that in the final draft - which is being handed over now to the Dutch presidency - the message from Dublin will be , as Mr Santer has indicated that it should be : the fight against unemployment , social deprivation and poverty must continue , and the final Treaty must have that as its priority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will only be speaking on the subject of Serbia .
My colleagues have already said all there is to say on the other subject .
We are currently seeing a sought-after partner of all the Western governments shamelessly presuming the right to annul election results that do not suit him .
Even the Serbian judges administer justice according to the wishes of Mr Milosevi & # x010D ; .
This manipulation makes it clear to every last one of us that Serbia is not a constitutional state .
The gagging of the media and the defamation of the peaceful demonstrators are further , manifest evidence of the communist despotism of this government .
Serbia cannot remain the family business of Milosevi & # x010D ; and Markovi & # x010D ; .
Unlike the USA , the Council reacted very hesitantly .
Why was it afraid to openly stand up for democracy and basic rights , although it is our flags that are flown during these demonstrations ?
Serbia is now paying the price for the fact that , unlike all the other successor states , it did not have to comply with the 1991 Badinter criteria in order to be recognized .
Moreover , a solution to the Kosovo question should have been made a precondition .
Of course Kosovo should also have been on the Dayton agenda .
Negligence and sins of omission of this kind have disastrous consequences .
The Yugoslav leaders are not showing the slightest inclination towards democratic reforms .
The people in that country do not feel free , they feel they have been cheated of their basic rights .
On my last visit to Belgrade in June many Serbs said to me : you are concerning yourself with the rights of Albanians in Kosovo .
Do so .
But we need help too .
Who is helping us to exercise our basic rights ?
The three leaders of the Savetno opposition came to Brussels at the end of October at my invitation to meet the delegation for relations with south-eastern Europe .

Of course the political ideas and the statements made by Mr Draskovic and Mr Djindji in recent years merely reflected greater Serbian and nationalistic ambitions .
They still approved of Karadzic when Milosevi dropped him as a result of Western pressure .
The alliance with the only genuinely democratic force in Serbia , Vesnapesi 's party , offers some hope , however , that the opposition wants democratic progress .
That is why it is up to us , and in particular to Serbia 's Western partners , to condemn Milosevi 's undemocratic conduct and to show solidarity with the peaceful demonstrators from the opposition .
Given that the opposition alliance is fragile , outside support for its aims might convince the population that a change of government could mean a step towards more democracy .
We expect the Serbian leadership , government and opposition to find a rapid solution to the Kosovo question , failing which there can be no peace in the region .
The democracy that needs to be established in Bosnia also depends on democratic conditions prevailing in Belgrade .
I call upon the Council to pursue these European goals more emphatically and uncompromisingly and finally to give a signal that it is doing so in Dublin !
Mr President , the European Council in Dublin is beginning in a climate of high hopes for the future of the European Union .
We have only just received the draft of the Treaty on European Union presented by the Irish presidency , and already the various foreign ministries are taking action to go further , to take the very necessary additional step that will enable the Dublin Council to produce specific , efficient results that are essential in the interests of European integration .
We concur , indeed , with the conclusions of last Monday 's Franco-German summit which , in the joint communique issued , once again evinced those states ' determination to provide a critical stimulus to the proceedings of the European Council .
The matters being dealt with are still very numerous and fundamental , but I should like to remind the House that what is necessary is to concentrate on the institutional reforms and on internal and external security .
But not to the exclusion of other matters : the Council must show that it is at last capable of taking the necessary decisions to provide a new stimulus to the creation of social , political and economic conditions that will bring the Union closer to its citizens , for a great many of whom the crucial issue to be resolved is the running sore of unemployment .
Although it is true that the strengthening of the present weak state of integration cannot and must not be obstructed , it is equally true that , by substantially improving the efficacy of the decision-making process , we shall be able to present the public with a Union which is more dynamic and more consistent in its operation .
We would also emphasize the need to adopt as soon as possible the necessary legislative provisions for the issuing of the euro , and regulations which will guarantee economic convergence and monetary stability within the area of the single currency , thus enabling the European Union to pursue a coherent and comprehensive economic policy .
Mr President , Dublin can and must be the keystone of the definitive European structure of the twenty-first century .
And then the grand design of the final years of this century - the single currency and cooperation between our united peoples that was so dear to Jean Monnet - can finally become a reality .
In order for that to come about , it is necessary for all of us to take that further step I mentioned earlier , which will finally give the European Union its solid base .
Mr President , why Dublin , given that Nuremburg had already taken place ?
To have a smiling portrait of 16 or 17 , including the President of the European Parliament ?
Why bother with the report by a tiny President when we had a letter written by two huge , dynamic presidents ?
Why bother with ministers , diplomacy , cooperation , if Mr CFSP can do everything singlehanded ?
Why invent new acronyms when NATO can thrive ?
Why tackle the causes if a common legal area and a Europol with teeth can see to the effects ?
Why so much hot air about labels , pacts , stability , greater or less flexibility of criteria and sanctions , while ignoring reality , social issues , unemployment , life - not single currencies and central banks ?
Why waste a whole minute , Mr President , when 51 seconds are enough to put questions that could take hours to comment on and discuss ?
Mr President , at this moment of the emergence of a draft Treaty on the IGC , are we to find once again that , contrary to assurances we have heard this morning on citizenship and democracy , a review of the Euratom Treaty has been neglected ?
The Euratom Treaty is one of the founding Treaties of the Union , along with the Treaty of Rome .
The failure to update and review it , to protect people from the effects of radiation rather than to promote nuclear power , is extraordinary .
We have heard from admirers of Jean Monnet this morning - I am also an admirer of Jean Monnet .
His biographer has said in regard to the Euratom Treaty that he thought that nuclear power had a great future and no past , and neither assertion was true .
However , amendments to the Euratom Treaty have been tabled for this process and , in regard to the IGC , will the Council meeting in Dublin make a statement on nuclear safety in response to widespread public concern ?
Specifically , have amendments to the Euratom Treaty , which would provide vigorous scrutiny of the safety of nuclear facilities , been agreed ?
The Euratom Treaty makes no provision for the setting or enforcement of safety standards relating to the operation of nuclear installations .
Have provisions in respect of nuclear installations which affect the territory of another Member State , particularly in regard to any cumulative effect of hazards to the health and environment of neighbouring populations , been agreed ?
Will the Council state specifically that existing nuclear reactors which do not meet standards will be closed ?
Mr President , unfortunately one minute is not long enough to congratulate the Irish presidency , which I would , however , have liked to do .
The intensive efforts of the Member States to fulfil the Maastricht criteria are currently leading to a massive rise in unemployment and undermining social standards .
This situation is compounded by the fact that the citizens are quite inadequately informed on the question of the introduction of the euro because the information campaign so far on the introduction of a single currency has been conducted in a remarkably one-sided manner .
Until now the social and employment policy consequences have in fact been concealed , whether deliberately or not .
The massive effect the introduction of the euro will have on all aspects of the life of the citizens of Europe actually requires that the people of the Member States are given a chance to participate in the decision .
In that respect it seems essential in terms of democratic policy to ask the people of the Member States their opinion on the introduction of monetary union by holding referenda .
If monetary union is introduced against the will of the people it is certainly doomed to failure !
Mr President , when our Minister for Foreign Affairs presented his plans for the Dutch presidency a few weeks ago we were very disappointed .
With due respect for modesty and realism we believed that the Dutch presidency was hardly being ambitious .
But now that we have seen the basis for the Dublin Summit we can appreciate the Dutch position somewhat better .
For the situation is that what is passed on from the outgoing presidency determines to a very large degree what can be achieved in the following six months , and what is being passed on to the Netherlands is alas very meagre .
The Irish presidency cannot be held responsible for at the end of the day it is the will of all governments together that determines the outcome .
We make our assessment in the light of the Martin / Bourlanges and the Dury / Maij-Weggen reports , and our conclusion is that there is a yawning gap between Parliament 's desiderata and the Union 's achievements to date .
To be more specific I shall mention just a few relevant points : specific results in the field of employment and social policy .
It is not sufficient simply to declare that these matters are important .
We must see the instruments being used to achieve the ends .
The EMU makes extra action necessary in the field of employment .
That is the inescapable conclusion we must draw .
And then the third pillar , cooperation in the field of justice and interior affairs .
There we have not been inactive .
But Parliament 's desire to have a say in affairs is apparently falling on deaf ears .
They are continuing with the intergovernmental cooperation which we have on more than one occasion characterised as undemocratic , a kind of intermediate pillar which as Mr Brok has already said is unacceptable .
But it is not just there . We were promised a revision of the decision-making procedure and we have not got that ; and far less have we seen any role that the European Parliament is to play in that decision-making .
That does not mean to say that we in any way denigrate what the Irish presidency has achieved through sheer hard work .
It is extremely important that human rights and equal treatment appear to be included in the new Treaty .
It is our duty to see that the citizens ' Europe is given flesh and bones . It is our role , Mr President , to ensure that the Dutch presidency is inspired by the achievements to date and that we narrow the gap between what we in this House want and what the Council seems prepared to do .
Mr President , at the beginning of the Irish presidency of this conference I want to express my great respect and say that Austria , which will be assuming the presidency in the second half of 1998 , can only learn from the way Ireland has mastered this difficult task .
I hope we will be able to work as efficiently as the Irish Republic has done .
The European Union has set itself ambitious aims : a common currency , a common foreign policy , a common house with room for more tenants that is as burglar-proof as possible and co-decision by the tenants .
The latter is also urgently necessary , for the European Union will only be able to achieve its aims if the citizens are adequately involved in the decision-making , with the help of the European Parliament as also of the national parliaments , on a basis of subsidiarity .
I , like Austria as a whole , would urge that a protocol to the Treaty , concerning the implementation of the principle of subsidiarity and strengthening the Committee of the Regions , is adopted in Dublin .
We also support all the efforts to strengthen internal and external security .
Austria , which has a long external EU border to protect , is particularly aware of the importance of Europol and Schengen and calls for a common approach to asylum and immigration policy .
We also consider it most important for the CFSP to take shape and for majority decisions to be possible in the non-military area .
The lack of a common foreign and security policy has had particularly adverse effects in former Yugoslavia .
So I think it is urgently necessary for the European Parliament to raise its voice in order to strengthen the democratic opposition in Serbia .
I also endorse the Austrian suggestion that an appropriate stance be adopted on this matter at the Dublin conference .
For only if the democratic structures in former Yugoslavia are safeguarded can the fragile Dayton peace accord survive .
I wish to thank the Presidents of both Council and the Commission .
I welcome much of what has been said , including the confidence pact .
At last we are seeing some action in the Great Lakes and a nudge to the Dutch presidency on sovereignty .
But what I find lacking is specific action on security and a policy on drugs .
If we agree that something must be done to stamp out crime and drug trafficking , then we expect specific action from the Dublin Summit .
And finally , traffic in Europe has recently come to a standstill because of industrial action in France , Denmark and Greece .
What is the Commission and Council going to do to guarantee the principle of free movement ?
The Dublin Summit must show that the Union is concerned about the everyday life of its citizens , and about the Serbian demands for democracy , as so passionately argued by Mr Cohn Bendit and Mrs Pack .
Thank you , Mr President , for the Irish contribution to a solid basis for a possible Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President , despite the fact that the question of institutional power has not yet been discussed by the Intergovernmental Conference , the text of the draft treaty from the presidency shows that there is a desire to transfer more power , on very critical issues , from the Member States to the EU .
The proposal means more joint policing , immigration policy and border controls .
There will be more about a common foreign policy and the ultimate goal , a joint defence policy , is firmly placed in the draft .
The proposals change the conditions of membership in such an unacceptable way that it is only natural that such extensive proposals should be decided by national referenda .
On the environmental front , the proposal is disappointing .
There has been no progress with regard to the rights of Member States to keep or introduce stricter environmental requirements for products .
The proposed article on openness is a small step forward .
There will still be no public meetings of the Council and each institution can draw up its own rules on access to documents .
This is unacceptable .
With regard to employment , the proposed committee and its recommendations will have very little weight against the iron wall of convergence policies which are currently raising the levels of unemployment in the European Union .
Mr President , the outline treaty presented in Dublin and the joint Franco-German letter both evade the true problems and only drive the IGC ever further along the federalist path , which solves nothing and is unwanted by citizens .
Firstly , these texts once again avoid mentioning the flexibility necessary for enlargement , because they are frightened of calling institutional unity into question .
They avoid mentioning the single currency , when the question of additional institutional arrangements is being debated at length every day in the newspapers .
It is true that the questions of security and the third pillar are tackled , but with the aim , particularly perverse in the present circumstances , of completely abolishing all internal frontier controls .
Above all , however , these texts in their various ways show a desire to organize a veritable programme of euthanasia for national parliaments . Euthanasia by extending qualified majority voting in the Council , thus removing any power from the national parliaments of minority countries .
Euthanasia by the transfer of intergovernmental jurisdiction to the first pillar , thus considerably reducing the powers of national parliaments on very sensitive subjects . Euthanasia , finally , by removing the need for certain trade agreements to be ratified by national parliaments .
In exchange , they are given only laughable bits and pieces .
I assume that they will remember this when , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you present them with the treaty to be ratified .
Mr President , I should like to take this opportunity of putting a very specific question to the President of the European Commission .
At the beginning of this term of office we agreed on a code of behaviour between the European Parliament and the Commission .
That was essential for good cooperation .
In the last few days the President of the Commission and the Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament have met on the financing of the MEDA programme .
My question is as follows : does the Commission intend to respect and apply totally the letter and the spirit of the European Parliament 's resolution of 19 September 1996 on the political situation in Turkey ?
Mr President , we offer our warmest thanks to the Irish presidency for the efforts it has made in a very difficult situation .
Many positive points have already been made , but we must be honest and say that the overall result confronting us today is still not satisfactory .
This is naturally a cause for concern , after nearly a year 's work by the Intergovernmental Conference .
One has the impression - as Mrs Guigou said a few moments ago - that the IGC may incline to a minimal reform , pending the arrival of monetary union .
I think the real political question is this : will the Intergovernmental Conference succeed in forming a political counterweight to monetary union ?
European integration is an irreversible fact .
The real problem is to prevent a further move to de facto integration , where monetary sovereignty will for practical purposes be in the hands of the Central Bank .
That is the real problem .
Monetary union represents the greatest transfer of political sovereignty since the Community was founded .
The risk is that this transfer will be a transfer from the nation States to bodies which are not democratically and politically accountable .
In that case , democracy in Europe would diminish rather than increasing .
The problem we need to confront , therefore , is whether the draft Treaty does or does not give the impression of representing a convincing move in that direction .
Our doubts focus mainly on the weakness of political citizenship , although we have of course welcomed the penalties for human rights violations and the attention paid to the idea of an area of security and freedom .
What strikes us above all , though , is that the debate on the Institutions is still lagging so far behind : the text says virtually nothing about this except that it will arrive in due course .
But how will it arrive , and when , and in what form ?
Restoring the institutional balance is an absolute necessity for a new democratization , because the reforming of the Institutions also means , of course , the construction of political union and the restoration of the balance between the Union 's Institutions , enhancing the supervisory and legislative role of the European Parliament .
Finally , there is flexibility , a really central subject .
We all know that what Europe will become depends on how flexibility is interpreted .
I believe there are no doubts on this point , and it is important that the document should address it .
This is surely a critical point , as indeed was demonstrated by the recent Franco-German document .
But we need to be aware that if flexibility is to be constitutional flexibility , a rule and not an exception , there will be a risk of disruption in the material constitution of Europe .
These are the growing problems , and , while thanking the presidency again for its efforts , we cannot help being concerned at the way the situation is developing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the summit in Dublin on Friday and Saturday is coming at a very difficult time for the European Union both politically and psychologically .
That is why we need to send out a signal of confidence in Dublin .
The heads of state and government must instil optimism and confidence in the citizens of the European Union again , especially in two areas . First , Dublin must send out a clear signal that the European Union wants radical reforms .
We need majority decisions in the Council .
That is the precondition for the politically , economically and morally necessary enlargement of the European Union .
In that respect , the letter from Chancellor Kohl and President Chirac is most encouraging .
The second condition is that as a preparatory step the heads of state and government must send out a clear signal on Thursday through their finance ministers that they intend to introduce a stable European currency on 1 January 1999 so that Europe can hold its own in an increasingly global world economy .
If it can send out these two signals , the Dublin summit will be a success !
Mr President , although the European Union will in a few years ' time have a common currency , a single monetary policy and a supranational central bank , the converse is that fiscal policy , and in particular the tax component , will certainly be much less coordinated and , probably , to a large extent still inconsistent .
This will create very serious problems : an imbalance in political terms and as regards the balance of power between monetary policy and fiscal policy , as indeed other Members have already emphasized ; threats to the success of the single currency and the smooth functioning of the internal market ; the continuance of situations of unfair fiscal competition , with adverse effects on the movement of goods , services and production factors ; and adverse effects on employment , since the focus of the tax burden is tending to shift away from mobile factors - capital - to less mobile factors such as labour .
We can therefore fully endorse the recent efforts and new approaches by the Commission where tax matters are concerned .
I speak for my Group when I say that we must call firmly upon the Council to support it and , in particular , to declare its own explicit support for this line , and to encourage and promote the efforts of the group of senior representatives of the Finance Ministers in their global examination of taxation policies , including the way they relate to other Community policies .
Even though the immediate aim is to guarantee the smooth functioning of the internal market - an indispensable prerequisite for the success of the single currency - and to reduce the adverse effects of unfair tax competition by introducing new instruments of coordination such as , for example , a code of conduct , it would seem that the time has come to make a real move towards abolishing the principle of unanimity in tax matters in favour of less cumbersome decision-taking arrangements .
Mr President , there is no doubt at all that the Netherlands will be looking at the Dublin Summit from the point of view of the IGC and of the joint action on trade and drug trafficking .
On the subject of the IGC I would like to express my appreciation of the Irish presidency 's action on this subject .
The fact that we are looking at the first draft of a new treaty is , to my mind , proof of good work .
The fact that it gives rise to certain criticisms has nothing to do with the work of the Irish presidency but more because certain countries were still unwilling to go along with Irish intentions on certain points .
The first part , citizens ' rights , is a very good part in my view .
I particularly like the article on non-discrimination which I think is also a good start to the European Year Against Racism .
I offer my congratulations .
I also like the proposals in the field of openness and transparency .
One point which has not been taken up is the transparency of the Council .
I think that publishing explanations of vote and results of voting is not sufficient here .
The reform of the institutions is a more serious business .
Very few proposals have been produced on that matter and I totally agree with Mr Brok that they have turned a deaf ear to Parliament 's requests .
We are also concerned about the internal security pillar which might well be put on a Community footing but at the same time stays within the intergovernmental remit as far as decision-making is concerned .
That is fraught with dangers .
And on the subject of foreign policy much remains to be done .
And then the joint action on drugs .
I want to say most emphatically that we Christian Democrats , including the Dutch Christian Democrats , consider the present paper a good one and that it is not true that the whole of our country wants to see it burned .
There is increasing concern in the Netherlands about the liberal policy of the current government on drug tolerance .
I sincerely hope that the Dublin summit will agree on a joint action and that it will in particular come up with a European policy on combatting drugs .
What is what we are all waiting for , including those of us in the Netherlands .
Mr President , we are currently seeing Europe forced to continue its endeavours regarding the European structure amid the complex but ordered work being carried on by the institutions .
This has been demonstrated by the Council 's report .
However , at the same time , we are living through an ongoing campaign , which is sensationalist in character , in which the media only highlight failures , anecdotes and negative aspects .
It is my belief that all the institutions must react against this .
Clear messages have to be sent out .
Public opinion must be very clear about the fact that all those proposals which are aimed at furthering integration are marks of progress and advance , whilst all those aimed at simple cooperation lead solely to inefficiency and stagnation .
In this field , also , I feel we have to react against certain proposals which have a tendency to misrepresent the institutional model .
And , amongst these , it must be vigorously placed on record here that this House will always oppose the Commission 's losing its absolute and total power of initiative .
This is one of the foundations of our institutions .
Likewise , any misrepresentation of the respective functions of the European Parliament and of the national parliaments will project a negative image .
And the third element I would like to highlight , Mr President , is the fact that recently - I would say over the last few years rather than the last few days - the European Council , which has an extremely important role to play , is attempting , in a way , to diminish and override the role of the Council of Ministers .
It seems to me that this is a further negative signal against which this House must react .
Mr President , the Irish presidency has made a strong impression in the area of justice and this is important .
Reality is hard and threatening .
International crime has a turnover of billions .
People are exploited , they become dependent on narcotics .
Children are sexually exploited .
Refugees are treated as goods to be traded .
Now that crime has stepped into the international arena and knows no frontiers , politics must take the same step .
We have a responsibility to create legal instruments which can deal with this international crime affecting individuals in their everyday lives , often very tragically .
Who will accept responsibility if current political deadlocks within the European legal cooperation are allowed to continue and organised crime is allowed to reap new harvests ?
The Irish presidency has made strenuous efforts in the fight against the traffic in narcotics and against crime .
This deserves applause .
It would be more sensible if the resolution , like the PPE resolution , had a Third Pillar heading and contained more than just one point in support of this fight .
Just 1 point out of 28 is a feeble effort .
The balance is wrong , although this is made up for by the fact that this one point is more far reaching than the others .
At least let this be a good omen that internal security will be one of the success stories from the IGC .
I regret that the resolution , which strives for more effective legal instruments to safeguard the security of our people and increased transparency and democratic control has not been more greatly influenced by the PPE proposal on the fight against crime .
Responsibility now rests with the governments of the Member States .
Welcome
Before briefly giving the floor to the Council and the Commission , I have the pleasure of welcoming a delegation from the Kingdom of Nepal , in the gallery , led by His Excellency Mr Ram Chandra Poudel , President of the Chamber of Representatives .
This delegation is honouring us with its visit on the occasion of the fourth interparliamentary meeting with the relevant European Parliament delegation .
The European Union has excellent relations with Nepal and our contacts at parliamentary level demonstrate our shared willingness to cooperate in many sectors .
I sincerely hope that this fourth meeting will mark a new stage in the necessary rapprochement between our countries and peoples and I wish this delegation every success in its work and an excellent stay in Strasbourg .
European Council on 13 / 14 December in Dublin and the situation in Serbia ( continuation )
I will be very brief in responding to the debate .
First of all may I thank Members for their contributions and their kind comments on the work of the Irish presidency .
In particular , in relation to the Intergovernmental Conference , I would like to reiterate that the Intergovernmental Conference can only go as far as the 15 Member States agree that it should go .
But I believe that we must be ambitious .
Unfortunately we do not start , as our US colleagues started , with a blank page in writing this constitution .
We have to bear in mind in being ambitious that whatever happens has to be ratified in the 15 Member States , in some cases by national parliaments , in other cases by referendum .
So we must take into account the reality of the situation .
But as the author of the Irish presidency report , Mr Noel Dorr said , this report is aimed at the upper end of realism and , I believe , is an ambitious one .
The European Union , in my view , is all about peace and stability and the prosperity that comes from that peace and stability by building interdependence .
The Intergovernmental Conference establishes how we conduct this interdependence in the future .
The cooperation that has come from that interdependence has allowed unprecedented material benefits to accrue to the Member States of the Union .
But if we are serious about peace and stability in the Union then we must also ensure that that same concept applies within the Member States , within the rural areas , within the urban areas of the Union .
I agree with those Members here today who raised the question of social exclusion and unemployment .
I do not accept that we are doing everything to combat unemployment .
We can do more and we can reach higher levels of employment .
I would like in particular to mention the Irish programme for local development .
It is the only one with which I am familiar .
I am sure in each of the Member States there are examples from which each of us could benefit by having perhaps some European cooperation .
But the local development plan in Ireland , which we debated recently as a conference addressed by President Santer and the Taoiseach , Mr Bruton , to show how committed we are to this concept , looks at underlying causes of unemployment as a whole by trying to introduce supplementary education - particularly in the area of long-term unemployment .
Who become the long-term unemployed ?
It is people who leave school without skills .
They cannot take on a trade , they cannot take on a profession , they cannot go on to university .
Supplementary education to assist in a targeted way people living in communities suffering long-term unemployment , supplementary training for those people , finance for one-to-five person job creation enterprises in those areas , estate management - because of people 's living conditions , often in highrise local-authority flat complexes - and environmental improvement : it is like five fingers fitting in a glove .
If we take this integrated approach to tackling the causes of disadvantage , we can impact on long-term unemployment .
I believe it is important , particularly for those of us in this House , whether we are Socialists , Christian Democrats , or whatever our political beliefs , who believe in encouraging enterprise , but also social justice .
I do not believe there is enough talk about social justice .
We must encourage enterprise but we must also encourage and create a greater sense of social justice .
We are about creating more efficiency and more effective transparency in the Union and we are about ensuring that the Union relates more to the concerns of the citizen .
How better to do that than by closer cooperation in the area of justice and home affairs ?
People are concerned about the drugs issue .
People are concerned about the crime issue .
It is not solely a concern of Member States .
Crime does not stop at Member State boundaries .
Indeed the source of the drugs problem lies in the countries where drugs are grown in large numbers , and some countries produce more illegal drugs for importation into our Member States than all their legal products added together .
Employment is an issue which is of the greatest concern .
When I was a boy - perhaps it is not fashionable now to talk about the devil - my mother said to me : ' The devil finds work for idle hands ' .
Are we in any way being realistic when we worry about crime and we worry about the drugs problem ?
We have 18 million people unemployed .
( Applause ) Unless we do something to tackle this problem , the problem of drugs is going to continue to be with us .
Crime and unemployment are not just matters for Member States .
It is like saying in the United States , ' Well , it is only a matter for California , or , it is only a matter for New York ' .
It is also a federal problem .
These issues are primarily matters for Member States but the European Union has a role to play in tackling these problems as well .
We must achieve success in dealing with the concerns of the citizen on an EU basis .
This is at the heart of the IGC .
Let us not only look at institutions and constitutions , let us look at the issues which our citizens are concerned about .
That is what you are elected for ; that is what I am elected for .
I will count Dublin II a success if we make progress on all of these issues .
( Applause )
Mr President , I have no intention whatsoever of starting up the debate again , even though the benches are much more crowded now than they were just now when the President-inOffice of the Council made his report and presented the work of the Dublin European Council .
I shall confine myself to dealing with two issues concerning international relations , which will certainly also be discussed in Dublin by the Heads of State and Government and by the Foreign Ministers .
The first issue mentioned by several speakers just now relates to Serbia .
The Commission - it goes without saying - is very concerned by the deterioration in the situation in Serbia following the annulment of the local election results in several large Serbian towns .
In this context , the European Union should maintain pressure on the Serbian authorities to conform to fundamental democratic principles .
Any improvement in bilateral relations between the European Union and this country seems to be ruled out as long as no just and democratic solution to the problem has been arrived at .
Under these circumstances , it is understood that the Commission will propose to Council preferential unilateral import arrangements for 1997 for the countries of the former Yugoslavia , excluding the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
I should also point out that the Commission is still very concerned at the absence of any real progress on the question of Kosovo .
In spite of the agreement recently concluded between Belgrade and the Albanian authorities in Kosovo for the reinclusion of Albanian students in the educational system - an agreement which has so far not been implemented - we can detect no sign of any relaxation in the attitude of the Serbian authorities .
Belgrade continues to insist on the fact that this is a purely internal problem and refuses any mediation whatsoever by international bodies .
Nor has the European Union received a favourable reply to its request for a presence in Kosovo , similar to that accorded to the USA this year .
Kosovo nevertheless remains a central question and as long as the problem remains unresolved full normalization of bilateral relations between the European Union and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will be impossible .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is what I wished to say about Serbia .
Another question was raised by Mr Martens about the 19 September resolution on Turkey .
In this connection , my short reply to Mr Martens is that the Commission feels itself to be clearly bound by the code of conduct we negotiated with Parliament .
I personally adhere to it and all Commissioners are also committed to it .
The 19 September 1995 resolution on Turkey will be respected by the Commission both in the letter and the spirit .
I am making this commitment before the House , in your presence .
Henceforth , there should be no difference of opinion on the point of substance between your Parliament and the Commission 's attitude .
Mr President , Mr Santer has just made a very important statement .
I want to be absolutely clear about what he means because it will have an impact on the vote tomorrow on the budget .
He knows it , that is why he has made it .
I want to be clear for my Group as to what he means .
Can he say to us that what he has just said means categorically that if Members of this Parliament disagree with projects put forward by the Commission on Turkey , the Commission will withdraw those projects ? ' Yes ' or ' No ' - that is what we need to know .
I reply to this point by making it very clear that , as I have stated previously , we are bound by a code of conduct negotiated and approved by your Parliament and the Commission .
I am committed to this , just as the Commission is .
Having said that , we remain within our sphere of competence , as I also said - and you were witness to it , Mrs Green - before the Conference of the Chairmen of Parliamentary Groups .
I have only to repeat the commitment I gave to that Conference .
Mr President , I am very grateful to Mr Santer repeating what he said in the Conference of Presidents .
He will also know that his fellow Commissioner , Mr Van den Broek , made it categorically clear he would not withdraw the proposals if this Parliament disagreed .
That is why we need clarity and that is why I am asking for it from Mr Santer .
Mr President , I want to ask Mr Santer for further clarification .
I really cannot understand from his reply what he means .
The European Parliament decided at the last part-session that certain projects would be discussed .
The letter states that if we do not reach agreement the Commission undertakes to withdraw these projects .
Can you simply tell us now : is that the case or not ?
With the best will in the world I cannot understand what you mean .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President of the Commission for his specific declaration that the Commission intends to respect and apply the spirit and the letter of the resolution of 16 September 1996 .
I shall reply very briefly .
Although I say that there is no basic difference between the Commission and Parliament over the 19 September 1995 resolution on Turkey , it goes without saying that the Commission will not lay before you drafts that do not correspond to the letter and the spirit of that resolution .
Even so , there must be a degree of trust between Parliament and the President of the Commission in this connection !
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Votes
Madam President , before passing to the vote , I should like in my capacity as rapporteur to make a few comments about certain amendments .
Firstly , I ask for the rejection of the declaration of intended rejection of the common position of the Directive . I assume that everybody will agree with this .
Secondly , again as rapporteur , I support only Amendments Nos 1 to 10 , in other words those adopted by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
As a result , I do not support any other amendments whatever my personal opinion may be about them .
Lastly , I have to tell you that only three of the amendments adopted in committee were passed by a large majority : Amendments Nos 1 , 5 and 10 .
I am telling you this so that all Members are clearly informed , since more of them are here today than during the debate yesterday evening .
May I finish by indicating to you , Madam President , that a number of amendments are inadmissible under the terms of Rule 72 of the Rules of Procedure .
But , as they are put to the vote , I suggest that you simply intervene on this point if one or other of these amendments is actually adopted , so as not to create a pointless debate .
( The President declared the common position adopted ( as amended ) )
Madam President , I should not like the rejection of all the amendments to make the Assembly think that this is a defeat for Parliament or part of the House .
I should like to point out that the common position is an excellent common position as it incorporates 80 % of Parliament 's amendments .
As rapporteur , therefore , I am myself extremely satisfied with the result .
I should also point out that at the first reading the adoption was agreed with a majority that did not include the PPE Group .
Madam President , I agree with the rapporteur .
Parliament was successful at the first reading .
Many thanks !
Madam President , I would like to say that this is a historic moment for the development of the European Internal Market , since it opens up new and great perspectives for energy policy and for Europe 's economy more generally .
I would like to thank the European Parliament for approving the Council 's common position on the internal electricity market .
I consider this to be a very major and important success for our common effort , which has at last brought results after negotiations lasting many years .
This is also a major success for Parliament , granted that 80 % of the amendments it tabled at first reading have been incorporated in the common position .
I also want particularly to thank the rapporteur Mr Desama for his prolonged and exceptionally successful work , and for his very great contributions throughout the negotiations .
I also want to thank all the Members of the European Parliament who are members of the Committee on Energy , Research and Technology , for their great contribution during the debates on the common position .
Let me also assure Parliament that the Commission took note of the messages from yesterday 's debate , and that it will bear them in mind when implementing this Directive .
I hope the Directive will now be adopted in its final form by the Council next week , so that it can come into force from the beginning of 1997 .
From now on , Europe 's electricity generation industry will have a very clear framework for its future commercial decisions .
A new stage in the development of the electricity market is beginning today in Europe , and I believe that it will constitute a very important positive message for the internal natural gas market , which will be addressed in the coming months .
Madam President , I would like to correct my vote on Amendment No 14 .
I would like to vote in favour and not against .
I believe there was a degree of confusion in the statement made and , although I understand that this will have no effect on the final result of the vote , I would like the Minutes to record the change in my vote .
Madam President , I feel the significance of the vote on Amendment No 14 was sufficiently clear , since our Group had requested a roll-call vote .
I therefore very much regret that this error or omission occurred on the part of the Spanish Members representing the People 's Party in connection with a subject which had such serious implications for the coal-mining sector in Spain .
Madam President , in the vote , you referred to Amendment No 11 and on our list of votes it was numbered 14 .
That is where the confusion lay .
We understood that it was Amendment No 11 when , in actual fact , it was also 14 .
All the Spanish representatives of the Group of the European People 's Party voted in favour of Amendment No 14 , which you called 11 , which is Mrs García Arias 's amendment .
If possible , please would you correct this .
There is perhaps a problem about the PSE voting list , but for my part my statement was very clear . I announced what amendment we were voting on very clearly .
Like Mr Galeote I would also like to change my vote because there was a mistake concerning Amendments Nos 11 and 14 .
I am therefore voting in favour of No 14 .
If there were other errors , perhaps you would be kind enough to point them out to the presidency .
That will enable us to save time .
Our reservations concern point 11 , where there is mention of giving Europol operational powers .
This can only be interpreted as meaning that Europol , as an independent authority , will be allowed to operate in the Member States .
This would not only involve a serious change in the legal system in our country but is not allowed for under Swedish law .
If this point is accepted , we will be unable to vote for the resolution despite the fact that we think it is otherwise sound .
When he spoke this morning about the preparatory work for the Dublin European Council , the President of the Commission welcomed the provisions included in the draft framework treaty , saying that the Commission found that it contained a good number of its ideas .
He concluded that a strong Union was necessary to defend national sovereignties .
However , when we examine the embryo texts , we wonder whether President Santer was not speaking ironically and whether he did not really mean to say ' in order to make a better job of killing off national sovereignties ' .
In fact , the draft treaty being presented in Dublin indicates a strong desire to make nations surrender their sovereignty .
They are increasingly being bound hand and foot by unified Community policies provided with various multilateral watchdogs ; their defence capabilities are limited by more qualified majority voting ; national parliaments are systematically humiliated ; subsidiarity control is a mere facade ; attempts are made to make the Treaty resemble a constitution by setting out the fundamental rights of citizens ; finally , control over their own territory is removed from nations by officially proclaiming the aim of abolishing all internal frontier controls , whether over goods or people , over citizens of the Union or residents of third countries .
These guidelines are quite appalling .
By finally confirming them , governments of Member States would show that they are prepared to give up the age-old freedom of their country to please minuscule pressure groups .
This is not the way to build a Europe of peoples .
I would like to place on record the appreciation of the EPLP for the excellent work of the Irish presidency .
It has been a busy six months and the General Outline for the Revision of the Treaties is an impressive working document which is a clear reflection of the industriousness of the Irish presidency .
Parliament 's resolution is generally balanced and moderate in tone and content .
In particular , Labour MEPs warmly welcome the emphasis which the draft revision places on job creation .
We would like to see the fight against unemployment being given the same prominence in the new treaty as EMU was given in the Treaty of Maastricht .
There was , however , one paragraph in the resolution which the EPLP voted against .
This was paragraph 11 .
We voted against because that paragraph flies in the face of common sense and the long-standing policy of the Labour Party .
In the view of the Labour Party policies relating to immigration , border controls and asylum are for the UK government and the British Parliament to decide in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
Cooperation in these areas should remain intergovernmental .
This House calls for strong common foreign policies with a hollow right of veto .
More issues will be transferred from the level of transnational cooperation to that of supranational decision .
The main policies involved are those on customs , narcotics , asylum , visas and police issues which will move from the Third Pillar to the First .
Military intervention and crisis handling will become an EU task , as the WEU defence alliance takes on more of a role as an arm of EU defence policy .
At the same time as ' basic EU law ' is expanding , the currency union , the EMU , is also coming into force .
Interest rates and policies on currency , labour markets and regional issues will all then be determined by the Central Bank of the EU in Frankfurt . Long term , tax and finance policy may also be included .
Centralisation and federalism is increasing .
I have voted against the resolution .
The EU 's Heads of State and governments , instead of addressing the exacerbated problems of Europe 's peoples and instead of responding positively to the just demands of working people , are trying to shelter behind the walls of Dublin castle in order to promote the discrimination of Europe 's peoples into first , second and third classes .
To set the seal on the condemnation of working people to unemployment and social exclusion .
To strengthen the powers of the Brussels Directorate and the autarchism of the Union 's structures .
They are in haste because they fear that what they have built may be torn down by the farmers ' blockades , the lowered blinds of SMEs , the demonstrations by strikers , workers and employees , who are rising to their full height in all the European countries against the consequences of the Maastricht Treaty , against the forthcoming stability agreement , the new convergence programmes , and the new and worse version of the Essen decisions on employment .
But the EP 's resolution as well , which emerges as more royalist than the king , calling for even faster rates and steadfastness in the implementation of Maastricht 's anti-populist and autarchic orientations , demonstrates the conflict between the liberal , social-democratic and other conservative forces on the one hand , and the struggling peoples of Europe on the other hand .
That is a further reason in support of the demand for an expression of the popular verdict by referenda in all the Union 's Member States .
The need for Europe 's peoples to decide their own future .
For a Europe of peace , friendship and equality between its peoples , democracy , improved standard of living for its citizens , a Europe focused on human beings and not on profits .
Situation in Serbia
At a time when public opinion in Western Europe and in Parliament is quite rightly dismayed by the events unfolding in Serbia and is justifiably concerned about their possible extension , I should like to explain my personal refusal to take part in this vote .
Firstly , in my opinion the Union - and particularly our Parliament - has for five years had a partial and unbalanced approach to the Yugoslav crisis .
The permanent demonization of Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has clearly not served the cause of an equitable and durable peace in the region .
By encouraging independent entities that are manifestly premature and a source of conflict , Europeans have furthered the break-up of a state and abandoned their own means of increasing regional cooperation based on harmony between the peoples concerned .
We took the risk of banishing Serbia from Europe and we are partly responsible for the tensions it is experiencing .
Secondly , I believe very sincerely that the support given to the claims for autonomy by one part of the population in Kosovo will inevitably lead to a demand for independence from this region and to a risk of changing the international boundaries between Yugoslavia and Albania by force .
Serbia rightly considers Kosovo as being at the very heart of its national history .
If we stick to a one-sided , biased view of the situation we risk reigniting the Balkan fire that was extinguished with such great difficulty in Bosnia last year .
I am aware that what I am saying goes against the prevailing point of view and even against ' fashionable opinion ' . I simply hope that forthcoming events in Yugoslavia will not come to justify a pessimism that the last five years has nourished only too abundantly .
Desama recommendation
Once again , this House is being told about the electricity Directive , or more precisely about the common position adopted by the Council of Ministers on 20 June last .
As early as the day after this passivity , our reaction was to condemn the Franco-German compromise on which this text was based .
Today , I add my vote to the motion for a resolution tabled by the GUE Group calling for its rejection .
I also know that a majority of my colleagues will not commit themselves to endorsing this resolution .
For all that , I wish to congratulate my colleague Claude Desama , an ardent defender of public services , who has been able to curb liberal pressure to set up the internal market in electricity .
Unfortunately , this was not followed through to its logical conclusion .
The common position of the Council is based mainly on the idea of deregulation .
No precaution has been taken to safeguard the public interest or energy independence .
As a result , I cannot support this text and I dare not contemplate the hostile reactions in my own country , some of which are already evident .
This Wednesday 11 December at midday , the European Parliament had to come to a decision , on second reading , on the common position of the European Council of Ministers concerning the ' internal market in electricity ' adopted in June of this year .
This is an important and sensitive issue , particularly for the French , but also for everyone committed to the public service and to independence .
While paying tribute to the enormous amount of excellent work done by the rapporteur , Mr Desama , and while noting the great progress made over five years in the direction of public service and energy security , I now wish to say , as a French socialist Member of Parliament , that the common position of 15 European ministers and governments is unacceptable as it stands .
This position still leaves too much risk hanging over European energy and the public service , despite the inclusion of some of the socialist proposals from the first reading .
That is why I am still hostile to this ministerial position and why , in all honesty , I voted to reject the common position and then voted for the amendments tabled by Mr Desama which would have radically altered the ministerial text .
( No amendment was adopted ) . The common position will unfortunately be applied as it stands .
We Spanish socialists voted in favour of the common position , since competence in the electricity sector is being introduced in an orderly manner and the principle of public service and territorial cohesion is safeguarded .
The Law Ordering the Spanish Electricity System complies with these principles .
The new government 's interpretation , however , is something else entirely , promoting , as it does , a monopoly and infringing consumers ' rights .
However , there is an extremely worrying aspect we have tried to change by means of an amendment aimed at preventing cutbacks in national coal production .
During the debate , the spokeswoman for the Spanish People 's Party denied that this article would have a negative impact on Spanish coal production .
She referred to it as ' a fantasy ' .
My response to her must be the following : either she was of a mind to manipulate the consequences of the document 's contents and to conceal the truth , or she made a pretentious display of her lack of knowledge , which amounts to irresponsibility , in saying that the People 's Party is here for the ' exciting project ' of the internal electricity market .
In accordance with the 1995 Report from the Spanish electricity supply authorities , annual electricity production in Spain generated using national coal , measured in gigawatt hours per annum , amounts to 29 % , whilst imported coal accounts for only 7 % .
The consequences are a 14 % reduction !
It is an act of political impudence to assert that they were reluctantly tabling an amendment simply ' to help calm down those who have become overexcited ' , without lifting a finger to convince other members of their Group and later making a mistake by voting against at voting time .
The same might be said of their arguments regarding the Spanish Socialist Party 's coal policy in the coal-mining sector .
What is obvious is the fact that , throughout the term of the socialist administration , the sector was streamlined , coal production was maintained and productivity increased .
Workforce adjustments were made in conjunction with the trade unions , without major trauma , in line with other European mining-sector reconversions , except in the UK .
The factor which introduced anxiety and concern into Spain 's coal-mining sector was not the socialists ' amendment but the Industry Minister 's statements regarding his interpretation of the cited article of this Directive .
Responsibility for the future of the Spanish coal-mining sector lies in the attitudes adopted by the Spanish People 's Party .
A considerable amount of work on the draft proposals on electricity was done both in the European Parliament before the decisions were taken and at each stage of the legislative procedure , thanks to the personal involvement and tenacity of the rapporteur , Mr Desama .
However , the text before us today at second reading , watered down during the Energy Council meeting on 20 June 1996 in a compromise presented to us as unalterable , destroys the balance that the European Parliament wished to impose .
Once again , deregulation takes precedence over the public interest , competition is favoured at the expense of safeguards for the quality of public service and equality of treatment for users .
There is a wish to deregulate rapidly without taking into account the true nature of the sector , without real safeguards for the public service which matters greatly to us and which forms one of the building blocks of our society .
That is why I oppose this text today : I have therefore voted for the intended rejection , because it is quite clearly essential to make a strong declaration against the Council 's slide towards deregulation .
It is essential to curb this trend .
All the same , that does not mean that we are retreating into an opposition involving nothing but rejection : on the contrary , we have a set of proposals to make because what we wanted from the start was to lay the foundations of a true internal market in energy , which would provide long-term investment and energy independence , would harmonize the social , ecological and security rules and would set up an evaluation committee composed of all the parties involved , particularly representatives of ordinary consumers .
Thus , after having taken part in the intended rejection , which did not receive the required majority , it was important to take part in the votes on the amendments so as to support those satisfying our demands and so as to oppose resolutely those which would open up the market still further to competition .
On a broader front , our opposition to the text should be taken as a strong signal from us , while we continue to reflect on the model for society that Europe will be choosing , whether in the debates on the various sectors we are dealing with in this part-session ( electricity , gas , postal services , telecommunications ) or in the debates on the EMU and the Intergovernmental Conference .
Electricity , post , telecommunications : the December part-session is certainly loaded with issues about which public opinion is very sensitive .
In order to defend these public interest services , particularly those related to electricity , Parliament used its legislative powers to amend the Directive proposed by the Commission .
Remember the battle fought by our socialist rapporteur , Mr Desama .
We succeeded in including retention of monopolies in the distribution companies , negotiation of access to the network with an obligation , for all producers and distributors , to provide public facilities , harmonization in environmental areas and taxation as a precondition for liberalization .
Three years later , the text is back before us , watered down by our fifteen governments .
I regret this deeply .
The new proposal no longer includes as many safeguards : that is why I voted in the first stage for the rejection of the Directive and then for the amendments so as to throw my weight against the Council 's position .
The final text , about which I remain critical , gives better guarantees to European citizens than the initial terms of the Directive and this is due to pressure from the European Parliament .
May I finish with a call to the vigilance of French public opinion .
The present government has two years to adopt this law .
France can , if it wishes , keep control over its distribution network while progressively opening up production to competition for 20 % of the market .
Socialists will not allow either the President of the Republic or the Ministers of the Right to sell off our public enterprises by cheating over the reality of the European Directive .
The report contains many good proposals , Article 3.3 and Article 10.1 for example .
But I consider that insufficient attention has been paid to the regional aspects of a deregulated electricity market .
Deregulation means that there is considerable risk of increased charges in sparsely populated areas , where long connection cables are required .
Deregulation in Sweden has not produced any benefits in general efficiency .
What has happened is that large users have been able to reduce their costs while smaller users have had their charges increased .
As usual , Parliament is overestimating the benefits of deregulation .
Herman recommendation
The question that needs to be resolved today in relation to the telecommunications market is not one of opening up the market as such .
Rather , it concerns the kind of democratic regulation needed to enable market-based mechanisms to function to the common benefit in this area in which public funds are inextricably linked with private goods .
With this end in mind , some open questions still need to be resolved : the European regulatory authority must not be turned into a one-sided deregulatory body , nor must the responsible national bodies specialise in deregulation ( however necessary this might often be in some areas ) .
The questions of renewed deregulation and of protecting the remaining public services must also be tackled at European level and the objectives of obtaining more consumer-oriented flexibility must be resolved at national or regional level .
The concept of the universal service must be made so ' dynamic ' that technological advances and ' convergences ' cannot destroy it .
Legislative programme
We are reserving judgement on one point , point 12 .
There is mention here of a ' definitive ' system for , amongst other things , value added tax .
We are not opposed to this provided that the word definitive is not interpreted as ' standardised ' .
We are totally opposed to all proposals for such harmonisation .
Harmonisation would force a reduction in the Swedish level of tax which would , in turn , force further cutbacks in the public sector .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.30 and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Human rights throughout the world in 1995-1996
The next item is the annual report ( A4-0400 / 96 ) by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on human rights throughout the world in 1995-1996 and the Union 's human rights policy .
Mr President , this morning we awarded the Sakharov Prize , this afternoon we are having a debate on human rights .
The day is devoted to human rights and we wanted it to be so .
As it does every year , Parliament is considering a report on European Union policy on human rights in third countries .
As every year , we have before us numerous violations of human rights perpetrated in too many countries ; the horror of tortured political prisoners , of millions of children turned into slaves , of women treated as inferior beings , of silenced journalists , etc . , etc .
This year , in view of current events and what seem to me to be the priorities for future years , I have deliberately directed my report at the reforms to be made if the Union wishes to change from spontaneous and rather empirical action to a structured , permanent and ambitious policy .
The European Parliament has long been increasing the number of initiatives aimed at improving respect for human rights throughout the world .
The resolutions we have adopted at each sitting - 139 since January 1995 - the inclusion of clauses on human rights in the majority of agreements with third countries , the insistence with which we call on the Commission and the Council to include human rights in their actions and policies , all these are noteworthy and encouraging efforts .
However , in many countries worldwide the situation is very far from being satisfactory and the question put to us today is to know how the Union can do more .
To do so , it must institute some reforms , the main lines of which are mapped out in the report before you .
The first set of reforms is legal .
The Community and later the Union have in fact improvised a human rights policy without it having a sound legal basis in the Treaties .
The Treaty of Rome was silent .
The Maastricht Treaty mentioned human rights but as a philosophical objective .
But the Union has no precise jurisdiction in the matter and the fact that it still has no legal status even prevents accession to the European Convention on Human Rights .
These gaps must be filled .
In addition , the Union needs to define clearly what it understands as coming within the broad concept of human rights , which obviously goes well beyond simple humanitarian actions .
It needs to specify the legal force of these rights it talks about .
It needs to specify the guarantees , controls and sanctions including - when necessary - the use of military force .
All things without which , in the words of Robert Badinter , human rights risk becoming an academic exercise .
A second set of reforms concerns the specialized administrative services which Union agencies must be given in order to acquire the expertise and professionalism needed for acceptance as an authority in a field as complex as human rights .
Today , the Commission and Parliament are dependent on analyses and information emanating from NGOs and the press .
Without calling their excellent work into question , we must accept that an organization as large as the European Union should be in a position to back up the positions it takes through its own knowledge , of high quality , and through rigorous working methods .
However , it is quite clearly the third set of reforms that is the most important .
Nothing can be done if the political will is not present .
Now we have to recognize that the Union - I am thinking mostly of the Council even though in this respect the Irish presidency largely escapes this criticism - but in general the Union and in particular the Council have not always shown a clear willingness to defend human rights when the Union has been faced with a concrete situation .
The hesitations in Bosnia , Chechnya , Rwanda , Zaire , but also in Turkey , China and elsewhere , show how difficult it is to act , for either prevention or cure .
These difficulties are not surprising .
Foreign policy has always been an expression of the interests of Member States and determined by the balance of economic , financial , political and military forces .
The inclusion of moral concerns , in this case humans rights , in a foreign policy which by its nature is outside the moral field cannot be easy .
To succeed in overcoming the obstacles , the Union first needs a genuine common foreign policy .
It is the prerequisite for truly efficient action .
In addition , the Union needs to be fully convinced of the vital importance of the fight for human rights . Of vital importance firstly for Europe itself .
At the end of the century , Europe is uncertain of itself .
Peoples have doubts about the direction of the European construction .
It should be understood that what is involved today is the future of our civilization and its humanist values .
Of course , this civilization has not had only good sides to it .
Europe has sometimes bred horror but it has also been the scene , the crucible , where this basic idea , the dignity of every human being , was forged .
Since the Second World War , Mr President , human rights have been the bedrock on which Europe is being built .
If we do not defend them with a very determined political will , the whole foundation of the European edifice will be in danger of crumbling .
Mr President , human rights are part of the European identity that we have .
But it is not exclusively to defend our social model , as is legitimate and our duty , that the European Union must demand that human rights are universally respected .
Defending human rights in the world means fighting for the dignity of every human being and guaranteeing the right of peoples , and not their masters or exploiters , to benefit from the fruit of collective work and effort .
In this context , the Lalumière report points out progress made in the universal affirmation of human rights , especially through action taken by the European Union which , among other initiatives has ensured that human rights guarantee clauses have been included in agreements signed with third countries .
This cannot be denied but we must note the difficulties met in introducing into international commercial , economic , political or military relations the moral values which , in accordance with our culture , should govern the international community .
The European Union does not always stick to its principles and it sometimes tolerates very serious violations by certain partners or even inside the Union , as demonstrated by racist and xenophobic phenomena against which a democratic conscience should rise up .
The Lalumière report calls for more coherence , more coordination , improved joint efforts by the various European Union institutions in defining theory and practice in respect of human rights .
That is something calling for an authentic root and branch reform at the IGC , to include human rights in the Treaty and , above all , to give the European Union a genuine CFSP able to turn political democracy , rights , freedoms and guarantees , social , economic and cultural rights , into the hard core lending coherence to all of the European Union 's external actions .
I congratulate the rapporteur on her report and her openness to proposals by the PSE Group and others , on her contribution to a subject on which she is a genuine expert , making the joint heritage of the European Parliament .
Today , a day after Ramos Horta and Bishop Ximenes Belo received the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo , I should like to say that we should avoid a policy of double standards .
That would not be worthy of our principles .
We should not pander to economic interests or the advantages linked to commercial or other policies and overlook human rights , especially when it is a matter of weak peoples fighting mighty oppressors , such as Indonesia .
Mr President , at this crossroads in history , as the millennium comes to an end , in the face of progress in terms of democratic conscience and universal solidarity , despite regular slides back into barbarity , let us make human rights a distinctive goal of civilization , the hope for personal dignity and that of peoples a factor of development per se .
Let us make the year 2000 ( a proposal by the PSE group which the rapporteur has accepted ) the universal year of human rights . Let us do so at once in order to educate the young and teach human rights in every day life .
Mr President , this is a very thoughtful report .
It is more than a recital of the many serious violations of human rights in countries throughout the world , because it makes a serious contribution towards the ongoing development of our own philosophy in the European Parliament .
I congratulate the rapporteur most sincerely on her exhaustive study .
Those of us who are on the Subcommittee on Human Rights and fully involved in the debates on urgencies know full well the magnitude of our task .
Sadly we are inundated with reports of criminal acts perpetrated by governments and those acting under them .
Through our debates we are able to give these acts publicity and from time to time to exert a merciful influence on governments - no easy task - not least because when our action is allied to economic pressure we have some clout at least .
I often quote the example of Syria where a few years ago we cut off development aid for a couple of years .
I have little doubt that the releases of political prisoners from Syrian prisons were due to the economic clout we exerted at that time .
The question is how we are going to carry our work forward .
Mrs Lalumière has two particular proposals to make , one via legal channels and the other the political approach .
Understandably she draws on her experience in the Council of Europe and that may well be a path to follow and will need to be explored further .
The political approach is , as she says , plagued with difficulties but deserves further consideration .
Regrettably , in my long experience the Commission is very inclined to pull its punches in dealing with third countries but I am happy to say that at least its behaviour is as nothing compared to that of the Council of Ministers , where Member States give pride of place to commercial and national interests and are content to brush aside human rights issues in all but the most extreme cases .
So , at least we can say that human rights are emerging as a major issue , and we must build on that .
Happily , as the European Parliament we have the freedom of action needed , and we must continue our role of speaking out against what is unacceptable .
Mr President , this House has a reputation especially outside the Union for defending human rights .
Mrs Lalumière 's report deals with how the European Parliament highlights the issue of human rights in the various coordinated policies of institutions .
It deals with political , legal and financial sanctions which should at one and the same time act as both an aid and a deterrent .
The rapporteur does not even exclude armed intervention , albeit under the auspices of the UN , in certain situations .
Mr President , this report expresses a development and opinion which has formed since two world wars in Europe and which has very solid foundations .
Defending human rights is not a new colonial arrogance , it is rather a pragmatic approach with a humanistic touch which is aimed first and foremost at promoting international stability , humanity , an essential part of a European foreign policy in the making , a proper step on the eve of the Intergovernmental Conference and of the 21st century .
Mr President , Mrs Lalumière 's report is excellent and I wish to congratulate her on it .
It systematically draws attention to the Union 's organisation of its policy rather than highlighting individual cases of infringements of human rights .
Mrs Lalumière rightly focuses on how the Union can produce as effective an external policy on human rights as possible .
On the day that Wei Jingsheng receives the Sakharov prize from the European Parliament it is appropriate that we debate the Union 's policy on human rights .
The Commission rightly argues in its communication on its longterm policy on China that any action must first and foremost produce results .
But results are not produced through being modest .
The Union can best achieve results by being consistent , decisive and transparent .
Consistency means that human rights must be an element of everything we do on the international scene .
The ministerial meeting of the WTO in Singapore is an excellent opportunity to put respect for basic human rights on the agenda of multilateral trade negotiations .
The social clause must also be included in Singapore .
Consistency also means that the Union 's industry must also respect a code of behaviour in international business affairs which is similar to the Union 's own rules .
That too is part of Europe 's image abroad .
Presence in Nigeria , for example , is not a licence to breach human rights .
Decisiveness means here that we have a policy aimed at promoting respect for democracy and human rights .
This can be achieved through deterrent diplomacy , humanitarian intervention , promoting freedom of the press and democracy throughout the world and our unwavering fight against the humanitarian problem of landmines .
The Council must also be able with a qualified majority vote to suspend treaties because of infringements of human rights .
That is of course work for the IGC .
Finally , Mr President , transparency .
Our criteria for our policy on human rights and its implementation must be uniform .
Only then can we expect third countries to take it seriously .
Economic interests should not be the overriding factor .
And a point of order , Mr President .
May I on behalf of the Liberal Group , and perhaps on behalf of the whole House , congratulate the Commissioner on his birthday .
He is exactly as old as I am and our age is revealed in the vademecum .
Mr President , today we awarded the Sakharov Prize to Mr Wei Jingsheng .
Exactly a year ago we awarded it to Leyla Zana , a Member of the Turkish National Assembly from Kurdistan .
In a country which has numerous agreements with the European Union , that Member of Parliament continues to be in prison and we have almost forgotten her , while at the same time the European Union , especially the Council of Ministers , is making every effort to upgrade relations with Turkey - we even see that in the budget procedure with the rejection of very many of the European Parliament 's amendments linking aid for Turkey to the human rights situation .
And I think this is a very characteristic example of exactly the great contradiction to which Mrs Lalumière referred in her excellent report , between commercial , economic or strategic interests and the elementary moral values which I think the European Union should serve , without hypocrisy .
I say : ' without hypocrisy ' , because this refers to another neighbouring area , at least one that neighbours our country , namely former Yugoslavia .
We see the European Union quite rightly protesting against the suppression of human rights by the Milosevic regime , but it remains silent about similar situations in Croatia , next door .
I think we ought to make headway .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament 's intervention is needed and will continue to be so for a long time .
But at least some reforms , such as a reference to human rights in the revised Maastricht Treaty and a condition relating to human rights in agreements establishing external relations , would be extremely important .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we too welcome the report .
However , we regret the fact that these most important human rights questions are often drowned in a sea of absurd left-right debate .
In our view , human rights questions are too important to be misused as arguments in what are often merely one-off political debates , which degrades them .
European history this century has shown that no political party can pretend to be pure as the driven snow in questions of human rights .
We therefore appeal to all the groups to approach this question jointly and we hope that the various political groups in this Parliament are not constantly divided up like the characters in the old Western The Good , the Bad and the Ugly , with each attempting to present itself as the decent one .

Mr President , I should like to call upon the Commissioner to pay careful attention to the proposal contained in paragraph 69 of Mrs Lalumière 's report and see to it that , for once , this proposal is actually followed up by a joint undertaking on the part of the Institutions - Parliament , Commission , European Council and Council of Europe ; the proposal relates to the idea of making 2000 the year of human rights and preparing a threeyear programme in advance of the year 2000 dedicated to human rights education .
I believe the Lalumière report is worthy of our support .
If any criticism is to be made , it will need to be divided by 628 , because the report has become somewhat long , as usual , because of the determination of each honourable Member to make his own corrections to it .
I should just like to point out one difficulty we do still have in dealing with these matters .
Even our culture , which is the most advanced in the world , is a culture of negatives ; meaning that we define peace as the absence of war , democracy as the absence of dictatorship , life as the absence of death , human rights as the absence of human rights violations .
All this goes to show that our culture is unable to emphasize good aspects without the absence of the bad , without attacking the negative .
I believe that a positive approach to overcoming this handicap might be to refer to three fundamental aspects of our existence .
First , no human being and no authority can lawfully order the taking of another 's life .
If we succeed in establishing this principle , we shall have taken a notable step forward .
Secondly , the human race cannot simply be divided in two , by laws that dictate that , for religious or other reasons , one type of being - the female - is inferior to the male .
Thirdly , childhood has its own inalienable rights , meaning that no-one - no parent and no authority of any other kind - can deprive a child of its right not just to life but to a life worth living .
If we can make progress in these three areas , perhaps we shall succeed in acquiring a positive conception of human rights .
Mr President , it may quite clearly be asserted that , nowadays , virtually every country in the world appears to accept fundamental human rights as a reference value , yet there are still many flagrant violations of these rights throughout the world .
The list of acts of violence perpetrated by man against his fellow man continues to increase , as Mrs Lalumière , who is exceptionally knowledgeable on this subject , ably reminds us in her excellent report .
Hence my Group , convinced that the defence of human rights is an essential condition for achieving genuine peace between peoples , shares the stance formulated by Mrs Lalumière in her report .
The European Union , which has made the defence of human rights the central core upon which its policy is based , cannot remain unmoved in the face of the violations of human dignity and self-respect which continue to take place in so many countries .
Yet nor can it restrict itself to a mere denunciation of such violations .
The European Union must be capable of assuming the responsibilities which come with its commitment to peace and the defence of human rights .
We therefore also support the relevant measures proposed by the report with a view to improving the European Union 's system for protecting fundamental rights and freedoms and conducting preventive diplomacy in the service of peace and to promote human rights .
However , we would be happier if , alongside civil and political rights , economic and social rights and cultural rights , the rights of national minorities were also included .
The fact that the protection of national minorities is upheld in the Copenhagen Declaration , the ECSC Paris Charter and the Council of Europe framework convention means that it is implicitly acknowledged that collective rights exist and must be protected .
Therefore we are of the view that the report must also explicitly recognize and safeguard these rights out of respect , obviously , for the pre-eminence of universal human rights .
The defence of man 's inalienable dignity - both individually and in terms of a group of people who feel that they form a community - is a political imperative which concerns us all and which the European Union and all the individual Member States also must be capable of recognizing to its full extent if it wishes to remain faithful to the spirit of the founding fathers and , by virtue of this fidelity , fulfil its obligations vis-à-vis history .
The Lalumière report is therefore showing us the path we should take .
It is simply a matter of having the political will to go further along it .
Mr President , in her report Mrs Lalumière mentions the many aspects of the human rights problem with her usual tact , but also with the required firmness as regards the essential principles at stake .
It is not much good continually talking at length about such a serious subject .
It is important to provide ourselves with an instrument that is consistent and effective , both legally and politically , and capable of converting a sometimes ill-founded profession of faith into consistent acts equal to the values about which we declare ourselves to be uncompromising .
That goes particularly for the external relations of the European Union , an area in which our determination to defend principles dear to us serves as a test .
Mrs Lalumière 's report enumerates the range of instruments used with relative success so far .
I note with satisfaction that she invites us , in the resolution , to supplement the existing arrangement with a new instrument , in the form of a code of conduct for European firms operating in third countries which would oblige them not to be accessories to grave violations of human rights .
Corresponding proposals have already been formulated in the OECD , but so far have unfortunately remained a dead letter .
Incorporating ethical considerations in the way business is conducted would also be a typically European response to the problems of globalization and internationalization .
Let us make sure that it causes recalcitrant countries to think twice before flouting , more or less with impunity , the principles and values dear to us .
Mr President , year after year , report after report , not just signals are expected from Europe but strong and firm political action so that human rights shall make headway throughout the world .
Unfortunately , the years go by and nothing changes , sometimes we even witness regression in places where hope was strongest .
What can one say about the recent decision of the Israeli Supreme Court to legalize torture in prison ?
It is no longer enough just to denounce it .
Let us act by suspending the interim agreement with Israel until human rights are respected .
Similarly for Turkey , which has still not released Leyla Zana , Sakharov prizewinner 1995 , nor her colleagues , the former Kurdish members of parliament , and which proposes an antiterrorist law , a terrible censorship of a press already plunged into grief by the unpunished murder of journalists .
Here again , let us suspend financial aid and make our cooperation conditional upon respect for human rights .
The list is a long one as it appears in Mrs Lalumière 's report , a tragic list of resolutions condemning violations of fundamental rights , arrogant and contemptuous violations of international agreements .
May I end by once again denouncing the crimes of the Colombian military groups who attack civilian populations and peasants , and who , yesterday , caused four deaths in one family , four brothers , thanks to the passive complicity of the Colombian government .
If it does not want to be a bitter disappointment to the rest of the world , Europe must play every card it has in its hand - and it has many - in every part of the world where it has any influence .
Mr President , human rights are becoming increasingly important in the Union 's external policy , as is seen by the fact that all cooperation agreements with third countries now include a clause on human rights .
We welcome the fact that human rights have hereby gained broader recognition .
At the same time the lengthy sad list of resolutions in Mrs Lalumière 's report indicate what is still amiss in many countries , sometimes as a result of dictatorial regimes , sometimes through cultural traditions , sometimes because of peculiar social and economic circumstances and alas also as a result of religious fanaticism .
Human rights represent an on-going problem where any presumed advance must be scrutinised closely .
There is a continual area of tension between the ideal and often bitter reality , where the biblical truth is confirmed that man 's instinct is towards evil .
Despite that we should wherever possible continue to exert pressure and influence to improve situations or better still to prevent them from happening in the first place .
But we have no great expectations of all kinds of institutional changes in the form of making foreign policy a community policy or appointing a commissioner for human rights .
Action on human rights cannot apparently be left to governments , as shown again in the recent negotiations in the WTO where major powers such as China will not tolerate being discussed .
New institutions will add little to the activities already being undertaken by the Union , the UN , the OSCE or the Council of Europe , not forgetting Amnesty International and other NGOs .
Mr President , I too wish to commend Mrs Lalumière on her excellent report .
It is appropriate that we are debating this now , on the day that we awarded the Sakharov Prize to Mr Wei Jingsheng .
The report rightly emphasizes the link between democracy and human rights , and the need for a universal concept which embraces the rights of national minorities , refugees , women and children , and the right to a healthy environment .
I welcome also the call for minimum social clauses in trade agreements to protect the rights of children , prisoners or to combat other forms of slave labour .
Such exploitation of fellow human beings must be unacceptable as we near the new millennium .
Nor should the EU blithely enter into agreements with countries which are blatantly abusing human rights .
This pattern should stop as it undermines the work of the EU and this Parliament .
The EU should not continue to turn a blind eye to such abuses .
Minimum standards should be adhered to and agreements suspended where there is clear evidence of widespread human rights abuses .
The customs union with Turkey shows that agreements with regimes which abuse their own citizens does not lead to improvements in human rights .
EU aid should be conditional on recipients making sustainable efforts to improve their own behaviour .
It is also right that the EU should monitor the arms trade and press for a binding code of conduct so that the EU at least is not sustaining regimes which infringe the civil liberties of their own people .
Whilst it is correct that the EU should strengthen its common foreign and security policy , it is not Britain 's position that the CFSP should be communitized .
The CFSP should remain intergovernmental but subject to reform .
Finally , I welcome Mrs Lalumière 's call for a Commissioner for human rights and a Centre for the Active Prevention of Conflicts , which is well overdue .
I hope that this report will have the full and deserved support of this House .
Mr President , while offering my congratulations to Mrs Lalumière I feel compelled to point out serious contradictions in some of our decisions .
For example , in Recital K , which is concerned with the resurgence of fanaticism and of political and religious intolerance , we quite rightly refer to Iran , apparently forgetting that it was only during the last session , in an urgent resolution on the Middle East , that the European Parliament called for mediation by that same Iran which is constantly violating human rights .
Regarding the noble commitment made by the European Union on human rights , we should not pass over the contradiction , minor though it is , that rears its head among the Liberal Group in this house .
I refer to the fact that it includes an Italian sub-group - the Lega sub-group - whose own activities are focused on preaching discrimination between northern and southern Italians .
Furthermore , the European Jewish Congress recently deplored the fact that Bossi , the head of the Lega , has always refused to condemn incidents of racism .
Finally , the Lega calls for judges and teachers from the south to be driven out of the north , and now it is even attacking the unity of the Catholic Church .
For how long is the Liberal Group going to be so contemptuous of its own honourable origins as to maintain its links with this racist sub-group ?
And why ?
To retain a larger political grouping ?
But at what price ?
At the price of selling the dignity and honour of Malagodi , Einaudi , Ugo La Malfa , who can no longer rise in revolt !
Mr President , I would firstly like to commend Mrs Lalumière on her excellent report on European policy in the field of human rights which , true to its long history , deals with one of the fundamental aspects of our identity .
I would like to highlight two aspects which I feel are fundamental and upon which we should reflect both in our work in Parliament and in our relations with the other institutions .
The first aspect relates to the assertion made in paragraph 13 concerning assessment of the evolutionary character of human rights .
Human rights are not consolidated overnight , as we Europeans well know .
They continue to develop and we have to acknowledge this , that is to say we have to carry out an ongoing assessment of progress achieved in terms of human rights not only in our own countries but also in third countries with whom we maintain relations .
This idea and the idea of critical dialogue complement each other very well , and both ideas should be applied to all those programmes which are currently being implemented , by which I mean PHARE , TACIS and MEDA , and others connected with Turkey , Israel , Algeria , Belarus or Iran .
The second aspect - the idea of the democratic clause - is very directly related to this idea of an evolutionary nature , that is to say we must not view the democratic clause as having a sanctioning character , rather as an aid to extending and assisting the consolidation of something that is very rare in the history of humanity : democracy and respect for human rights .
I therefore understand that these advances in terms of principles contained in Mrs Lalumière 's most excellent report must be nurtured by us and applied systematically to all agreements we conclude .
That is to say we have to look at the democratic clause in terms of the evolutionary nature and concept of critical dialogue we have to apply to our foreign policy .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Lalumière for her excellent report which I hope receives the support of the House .
I welcome the initiative taken in this report on international human rights to state firmly that the term covers civil , political and economic and social rights .
I was pleased to note that Mrs Lalumiere accepted my amendments , particularly that systematic rape is to be treated as a serious war crime .
As a consequence of this , it is necessary to include the words systematic rape in Additional Protocol II of the Fourth Geneva Convention .
In 1994 , I voted against establishing a custom 's union between the EU and Turkey .
Parliament 's demands on human rights were not being fulfilled .
The majority of Members of Parliament felt that a custom 's union would improve the human rights situation in Turkey .
As with similar agreements with third countries , a clause on human rights and democracy was inserted and it was hoped that this would lead to positive developments .
This has not proved to be the case .
Human rights have not improved in Turkey since the introduction of the custom 's union , they have got worse .
Yesterday , five journalists from the largest newspapers in Turkey spoke here in Parliament and warned of proposed laws , currently under consideration , which would seriously curtail the right to free speech .
The EU has political , economic and diplomatic means available to it .
These must be actively used and must be supplemented with conclusive action if violation of human rights continues .
We must also develop political , economic and legal mechanisms to be used as guarantees , controls and sanctions , as without these the clause on human rights and democracy will have no effect whatsoever .
Mr President , first of all the Commission would like to take this opportunity of thanking the House for its contribution to the promotion of human rights and basic freedoms in the policy of the European Union .
We also pay tribute to the work of the European Parliament in the field of human rights as expressed once more in the award of the important Sakharov prize .
The presentation of the annual report on human rights is one of the European Parliament 's initiatives which enables a major dialogue between the institutions on human rights issues .
This year we are debating the report presented by Mrs Lalumière , an eminent rapporteur who as former secretary-general of the Council of Europe is more qualified than most others to talk on this subject .
It goes without saying that the Commission lays great store by the respect of human rights , both inside and outside the Union .
The Commission has on previous occasions discussed human rights clauses in agreements between the EU and third countries with you .
Since 1992 these clauses have been incorporated systematically , not incidentally , into agreements with third countries , so all our new external agreements have this clause as an essential part of the bilateral agreement .
The Commission regularly discusses human rights on the international and world-wide scene .
In our communication of last July , for example , on the relationship between international trade and labour standards we produced an in-depth analysis of the possibilities of placing these standards on the agenda of the World Trade Organisation .
These standards concern in particular the abolition of forced labour , slavery , child labour and the promotion of the freedom of trade unions , together with the right to collective labour negotiations and nondiscrimination in employment .
As you are aware this is being discussed at this very moment at the ministerial meeting of the World Trade Organisation in Singapore ; these issues , as you well know , are very controversial especially when there are seen in relation to rules on international trade .
Mrs Lalumière 's report also proposes the introduction of a code of behaviour for multinational undertakings from the European Union to oblige them to respect human rights .
I must say that it would be impossible to enforce such a code of behaviour on companies .
It goes without saying that I would welcome it if companies were prepared to make human rights part of their company policy in third countries .
Strengthening democracy and respecting human rights are high priorities for the European Union , especially in countries undergoing change .
I would refer you again to our democracy programmes in PHARE and TACIS for central and eastern European countries and the former Soviet Union where we have developed a wide range of programmes and actions to support democratic reform and further develop a constitutional state , to strengthen civil society and protect and promote other human rights .
Since the production of the famous chapter B7-52 - the European initiative on the protection of human rights - funds for this purpose have been constantly on the increase .
For monitoring and coordinating purposes the Commission has since 1994 been producing annual reports on the main guidelines followed in the use of these funds .
These reports contain a separate account of each individual budget line , an account of the sector on human rights , democracy and development and a general account of all human rights budget lines .
The Commission shares the particular concern of the European Parliament on matters such as freedom of expression and freedom of the media .
As this is a fundamental factor in democracy and civil society which plays an important part in the protection of human rights , our specific actions are aimed at promoting this freedom .
I would like to tell you about a very busy conference on the freedom of the media in former Yugoslavia organised recently by the Commission in Brussels where the Commission again promised an important sum - in this case some ECU 10 million for 1997 - precisely to support and encourage the free media in former Yugoslavia .
I also think that the current developments , not so much in Bosnia as in Belgrade , prove how important this element can be in strengthening democracy .
In these circumstances I also wonder whether the proposal for separate special budget lines for the free media might not be less effective that expected as it could mean that this specific aspect might be restricted or neglected in other areas of activity .
Mrs Lalumière 's report also highlights the importance the European Parliament attaches to the centre for the prevention of conflicts set up by the Commission .
The Commission is currently working on a model programme , the ' Network for crisis prevention ' , resulting from the Rocard initiative under which studies will be drawn up , advice dispensed and assessments made in the field of crisis prevention .
This network we are setting up will attempt to collect information on potential crises and humanitarian disasters , process that information and then produce confidential analytical and policy reports on ways of preventing conflict .
The report calls for closer coordination between the European institutions on the one hand and the Member States on the other hand .
The Commission fully agrees with Parliament that this coordination should be intensified and we are acting accordingly .
We are trying as much as possible through careful coordination and adapting internal procedures to new forms of communication to improve our coordination of human rights .
You know that President Santer has taken upon himself personal responsibility for the sensitive field of human rights .
And I have been entrusted under his authority with responsibility for the thematic and horizontal aspects of that .
With a view to improving internal coordination there are also regular meetings of the directors-general in the Commission involved in external relations .
We also have an interservice working party ' Human Rights ' in which all the Commission services dealing with human rights are represented .
Mr President , I shall conclude .
One of the most important events in the promotion and protection of human rights in the world was undoubtedly the signing of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights on 10 December 1948 .
I have taken careful note of Mr Imbeni 's support for the proposal that the year 2000 should be designated the year of human rights .
May I make a small amendment to that proposal and suggest it might be worth thinking of designating 1998 , the 50th anniversary of the signing of the UN Declaration of Human Rights , as the year of human rights ?
We had thought of that some time ago and are also trying in conjunction with the United Nations to work towards having 1998 as the year of international protection of human rights .
We shall have to wait and see if anything comes of that but at any rate that is what we are doing .
As an aside I would like to thank you for your warm congratulations to me this afternoon on the occasion of my birthday when I have reached the respectful age shared by Mr Bertens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Protection of minors - adoption
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0393 / 96 by Mrs Zimmermann , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on measures to protect minors in the European Union ; -A4-0392 / 96 by Mr C. Casini , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on improving the law and cooperation between the Member States on the adoption of minors .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur on measures to protect minors in the European Union I am particularly pleased that this report has come on the agenda on the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of UNICEF .
In that way this House is showing that it also takes the problems , concerns and interests of some 80 million people in the European Union seriously .
Let me mention a few examples of the problems facing children .
Not all children in the Union have the same access to education systems .
Many children live below the poverty line .
In Germany they number 2.2 million .
Not all children enjoy the same health care .
Children are sexually abused , maltreated and commercially exploited .
There are many children in the Union too who work and the children of refugees are often excluded from entry into our countries .
A shocking number of children are addicted to drugs , alcohol , nicotine and medicines .
And we must not forget the many children who are also under psychological pressure , which is impossible to assess .
As a result , a large number of children face obstacles to their development .
We need to take a great many measures to remedy this situation .
Priority must be given to the ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in all Member States and its introduction into their legislation .
Children and adults must be better informed of the rights enshrined in that convention , for if they are to exercise these rights they must first be aware of them .
All existing Treaties are aimed at the welfare of the citizens .
By definition , citizens are first and foremost employees , employers and consumers .
Their offspring are therefore primarily children of working parents .
But if children are to be granted a status appropriate to the conditions of this changed society , we do not just need these legislative changes .
We therefore call on the Council , when amending the Maastricht Treaty , to include children as a separate category of people .
Children 's rights should become a basic principle of European actions .
At the same time , a policy geared to children 's rights should be introduced in all areas and account should be taken of aspects relating specifically to children in all legal acts and initiatives .
Priority should be given to the formulation and implementation of a policy geared to protecting the rights of children , in addition to budgetary considerations .
We also call on the Member States to introduce an additional protocol to the European Convention on Human Rights that meets the specific needs of children .
Furthermore we call for a separate directorate-general or separate Commission department to be set up with responsibility for children 's rights and for Parliament to appoint a children 's ombudsman .
I also suggest that Parliament sets up a committee on children 's concerns .
If we vote and decide on this report today on the 50th anniversary of the foundation of UNICEF , this act would represent a future guarantee that we will pay particular attention to the problems of children in the activities of the European Parliament .
In order to encourage political participation by children , we call on the Member States to assist in the formation of youth parliaments at local , regional and national level .
Social participation should be encouraged by appointing children 's ombudsmen in the Member States .
Support should also be given to setting up children 's S.O.S. telephone helplines , which already exist in some Member States .
The European process of integration also affects the situation of children .
Since we do not know these effects yet , not even in the case of adults , we call on the Commission to concern itself with this situation and to commission research .
The report also calls for psychological support and assistance to be given to children who are the victims or witnesses of acts of violence .
It also calls for priority to be given over imprisonment to the rehabilitation and education of under-age offenders .
That will give these children a real chance of being reintegrated in our society .
And we call on the Council to set up a European missing children 's centre , as Mrs Banotti has indeed been urging for a long time .
Adequate protection and humanitarian aid must also be given to under-age refugees from third countries .
No distinction should be drawn in such cases between political and economic refugees .
We also expect the Commission to do its utmost to combat child sex tourism and child pornography .
I know that Mrs Gradin is looking into this very closely , as she made plain at the Stockholm conference which I also attended as well as here in Parliament .
At the same time , we call on the Member States to adopt legislation making it possible for any of their nationals who commit such crimes against children in another country to be prosecuted before their courts .
All the demands set out in my report are based on one crucial fact : children have the advantage over other groups requiring protection in society that they have a lease on the future .
In shaping this future they must stand at our side as partners with equal rights .
To enable them to do so , we must make education accessible to all children living in the territory of the European Union , irrespective of social origin or nationality .
Today 's children are the society of tomorrow .
We will build that society up by respecting the dignity of children and enabling them to develop into independent actors .
In particular , today 's debate means that we all assume responsibility for the future of our children , undertake to act to the benefit of the children , to be their advocates , to introduce a new way of thinking in the Community in response to social , economic and political changes and to give children a status appropriate to their needs .
Children must be able to participate in this process as equal partners .
In conclusion , let me quote what the children at the Rio conference said : ' It is our future , and we want a say in it .
We want to be brought up in such a way that we have the courage to speak out .
We want solidarity ! '
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is significant that this House should be talking about children on the very eve of Christmas , the feast at which we celebrate the mystery of life and childhood , and that we should be talking of them on the very day on which the 50th anniversary of UNICEF falls .
Recognizing children 's rights , contrary to what might be thought , is a political fact of the first importance .
It has been said that the way society treats its children shows what it thinks of mankind as a whole .
Indeed , when we rightly say that a child is an individual , we mean that the principle of equality must be applied without exception , so that its benefits are also felt by the weakest , the smallest , the most dependent , those who have no voice , those who do not have full independence or capacity for thought and action .
Again , when we say that children 's rights and interests must take precedence over those of adults , we are trying to apply the principle of solidarity whereby society must offer some of its own strength to strengthen the weakest .
Recent grim news stories show what despicable advantage may be taken of children by adults determined , at any cost , to satisfy their lust for gratification and for money .
We must , then , say an unyielding ' no ' to all forms of violence against children , and a loud , clear ' yes ' to children 's rights , the rights of all children , of every race and colour - I recall , incidentally , that 1997 is to be Europe 's Year against Racism - in whatever condition they may be , and throughout their development .
The modern institution of adoption is one way of providing one of a child 's most basic rights : the right to a family .
We should be failing to understand its true significance , turning it upside down and reverting to the laws of ancient Rome , if we were to give adults the right to adopt and to give priority to adults ' interests .
I am only too well aware that the very concept of the family has now been pensioned off , but it must be admitted that , in normal circumstances , the best thing for a child is to grow up in an atmosphere of love , with the care of a father and mother , in an environment of guaranteed stability and peace .
If we look at things from the child 's standpoint , they are simple enough .
Clearly , there are cases in which , in the interests of the child , adoption by a single person is preferable - I would remind you that on the specific subject of this action , I am the rapporteur .
One thinks , for example , of a little child which , having lost its parents , has a grandfather or a grandmother or an uncle with whom to live ; one thinks , too , of a person who marries a woman , perhaps a widow , who already has a child ; in this case the effect of adoption is to make the woman 's child the child of the man also .
Nevertheless , there must be a clear preference for a family which includes a father and a mother .
I must make it clear that any other solution which upheld an adult 's right to adopt purely by virtue of being an adult , or the right of a community other than the family community I have just described , would distort the institution of adoption and my own report ; that would force me to distance myself somewhat from that report .
In any case , there is no practical problem , because the very sharp fall in the birth rate in Europe means that there are on average ten applications for adoption for every abandoned child .
This phenomenon lies behind the sharp increase in international adoption in all our countries , which is presenting major difficulties not only for the adoptive parents but also as regards the transparency of procedures , the risk of serious abuses and , most of all , the balanced development of the children concerned .
On the other hand , international adoption is a subject of direct concern to the European Union .
To summarize , the content of my report on adoption states that adoption means providing a family for a juvenile who lacks one ; that the interests of the adult and the juvenile must be given precedence ; it calls for the Hague Convention to be ratified both by the Member States and by other countries ; it calls for the standardization of the age gap for adoption ; it calls for reciprocal recognition of adoptions granted within the Member States ; it states a preference for an adoptive family which includes a father and a mother ; it accepts adoption by single parents only when the interests of the child demand it ; it classifies international adoption as of secondary value , since first and foremost it is necessary to allow the child to remain with its family , trying to provide the necessary resources through economic cooperation .
In cases of adoption , strict rules must be adhered to regarding the declaration that a child is being given up for adoption .
We must say ' no ' to contractual forms of adoption ; it is necessary that the intermediary function in international adoption should always lie with authorized bodies .
I hope that the vote will be as unanimous as possible ; children should unite us , not divide us .
That is why we have tried to achieve a result which can be as widely shared as possible .
I hope that the time remaining between now and the final vote will enable us to achieve the objective of a unanimous vote .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are applying ourselves with culpable delay to the obligations that organized European society should fulfil towards its youngest and weakest members , namely children .
It was necessary for international public opinion to be outraged by the disclosure of horrific crimes in one country , before we began to wonder whether enough protection was being offered to those of tender age , who are unprotected .
However , all the endless debates and appeals , the impressive conferences that have sprouted over the past year , will be shown up as cosmetic verbiage unless certain direct statutory measures are adopted and unless their practical implementation is imposed .
Because only in that way will it be possible to bring an end to the brutal and abhorrent exploitation of the young .
Exploitation that is not only sexual , by white slave traders , but economic as well , by unscrupulous employers and apathetic consumers .
The reports we are debating today , which have been prepared by the relevant committees , contain a host of recommendations . At the summit are the safeguarding of children 's rights , their recognition in a revised Union Convention , the harmonization of national laws , closer cooperation of the judicial authorities , and the full empowerment of Europol .
In the limited time available to me , let me add a comment about something we do not usually mention : the tolerance of sex tourism .
When this profitable activity is discussed we speak only of the victims , children , but remain indifferent to the perpetrators who sustain this repulsive trade , the adults who make use of it .
I believe that the means exist and it is not difficult to perceive methods to eliminate the sex tourism that stains not so much distant countries , as the civilized countries that provide its customers .
Only with an integrated and honest grasp of the problems can Europe contribute decisively to the protection of minors in the present age , when not only is the economy becoming increasingly world-wide but the values of civilization should do so as well .
Mr President , minors are still boys and girls , as we all know , but unfortunately it is still the case that in both their upbringing and education and in society at large girls are treated differently from boys and right from the very beginning they have it drummed into them what sex they are .
If we want to end the stereotyping in our society then we must begin at the very beginning and try to change it there .
I have heard rather too many fine words on the protection of minors and the importance of the family .
I must say that we in the Committee on Women 's Rights have discussed on various occasions in the last few years the dangers facing minors not just outside the family but also inside it .
Cases of incest are often shocking and I shall refrain from saying whether they are more or less shocking that the Dutroux affair , to which Mr Lambrias was obviously alluding ; to be honest , children inside the family are not automatically safe , and if we want to give equal opportunities to men and women in our society then we must recognise the fact that the traditional family will not continue to exist and that more and more often other forms of living together , including heterosexual and not only homosexual couples , are proving to be very long lasting and can also provide a good environment for bringing up children , both young and older children .
There is absolutely nothing wrong with that and I even think it is a precondition for giving equal treatment of men and women a proper chance .
Society should adapt to that and not the other way round .
We cannot demand the traditional family back because of occasional excesses for these also happen in traditional families .
Mr President , I would like to begin by referring to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , and to urge the European Union to accept that this should be far more than a paper commitment on our part , but should actually be a legal obligation - as it clearly is - to deliver civil , political , social , cultural and economic rights to our children .
It is the most widely ratified international convention in history and carries with it very clear and unequivocal obligations which we should face up to .
But of course wherever we look , we see that children all over the world are used , abused , exploited and ignored .
Today UNICEF publishes its State of the World 's Children report , which deals with child labour .
9 million children across the world die from causes which could very easily be eliminated with very inexpensive solutions , solutions that we in our part of the world have been using for half a century .
So what we are asking for here is that we should have , not just the good intentions , but actually the political will , to deliver the goods to the children of Europe and the world .
We need to shift resources to our children and also to shift our interest to the children in all our societies rich and poor .
I should also like to refer to the Hague Convention , and to a particular case in my own constituency of Adam and Nathan , two little boys abducted by their Tunisian father , a national of a country which has not ratified the Hague Convention .
As you said to me recently in an answer to my question , we have few options in the case of a country which has not ratified the Hague Convention .
He treated them as if they were his property , he deceived them and he took them to a very bewildering situation in a country and a family which they can barely understand .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , what can be done in this case .
What leverage are you able to use in this case ?
Tunisia is a recipient of large amounts of European Union aid , and you say in your answer to me that there are obligations under international law which you consider they should be respecting at this time .
I would like to ask you whether any future discussions with Tunisia will include these international obligations , particularly the Hague Convention ?
And could you tell me , please , what words of encouragement I can give to a mother who in these few weeks before Christmas is heartbroken and longing to have her children , Adam and Nathan , home with her in South Wales where they belong ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Zimmermann report on the protection of minors is concerned with creating a legal framework that is as uniform as possible .
The basic aim of this report , to improve the protection of minors , deserves full support .
But if we analyse the report more closely , we find there are various points that need to be looked at somewhat differently .
As Mrs Seillier pointed out , the best protection for children is to grow up in an intact family .
Although this is the nucleus of our society , it is not mentioned at any point in the resolution to the report .
I consider that a serious weakness .
The best condition for effective protection of minors is and remains the family .
Normally , children and families have the same interests - although I know that the reality is often different .
It follows from this that protection must be geared primarily to the family itself .
Its needs must be examined .
Here , however , we face numerous social problems , such as increasing selfishness , increasing structural inconsiderateness .
In some parts of our large towns only 10 % of families have any children at all .
So no wonder the awareness of children 's needs is declining so much .
Only in second place should we consider rights in relation to the protection of minors .
The rights of children are formulated above all in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child .
It forms the guarantee for minimum legal standards .
It has been widely accepted .
180 countries in the world have signed this convention .
I do not think that has been the case with any other convention .
It has provided valuable impetus and really does represent a milestone in the further development of the rights of children , although it is confined to obligations upon the states and does not formulate any specific rights of children .
This report is meant to contribute to doing so .
The main problem areas - this has been said in various quarters and therefore we certainly need not go into it further - are problems involving the media , problems resulting from the rise in sex crimes , paedophilia , violence , prostitution , drug addiction , poverty , child labour .
We must support the right of children to a healthy physical and psychological development .
We must find answers to the problems named above .
The Council of Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs has declared itself prepared and undertaken to promote closer cooperation in police and judiciary policy .
The requests made in the report for a separate directorate-general , children 's parliaments and special committees to be set up would doubtless do no harm , only the question is , of what help would they be ?
Do they not just mean more bureaucracy , would they not to some extent just be alibis for action ?
I am proud to be able to refer to an act of practical assistance , namely the fact that a colleague in our group , Mrs Banotti , has set up her own initiative and , without going through any particular institutions or refuges , has helped by her own means to bring back missing children .
The report says that children 's rights must be enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty .
Nobody will be against that , only the question yet again arises : of what practical value is that ?
Surely the point is to provide real practical help for the children ?
Not least we need balanced adoption laws , as proposed by Mr Casini .
We need to use and concentrate all our forces and abilities .
We need commitment , we need strength and perseverance if we really want to give better protection to children .
Mr President , the two draftsmen have presented important proposals for making child protection a priority of Community policies , by seeking to put an end to the law of silence , to sex tourism , etc .
This is an issue which ought , it seems to me , to have been unanimously well received in this Chamber .
Unfortunately , we see that politics has intruded into this area .
Some are using this noble cause as a Trojan horse in an attempt to put their own ideology before children 's interests .
Faced with the daily reality of all kinds of abuse and perversion , of which children and young adolescents are the victims , how can we not see that any attempt to project the sexual practices of adults into an area as sensitive as this is not only a provocation but an actual incitement of minors to debauchery ?
I hope Parliament will quickly take a more serious line , because otherwise it will forfeit any right to become as angry as it did in Brussels in September following the terrible events of the summer .
My group 's vote on these texts will depend on what amendments are adopted .
However , I can only be pleased at the decision of the last Justice Council , which anticipated the wish of some of us by approving a joint action for strengthening the fight against trade in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children and by extending the mandate of the Europol Drug Unit to paedophile acts .
Childhood is fragile , childhood is essentially transient .
Schiller said : ' Learn always to respect children 's dreams ' .
How could a Parliament wishing to be responsible imagine that the interests of the citizens it represents are defended by adopting certain amendments to these texts ?
How could any of us imagine justifying such proposals to public opinion in our own country , to the electors in their constituencies ?
How can we any longer look children in the eye to discover what their dreams may be ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report addresses very urgent issues and I believe that the vast majority here will support them .
But other issues are also addressed which are not within the competence of the Union , issues which are the concern of the Member States not Parliament .
In our more self-righteous moments , we strive to strengthen the principle of subsidiarity and ensure that it survives .
But if we approve all the amendments and all the proposals without amendments we will not be practising what we preach .
This is why our group cannot support all the amendments , despite the fact that we think the report is essentially sound .
We would like to practise what we preach and I ask you : What will the people of Europe think of our proposal if we involve ourselves in culturally related issues such as ; at what age do people have the right to adopt and what are our views on the adoption rights of homosexuals and single people ?
I think that the recommendations in this field do not respect the importance of cultural diversity in Europe .
I also think that many of the proposals risk obscuring the more important issues of providing the Union with the tools to fight against those dreadful crimes which already take place and using the tools that we have in the fight against those crimes which have already been mentioned by many of you .
We need to strengthen police cooperation in the Union to expose networks which trade in children either for sexual exploitation , or adoption , or in order to obtain organs for transplantation .
I am pleased that the Council of Ministers has taken the first steps so that together we can stop this trade .
The situation demands that we take action throughout Europe and that we require applicant countries to respect this issue . We must also demand that attention be paid to children and social cooperation in the PHARE and TACIS programmes .
Mr President , I would like to refer in particular to the report on intercountry adoption .
The first observation to be made regarding Mr Casini 's report , whose sensitivity on such questions has been more than confirmed , is that it is extremely opportune . It comes at a time when trafficking in minors and their use for unlawful purposes undermines the image of intercountry adoption .
The second is that it lays down essential safeguards for preventing use of minors for criminal purposes .
At the same time , consistent with its protective spirit , it highlights the social value of other legal ways of alleviating the situation of minors who have been abandoned , such as temporary fostering and guardianship .
Yet this is a report couched in extremely cautious terms , legally speaking , and I regret that it did not take the further step , necessary in my view , of requiring international bodies to ensure that children be adopted preferably by families from their geographical and cultural environment .
I also regret that it did not take up a position on a matter of great social consequence , i.e. the discrimination suffered by homosexuals when they attempt to adopt a child .
I believe this is a matter worthy of special attention in a free and tolerant society such as ours claims to be .
Lastly , I would like to take the opportunity to commend Mrs Zimmermann on her report . Its spirit of openness proved to be perfectly compatible with prudence .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we all know that the most resolute step we could take to protect minors would be to apply the 1989 UN Convention on the Rights of the Child unconditionally .
Both reports refer to it with good reason .
But we also know how many reservations there are about the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , reservations based on individual , collective , even state individualism and egoism , in my own country too .
Even the European Convention on the Exercize of Children 's Rights adopted this year falls below the standard of the UN convention .
A great deal still remains to be done here .
So I welcome the fact that both reports make proposals on what can be done at this stage .
In this respect , however , I believe two aspects are particularly important in terms of the direction we follow .
One is to preclude all discrimination against new forms of long-term relationships , as called for in paragraph 2 of the Casini report , which also includes homosexual partnerships .
Secondly , my group considers it equally as important to talk in plain terms here and not to talk of the right to life when the issue is the inviolability of living beings .
When we look at children we can see how far we still have to go in our approach to human rights in order to move from the autonomous and therefore also selfish individual towards establishing reciprocal relations between individuals .
Mr President , in a day devoted to human rights , it seems to me a good thing to bring children 's rights into the debate .
This is an area to where the European Union 's approach has been somewhat cool .
It is true that the legal basis was shaky , but European children are residents like any others and we must be concerned for their well-being , their dignity and their future .
That is why I am delighted that the European Parliament has taken the initiative in these two reports , and I should like to congratulate Mrs Zimmermann and Mr Casini warmly on the quality of their work .
The first requirement is to harmonize legislation and to ensure that international conventions are applied .
There is of course such a profusion of conventions that a common legal framework must be found so that universal , vigorous protection for children 's rights can be formulated throughout the European Union .
In this respect , the United Nations Convention seems to me a good reference point but whatever happens the wish to protect children 's rights must be included in the treaties .
Nevertheless , no significant progress will be made in the matter unless the European Union strengthens its responsibilities in the field of education , health and family policies .
For , beyond problems of maltreatment , of economic or sexual exploitation , it is our duty to reaffirm the right to education , an education that is fulfilling and which allows people to fight properly against inequalities and educational failure .
In addition , we must promote an open family policy which takes into account family trends today and a coherent , actively-directed social policy in order to fight effectively against poverty and exclusion , whose ravages among the young are only too well known to us .
Finally , beyond the proposed remedies , I believe it would be good if our societies gave some thought to the way they regard their children .
They are very often considered as objects of desire or a commercial target rather than as future citizens to whom we should be anxious to transmit our own values .
Mr President , it is high time to regard a child as a person in law .
Society seems to be aware of the existence , even in various European Union countries , of maltreated children , paedophile rings and child pornography .
It intends to take various measures - like those in paragraphs 7 , 8 , 9 and 10 of the report - that are extremely important for the protection of children and I am pleased about this .
However , we must not debate the wrong subject .
Our discussions should be concerned with defending the legitimate rights of children and protecting them , and not with advocating principles whose only real purpose is the questioning , by some of us , of our so-called morally and sexually - ever the same words - archaic societies because they are not sufficiently liberal and permissive in sexual matters .
In fact , in some paragraphs , such as U and V , the report criticizes the lack of information and debate about sexuality .
I must say that I am astonished .
I think Mrs Zimmermann must be one of those who never watches television or reads newspapers and never goes into schools , for the subject is talked about in complete freedom .
The report defends sexual preference , the freedom to fulfil oneself , and the abolition of any difference in legal status between children born outside marriage and those born within it ; it is also in favour of the free movement of children of residents of third countries , an extremely dangerous idea because it will allow entire families to come and settle down in any country .
I must say that , here again , I am astonished . The apparent dismissal of the very concept of the family from this report is totally amazing .
Whereas the development and protection of the child - and everybody recognizes this - seem to be the avowed aims of the report , it distances itself entirely from , and even abandons , the family framework , the pre-eminent framework for the integration and development of children .
How , then , can we claim to protect children when their natural environment and their emotional reference point are being destroyed .

The report , Mr Casini , displays a wholly libertarian drift about the adoption of minors , for it envisages asking Member States to abolish discrimination against homosexuals in respect of legal adoption .
This is completely paradoxical and not at all consistent .
Is that the way to defend the nuclear family in the traditional meaning of the term , i.e. a mother , father and children ?
Certainly not .
Is that the way to protect children against all failings of society by denying them any chance to benefit from a healthy , fulfilling family environment ?
Certainly not .
We have therefore decided to vote against this report , and I find it very dangerous , Mr President , that the constant wish of the Community is always to control everything , to regulate everything .
The danger of that is that it may lead tomorrow to the destruction of the moral values which are the fundamental values of our society .
Mr President , this Parliament has long recognized its duty to take the protection of children into account in the framing of its work .
The presentation of today 's reports demonstrates again the long-standing commitment we have to young people .
I would like to join with those who have already congratulated the rapporteurs for their dedication and their work .
Indeed I would say to Mrs Zimmermann that it was very interesting this morning to meet the group from Focus on Children and to take part in their presentation .
The debate is timely because not only is it the 50th anniversary of UNICEF but it coincides with the debate we had here this morning on the new revised Treaty , which was presented by the Irish presidency .
As you know , the rapporteurs commenced their work long before the horrors of that Dutroux case became known .
The Irish presidency equally , right from the outset , saw the need to prioritize the fight against organized crime and trafficking in persons .
In this regard I am very pleased to see the express reference in Article K.1 of the draft Treaty to common action between Member States to combat trafficking in persons and offences against children .
However , in common with most Members in the House , I hope that the eventual outcome of the IGC will see a shared competence in this area between Parliament and Council under the Community pillar and the insertion of a separate Treaty provision dealing expressly with the rights of children .
It is now clear that many Member States are in dereliction of their obligations under international and European child protection instruments .
I was disturbed to hear evidence from the experts who spoke at Parliament 's recent public hearing on the rights of children .
They pointed to the dismal failure on the part of many Member States to transpose into their national legislation orders such as the international instruments under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , which has been much referred to here today .
In short , while children , in theory , have extensive rights both nationally and internationally , the exercise of these rights is often rendered worthless by the inadequacies of the national legislation and procedural laws .
Accordingly I am fully convinced of the need for a two-pronged approach : we need action at Community level where that action is appropriate , but extra regulation , whether it is supranational or at any other level , does not mean extra protection in practice .
What we require is that we as parliamentarians should have the political will to bring the necessary improvements into the national laws .
I am sorry for going on , but it is a very important and sensitive subject .
I would just like to add : the debate is dominated by women .
I am sorry to see that .
Mr President , several colleagues have referred to the success of the recent Council of Justice Ministers and the progress made by them on the issues we are debating here today .
I would like to join everybody in commending both rapporteurs .
The reason why this progress has been made is because clearly now , particularly following events in August in Belgium , there finally exists a political will to do something to improve the rights of children within our Community .
It is my opinion , as with many other colleagues , that it is only once we see some specific reference to this within the Treaty that we can begin to make real progress .
In the Maastricht Treaty , in the protocol , we recognized animal rights and if we can do that we can certainly do something for the children in our Community .
This is not to underplay the importance of that protocol but simply to say that a well-organized , well-financed lobby group , can achieve a remarkable amount .
Unfortunately there has not been the same resources put into the question of the safeguarding the rights of our children .
I would like to make reference to a couple of points in Mrs Zimmermann 's report .
She calls for a DG to take care of children 's rights .
I think that is probably a bit too ambitious .
We certainly need a specialized unit which Members can use as a resource , which can be the reciprocal point in Parliament 's structure where we can go for advice and help and also gather a body of information regarding children 's rights , or shall we say the lack of them , as the case may be .
Adoption is a very delicate issue in all of our countries and in some of our countries it has very clear constitutional implications .
So , while welcoming Mr Casini 's report , it has to be recognized that in some countries there are specific constitutional problems in relation to some of the points he made .
Also I would say , we have to begin to accept the many conventions and implement them .
There is the Hague Convention which I work with myself and of course the UN Convention .
They are all there but we have not had , up to now , the political will to implement them and I would like you to recognize that we do now .
Mr President , the two reports we are looking at today have one point in common : the priority given to children 's rights .
I would even add that the greater interest of the child must be the most important consideration .
The Casini and Zimmermann reports have the merit of having been produced and of highlighting the problems of adoption , of the protection of minors ' rights and the legitimate rights of children .
Since the events that shattered my own country , Belgium , the European Parliament has shouldered its responsibilities .
The Council and Commission have finally tabled the first practical measures aimed at greater protection for children .
We must live up to our ambitions and the expectations of our citizens and stress the priority that the Council and Commission must give to the fight against sexual tourism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fight against the trade in human beings and more especially in children will henceforth come under the authority not only of Member States but also of the European Union .
Only such enhanced cooperation could put an end to the scandal of raped and exploited children .
A few days ago , the Romanian police arrested a Cambodian with false papers , accompanied by four children .
But how many other traffickers in children , Mr President , are moving around in complete freedom ?
Whether it is the arrest of a link in the chain of an international paedophile ring or of an illegal adoption network or , still worse , of traffickers in organs , what is happening shows us that the European Union must more than ever put every effort into this .
Europol must certainly help us to break up these networks , which are unscrupulously corrupting the future of our societies .
Mr President , I must begin by congratulating Mr Casini on his report on improving adoption legislation .
I congratulate him particularly for his telling emphasis on the principle that adoption should be seen unambiguously as a fundamental safeguard for children who are lacking in security , and thus as the right of each child to have a family , rather than a system for simply providing children to those who lack them .
In the context of this approach , where everything is seen from the children 's standpoint , we can also value the clear identification of the so-called traditional family as the ideal environment for the adopted child - the only environment able to offer him the most natural and suitable conditions for his balanced development and his education .
Admittedly , unfortunate episodes can occur even in a traditional family - cases of incest and maltreatment , for example - but , as always , such cases are the exception , to be prosecuted under the criminal law , not the rule .
Conversely , the adoption of children by alternative family models - common law marriages and , in particular , homosexual couples - irrespective of any assessment of their intrinsic merit , in no way provides the necessary safeguards for the child , but simply represents the egotistical assertion of the interests of two adults , which has nothing whatever to do with tolerance or equality .
Adoption by a single person , in my view , is a different matter .
If the right moral , economic and social conditions do indeed exist - a point which the rapporteur also emphasized - adoption by a single person is preferable to the child 's being abandoned or entrusted to an orphanage .
However , the first necessity in order to make adoption more effective in helping children is to make the legislative procedures clearer and simpler , not only in order to avoid unreasonable difficulties and bureaucratic delays within the Member States but also in order to regularize the system of international adoptions , which in some cases hides neither more nor less than a straightforward trafficking in children .
As is also stated in the report , it is more necessary and urgent than ever in this connection to set up a national body within each Member State , as envisaged inter alia by the Hague Convention , to coordinate adoption , making it easier , in particular , for children to move around within Europe and also to discourage any illegal trafficking in minors , the purpose of which in many cases is not just adoption but , more tragically , sex tourism and other forms of child exploitation .
Mr President , Europe abandons children , we abandon children .
I do not mean by that that other European citizens and families abandon Europe 's 120 million children - although they do - whether they are talking about child abduction , child prostitution or poverty , which strikes hardest at children who do not have enough to eat .
At no time of the year is this felt more than at Christmas .
Exclusion is a word most children do not know , they just experience and feel it : exclusion from family , friends , health-care and education and the wherewithal to grow up decently and live productive lives .
No !
I mean we have abandoned children .
We - European politicians - have , by our negligence , abandoned children .
Despite our Merry Christmases and Happy New Years , we have provided no warm manger to receive Europe 's excluded citizens .
Let me just cite two ways we have failed to act .
Firstly , there is no mention of children in the Treaties ; nor in the Irish draft IGC revision are we proposing to give children their proper status .
They are refugees in their own country , they are seen but not heard .
It is time we ended the ambiguity of citizenship and confirmed their full status as citizens in the IGC .
Secondly , the single European market .
We all vote for its swift completion - quite rightly too .
A productive single market of the 21st century will be our children 's inheritance , their jobs and prosperity .
But in making that market , in securing its foundations , we must not forget children .
Just one example : free movement of workers - a cornerstone of the market - also means free movement of families , with all attendant problems of adjustment for children in a new society .
Free movement of workers also means free movement of paedophiles across state borders .
Now is the time to act .
Give children status in the IGC and protect them in Europe 's biggest enterprise : the single market .
Support the Zimmermann report .
Mr President , a person who was virtually disregarded by the press - because the subject was a somewhat unfashionable one , the subject of values - invited representatives of the major religions and men of culture to debate a simple question : what is the value of a child in religions and culture today ?
Is it a supreme value , or is it still a utility value ?
Admittedly , the debate was somewhat influenced by the purpose of the conference , since it is easy enough to identify the sexual exploitation of children as utilitarian , and equally easy to see the child as a tool of adults when it comes to child prostitution .
It is easy , too , even if no longer obvious , to identify this utilitarian view of children in cases of paedophilia .
Not all our countries have the same legislation .
Even less obvious is the utility of children in pornography , given that some hold that the offence is confined to making use of a child and does not include possession of the material , an extremely dubious distinction since , basically , possession amounts to joint liability in a form of offence that has already been committed .
Notwithstanding the solemn declaration of the recognition of children 's rights , children are sometimes regarded , even in current attitudes , from a very different viewpoint , as something to be exploited , a resource for parents , advertising , the labour market , organized crime .
This is to lose the sense of a child as a value in itself : children are measured in terms of other people 's desires and needs ; the mere aspirations of adults actually become stronger rights than those enjoyed by children .
I believe that adoption is really the litmus test in determining what children 's rights are worth .
The requirements and regulations for which Mr Casini 's report calls are directed towards that end , but are contradicted only in the point that refers to a right to adoption .
There is no such thing as a right to adoption !
There is such a thing , or rather there may be such a thing at the very most , as availability ; if we take the rights of individuals rather than the rights of children as the only starting point , the result will be that those legislative requirements that are needed today will become less and less strict - requirements which greater affection and stability from the parents .
I ask the two rapporteurs , who have worked well on this subject , to come to an understanding with each other .
Mr President , as a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , I welcome Mrs Zimmermann 's report on measures to protect minors in the EU .
It is clear that European society has only recently recognized the full extent , the hidden eight-ninths , of the iceberg of child sexual abuse as revealed by events so tragically discovered in the United Kingdom and Belgium .
There is child abuse .
We all know that .
There is also organized child abuse .
Paedophiles operate across nation state boundaries .
That is why we need to use all possible means of combating their activities .
I welcome the proposals in the report on strengthening laws against sexual exploitation , proposals on combating the proliferation of sex tourism , but also we need to go further .
We need to use the facilities we have at our disposal , organizations such as Europol to keep records of those who have been convicted of paedophilia and make that information available across borders .
We need to use the technology available to control child pornography , for example on the Internet and elsewhere .
I also welcome paragraph 32 of the report which calls on Member States to remove all differences between the legal position of children born to unmarried couples and those born to married couples .
I welcome paragraph 36 which calls for free movement of children having a nationality other than those of one of the Member States .
We all know of examples where children from third countries on school visits are not allowed to cross Member State boundaries , an absolutely ridiculous and barbaric position .
Finally , I should like to say how impressed I was that Mrs Stirbois managed to parade her and her party 's racist dogma even on a report on child protection .
Her nasty , narrow-minded racist comments on adoption will take some beating .
Mr President , today UNICEF celebrates its 50th birthday and today Mrs Zimmerman has presented her report on the protection of minors .
I would like to congratulate them both .
It is important that it is not only today that we discuss and pay attention to children but that we do this every day of the year .
There is a particular area which I would like to raise which concerns the upbringing and care of children .
Children have the right to good female and male role models in their every day life .
The sexual scandals that have taken place and from which we all would like to dissociate ourselves , must not prevent men from working with children .
These days , it is more often women that have privilege and responsibility .
We must , therefore , encourage men in Europe to work in childcare and child raising .
Both men and women must influence the physical , psychological , mental , moral and social development of our children .
We talk about children 's rights and I take it for granted that children are included when we demand respect for human rights , in our various trade discussions for example .
If this is not the case then , naturally we should write this in to the new treaty , a point which many of us have already raised and highlighted today .
The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child must form part of the democratic reference framework .
Mr President , I must start by congratulating Mr Casini .
I am in complete agreement with the views expressed in his report , especially when he says that the purpose of adoption must be to provide a family for a child who lacks one .
I am very glad to note that , in this evening 's debate , everyone has been able to agree with this principle , and I venture to hope that , in due course , this principle really will be followed through to become a reality in every Member State .
This gives rise to many different considerations relating to adoption by singles . Once again , our attention absolutely must be focused on the greater good of the child , taking into consideration such factors as the original culture of the adopted child and the culture of the adoptive family .
The good of the child , furthermore , can also be achieved through the method known as ' long-range ' adoption , which is on the increase in many European countries .
It offers a way of satisfying the most urgent needs of children , especially from the poorest countries naturally , enabling them to continue living in a social and cultural environment in which they originate .
Turning now to Mrs Zimmermann 's report , I should like to stress some of the amendments proposed by our Group , Union for Europe . First of all , there is an oral amendment which we shall be proposing tomorrow in connection with paragraph 4 , which calls on the Member States to include in the Treaty , when it is amended , a chapter on children , who represent a separate category , and at the same time urges the European Union to make children 's rights one of the basic criteria of its actions .
I should also like to draw your attention to an amendment inserted in paragraph 24 of the Zimmermann report , in which the Member States are called upon to promote close cooperation between the judicial authorities , police services , social services and non-governmental organizations , such cooperation including the establishment of appropriate databases for those found guilty of acts of paedophilia : the purpose here being to ensure that , without undue delay , all the Member States should be able to identify those guilty of such acts and so be in a position to practise some kind of supervision of these individuals .
Mrs Zimmermann also refers to the possibility of a free telephone line set up at European level .
I should point out that in Italy , as Mrs Zimmermann says , ' Telefono azzurro ' has been in operation for ten years - the tenth anniversary of its introduction will be celebrated during 1997 .
It has been an extremely successful experiment , and one which is certainly worth bringing to the attention of all Member States as offering the potential for a common telephone service for all the States of the Union .
Mr President , is it right that Mrs Todini spoke on behalf of the Cultural Affairs Committee , for that is what the screen said , and if that is true , then is it right that she used that time to defend the amendments tabled by her own group ?
And the second question I wish to put is : Mrs Todini has the reputation in this House of concluding that everyone agrees with her .
She has now concluded that everyone agrees with her that adoption can only take place in traditional families .
Well , either she was totally absent from the debate or she was not listening at all to it , but she cannot draw that conclusion because I heard various people here say that adoption should also be allowed in less traditional forms of society .
So Mrs Todini should not jump to such quick conclusions in this House .
Mrs van Dijk , Mrs Todini spoke as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Youth .
What the speaker said is a matter which the Committee on Youth will consider .
Mr President , the two reports currently under discussion are about children 's rights , their right to be children , to grow up and to develop in stable conditions and about their right to a family .
Many are the children currently growing up in insecure conditions who are being exploited .
I am referring to refugee children , street children and children who are sexually exploited or who are forced to do heavy work for long hours .
I am referring to all abandoned children who lack basic security .
Children should naturally be at the centre of all our political decisions in my view .
The children of today are the adults of tomorrow .
Basic security must be every child 's right .
The report by the honourable Member Mrs Zimmerman on the protection of minors rightly emphasises the importance of safeguarding children 's rights .
Poverty and unemployment contribute both to insecurity and an increased risk of children being mistreated .
We must fight this with all available means .
In its broadest sense it is a question of combatting poverty and of taking action to increase employment but it is also a question of paying attention to children 's rights in everyday politics .
Action is required to prevent exploitation of children and to protect and rehabilitate those children who have been affected . Effective measures are required to combat the exploitation of children in all its different forms .
Naturally , the EU has an important role to play in this respect .
This has been most clear recently in the fight against sexual exploitation of children .
Current and planned actions and initiatives within the European Union were listed in an aide-memoire presented by me on 27th September .
This document was used as the basis for a programme of action decided upon at the World Congress against the Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in Stockholm , in August this year .
Since then the Commission has presented various proposals : Firstly , a report on misuse of the Internet .
This includes a proposal for action to prevent the use of the Internet by paedophiles or for the spread of child pornography .
Secondly , a Green Paper on the protection of minors and individual integrity within the whole area of audiovisual media .
The fight against sexual exploitation of children and child pornography is a central issue in this .
Thirdly , a report on action to combat child sex tourism .
The Commission will also undertake an information campaign at EU level against child sex tourism .
Mr President , there has also been significant progress in the legal arena .
The Council of Ministers decided , at their meeting on 29 November , to make sexual exploitation of children in all its forms , trade in children and possession of pornography illegal .
Member States also agreed to apply the laws and regulations which forbid sexual exploitation of children extraterritorially .
This is very important in the fight against sex tourism .
The Council has also decided to extend the mandate of the European Drugs Unit so that it is not restricted to illegal immigration but also covers the traffic in people .
The EDU will also establish a register of experts in Member States to combat international crime .
This register will include experts in the fight against sexual exploitation of children .
The Council has also decided on a special programme of action in support of concrete cooperation projects to combat the traffic in people and sexual exploitation of children .
Support will be given to research projects , education and seminars through a programme which we have called Stop .
The report by the honourable Member Mrs Zimmerman also raises many other aspects .
I would especially like to draw attention to the exposed situation which many children from countries outside the European Union often find themselves in .
They do not have the same networks as their contemporaries in their new country and I share the report 's view that we can do a great deal at EU level .
The Centre for Racism and Xenophobia which has been established on the initiative of the Commission can play an important role in supporting real integration measures .
The Commission is also considering proposing measures to keep families together .
I would also like to underline that I fully share the rapporteur 's views on the importance of the role played by voluntary organisations when it comes to protecting the rights of children .
The Commission has supported the work of voluntary organisations for many years including their work in preventing and trying to put a stop to the mistreatment of children . I also think that cooperation with these organisations must be further increased .
Our joint efforts must continue .
For my part , I intend to take the initiative for further action to protect children 's rights next year particularly with respect to the sexual exploitation of children .
Mrs Zimmerman 's report will naturally form an important basis for this work .
So , Mr President , I turn to the report by Carlo Casini on international adoption .
We all agree that a child has a right to a family , which should , in the first instance , be their own biological family .
Only when this possibility has been exhausted should the child 's interests be met through adoption , preferably within the cultural background to which the child belongs .
Only when these possibilities have been exhausted should adoption into a different cultural background be considered .
We must always keep sight of the interests of the child in cases of adoption .
This is my firm opinion and I welcome the fact that the resolution by the honourable Member Mr Casini reflects exactly that view .
Solid international cooperation is required for intercountry adoption to work .
The 1993 Hague Convention provides a good framework for such cooperation .
It regulates contacts between the competent authorities in the country of origin and the country of adoption .
The Convention also covers the issue of recognition of the adoption decision but always keeps the rights and interests of the child at the centre .
I share Mr Casini 's view that ratification of the Convention is an important step towards improving security during adoption .
So far Eight Member States have signed the Convention but only one , Spain , has ratified it .
Quick approval of the Convention is of particular importance as many of countries of origin have already gone a long way towards introducing the Convention .
I hope that the Members in this House will help this Convention come into force in our Member States .
Another important task in ensuring that the adoption process is speedy is to ensure that it is not delayed by slow and complicated administrative procedures .
Let me highlight two examples : The Telecommunications Directive is now under discussion in the Council .
If this were already in place the relevant legal documents in an adoption process would be available more quickly between Member States .
Secondly we have the Grotius programme which can facilitate and improve cooperation between those working on adoption issues within the legal system .
I intend to propose that adoption become one of the main areas of this programme .
I would like to emphasis the seriousness of adoption which must be seen as permanent .
The adopted child must have the same security as a biological child .
There should never be any question of adopted parents choosing to reject the adopted child .
Adults may divorce , but a parent should never be able to divorce its children .
Mr President , in conclusion , let me emphasise that the protection of minors , like adoption , concerns basically the same issue : the child 's rights as an individual .
It should no longer be possible to ignore issues which have long been kept hidden .
I am referring to the sexual exploitation of children .
It should no longer be possible to ignore the fact that children 's rights are an integral part of human rights .
It should no longer be possible to maintain that it is of no consequence for tomorrow 's society how we treat our children .
We must act jointly to ensure that children receive a safe and secure upbringing .
Coordinated action at European level has an important role to play .
We should use every possible means available .
In the Commission , we will continue to keep sight of this in our work and in the work in which we are involved for the Intergovernmental Conference , in order to place the rights of children in the centre in a more effective way than perhaps we have done so far .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
Employees ' rights in transfers
The next item is the report by ( A4-0367 / 96 ) by Mr Kerr , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the safeguarding of employees ' rights in the event of transfers of undertakings , businesses or parts of businesses ( COM ( 94 ) 0300 - C4-0151 / 94-94 / 0203 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , it seems a long time since we first discussed this report in Parliament .
In fact , it was one of the first pieces of work that I was given as a new Member in September 1994 when the Commission produced the revised directive .
It is very appropriate that we are discussing it today in the discussions following the preparations for the Council meeting in Dublin .
That meeting will discuss the future of Europe , the IGC , and I would contend that the acquired rights directive is one of the key elements in the construction of social Europe , an important part of the dimension which I hope will be reaffirmed in those discussions in Dublin at the weekend .
This is a 1977 directive which attempted to assure employees in the European Union that the Union was concerned with protecting their rights at a time of economic change due to mergers , takeovers and privatization from the public to the private sector .
It was an attempt to assure them that their conditions and wages would be protected at the point of takeover .
The directive was passed in 1977 but it was disputed for many years in the courts , right up to the Court of Justice in terms of its judgments .
It became clear from many of those judgments that the directive applied to all Member States and to almost all situations concerning takeovers , mergers and transfers of undertakings .
This became a very important part of Social Europe .
It is no secret that a number of Member States , in particular the UK , were keen to change this position and to weaken the directive , and the Commission found itself under pressure to bring forward a revised directive .
In fact , it is worth recalling that the British Minister of Labour at the time , Michael Portillo , whom Mr Flynn will remember fondly , I am sure , wrote a letter to his colleague , the Foreign Minister , in which he said : ' This is a revised directive we are very keen on , but we must keep quiet about it , otherwise we will alarm our fellow Members of the European Union if we are seen to be too keen on it . '
So , the directive was brought forward in September 1994 by the Commission and came to Parliament for first discussion in October 1994 .
It is worth recalling that in those discussions we had in the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment and finally in Parliament itself - and I was looking at last January 's debate in preparation for tonight - the position was clearly indicated that the original revised directive , in particular Article 1 ( 1 ) , and the weakening in our judgment of the exclusion of contracting-out from the directive , was a major concern to the committee and to Parliament as a whole .
After the discussion in Parliament Commissioner Flynn went back to the Commission and obtained an undertaking that the Commission would accept the deletion of this and reversion to the original directive coverage in terms of the definitions of an undertaking .
We are very glad he did that and successfully obtained the agreement of the Commission .
Since then the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights have been discussing the rest of the directive , and that is the final result of the report before us tonight .
There are a number of amendments but I will not go through them in detail at this stage .
We have encountered some problems with the amendments on liquidation and bankruptcy .
We attempted in our discussions with the Commission - and we have had very good and close working relations with the Commission officials on this report - to clarify the law , to harmonize the law so that it had a common base line across Europe .
We have attempted to address this in a number of the amendments .
I know that at the last minute some members of the committee had some concerns about that , so we withdrew those amendments at the committee and brought them forward to present them to you tonight as a whole .
However , we are not totally inflexible on that and I am willing to have discussions on those amendments with Members before we vote on the report tomorrow .
There is an urgent need to clarify the situation , to make clear the distinctions between liquidation and bankruptcy when companies are in difficulty and this is what they attempt to do .
I want to mention the pensions amendment briefly .
I understand that the Commission will not be able to accept this , but it is important to flag up the issue of the transfer of pension rights .
It is an increasingly important issue in the European Union .
Many workers are seeing their occupational pensions build up .
Some have seen them threatened in the past through takeovers , mergers and transfers .
I know the Commission 's view is that this is a question of subsidiarity , but it is a nettle the Union will have to grasp .
There are ECU 750 billion of pension rights in the UK alone and many billions more in the rest of Europe which are subject to this .
We must deal with that as well .
Finally , I conclude by paying tribute to the people who worked with me on this report : Stephen Hughes , chairman of the Social Affairs Committee , who is in Singapore representing us at the WTO , Sue Waddington from the committee and from the Committee on Women 's Rights , Christine Oddy from the Legal Affairs Committee , the staff and secretariat of the Social Affairs Committee , and also the Commission .
I hope that after the rest of the debate tonight we can get a good response and vote it tomorrow .
Mr President , I would first like to congratulate our rapporteur Mr Kerr , both for his efforts to make the Commission understand the many negative consequences of some of its basic proposals for the rights of working people , and for his work as a whole .
I would like to dwell in particular on the rapporteur 's Amendments Nos 4 and 9 , and to join him in asking Parliament to approve them unanimously , and of course for their acceptance by the Council and the Commission as well .
Those amendments express absolutely the spirit of the opinion by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , which I myself prepared .
The legal device whereby the transfer of some function of an undertaking , business or part thereof does not in itself constitute a transfer and consequently the rights of those working there are not protected , is an exceptionally dangerous order that could lead to a series of figurative transfers whose only purpose would be to do away with working peoples ' acquired rights .
Furthermore , to allow the possibility , even for the judicial authority , of amending or dissolving work contracts and labour relations in the name of ensuring the survival of the business in the event of the employer 's insolvency , could also lead to a series of figurative bankruptcies for the same purpose .
The Directive must define very clearly indeed the meaning of a transfer and its protective orders should apply to any type of transfer that affects working peoples ' rights .
As for deviations in the event of insolvency , it must be made clear that work contracts cannot be terminated or amended without the employees ' agreement and that of their representatives .
At a time when employees are under special pressure owing to stability agreements , with convergence programmes and employment policies based on overturning their rights , they do not need measures such as those proposed , which supposedly exist in order to preserve and not to abolish the rights of working people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , can we still speak about safeguarding employees ' rights when existing jobs can to some extent still be protected but at the same time many jobs are at risk or disappearing entirely ?
Can we be content with the fact that the person who has a job is protected while the job opportunities of the unemployed continue to decline ?
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights I find myself in a difficult situation since I did not obtain majority support on some points I consider extremely important .
Let me turn briefly to two points .
The first is the question : what constitutes a transfer ?
The Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights voted to retain the definition proposed by the Commission , namely the transfer of an activity which is accompanied by the transfer of an economic entity which retains its identity .
Now the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment is urging that we maintain the 1977 definition .
I do not consider that acceptable .
In view of the casuistic rulings of the EU Court of Justice we need a clear and unambiguous definition which , in particular , ensures that the transfer of an activity does not in itself suspend the application of the directive - let me remind you here of the Christel Schmidt case .
If this situation were retained , it would have serious consequences for the economy and further increase the unemployment figures in the Member States .
I wish we could have kept to the more precise definition I proposed .
The second important point concerns insolvency procedures .
Insolvency proceedings are included , but a distinction is drawn between reconstruction and liquidation proceedings .
I regard this as disadvantageous to employees too .
Instead of deciding in favour of reconstruction in the event of an insolvency procedure not aimed at liquidation , under which the parts of the undertaking worth saving can carry on and a large-scale loss of jobs can be avoided , this is a reversion to a type of procedure more geared to liquidation , which , experience shows , leads to more job losses .
That is why I can only conclude by referring you again to the questions I put at the beginning .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Kerr on this report .
A tremendous amount of work has gone into it and when we discussed this matter in this House in January 1996 the main concern of Parliament was to impress upon the Commission the need to remove from the proposed revision of the directive the new definition of a transfer , that is Article 1 ( 1 ) , since that new definition would have excluded the contracting out of services from the scope of the directive .
Speaking in that debate as the rapporteur from the Committee on Women 's Rights I explained how that revision would adversely affect women workers in particular .
I cited research undertaken by the Equal Opportunities Commission in the United Kingdom which had examined the gender impact of the transfer of activities .
This research found that when the directive was not being applied to the public sector women workers were more likely than men to lose their jobs or have their pay cut and their pension rights reduced .
I am therefore very pleased that Commissioner Flynn has agreed to remove from the revised directive this new definition .
But the Women 's Rights Committee has proposed a further amendment which has gained the support of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment which , in the light of experience , we regard as very important .
This is Amendment No 15 which requires Member States to prohibit any discrimination when implementing the directive 's provisions .
I say ' in the light of experience ' advisedly because we are aware of the vulnerability of certain groups of workers when transfers occur .
These are the groups undertaking relatively low-status but essential work , such as cleaning , caretaking and caring occupations .
They tend to be mainly women .
I want to draw attention to one current example that has been given to me by the public service union , Unison .
In Northern Ireland currently , as a result of contracting out of national health services to a private company , over 500 staff , mainly women , went on strike for two weeks in October of this year because the new contractors have cut their pay , have introduced unequal pay between men and women doing the same work , have introduced differential rates of pay for workers in different parts of Northern Ireland and have brought in job-seekers to break the strike .
These matters may have to be settled through the courts because the contractors may be in breach of national and European legislation , but it illustrates the point that we need a directive to protect workers against discrimination and provide them with some security when transfers occur .
The debate on Mr Kerr 's report is suspended and will resume at 9.00 p.m.

Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-1226 / 96 ) .
Question No 1 by Arlene McCarthy ( H-0911 / 96 )
Subject : Local and Regional Territorial Pacts for Employment
Given that , despite the fact that the UK signed up to the employment strategy at the Essen , Madrid and Florence Summits , both the UK Prime Minister John Major and the Employment Minister Gillian Shephard , have written to President Santer and Commissioner Flynn respectively stating their reluctance to implement the Commission 's Local and Regional Territorial Pacts for Employment , what steps does the Council intend to take to persuade the UK of the value of signing up to these pilot action programmes and to persuade them not to opt out of the Local and Regional Territorial Pacts for Employment ?
Does this mean that , at the Dublin Summit , the UK will be the only Member State not to have pilot action programmes for the Local and Regional Territorial Pacts for Employment ?
Following the initiative of the Commission on local development and employment and the conclusions of the European Council at Cannes and Madrid , the Florence European Council invited all Member States to select , where possible , regions or cities as candidates for participating in pilot projects concerning local and territorial pacts on employment with a view to implementing such pacts in the course of 1997 .
As announced at the Florence European Council , the Irish presidency organized in Dublin on 11 and 12 November a conference on local employment initiatives .
The subject was also discussed at the ministerial conference which took place in Ballyconnel on 14 and 15 November .
This conference covered the impact on employment of the structural funds , territorial employment pacts and the Commission 's cohesion report .
There was broad agreement on the approach proposed by the Commission , which is to establish pacts at regional or local level on an experimental basis .
There was also agreement that territorial employment pacts should reflect the institutions and traditions of different Member States .
While there are many useful examples in the Member States , notably my own , of strategies to mobilize support for local economic development and employment creation , at this stage it is up to individual Member States to judge whether it is desirable to promote such projects .
Thank you Mr Mitchell , and thanks to your President-in-Office who invited me to the Ballyconnel seminar .
I was able to listen to the points made but , I am sorry , you did not answer my question .
I wanted to know whether we do have an opt-out and whether you have been told officially by the UK Government that it will not be submitting pilot action projects for that particular Council .
I wanted to ask you : does it not mean that local and regional partners should be able to submit their own projects to the Commission ?
I speak as someone representing a region which has spent some time because of those Council meetings preparing its own pact for employment .
It is now to be told that it cannot submit that .
Are you not disappointed that the initiative which you have proposed is not being taken forward by the UK Government ?
Firstly , I should point out that the Council has never been called upon to deal with the specific issue raised in the honourable Member 's question , and it is up to the Commission and not the Council to implement the policies , legislative texts and other decisions taken at Union level .
As it happens , I am the Minister responsible for local development in Ireland .
We have a very advanced approach to local development in Ireland which was based on 12 pilot schemes .
It is an area-based approach , very similar to the territorial pacts approach being adopted by the Council at present .
In fact , the Council is leaning heavily on the Irish experience in the way it is going about its business .
We have expanded from the 12 to 38 pilot schemes in every designated disadvantaged area in Ireland .
This is an integrated approach to deal with the underlying causes of long-term unemployment : supplemental education , supplemental training , environmental improvements , money is available for job creation in one-to-five-person enterprises and we estimate that something in the region of 8 , 000 jobs will be so created .
We also take account of living conditions .
The conditions in which people live affect their employment potential , particularly if they are living in overcrowded , dark , dank flat complexes managed by local authorities .
The management of those estates is part of the plan - five fingers in a glove .
I am so enthusiastic about this that I really believe that this is something which should be available in every Member State and , not only that , it has application in the 11 applicant states .
So I would like to see a centre of excellence , and certainly I would like to see the experience we have in Ireland shared with other Member States .
I am disappointed that not more Member States have yet drawn on local development initiatives , because they have been mentioned at every European Council since and including Essen .
It is not for me to lecture other Member States on how they should go about their business but there is an OECD report on local development in Ireland and I would commend it to any Member State to read .
It is a bit like the Credit Union movement - I do not know whether there is something similar in all Member States .
In the beginning there may have been people who tried to dismiss this as a sort of organized money-lending and there are people who dismiss local development as just one in a series of more schemes .
It is no such thing .
This is an integrated approach which has targeted areas of greatest need , is tailored to the needs of the area and , in my view , has an application in all the disadvantaged areas - rural and urban - throughout the Union .
I commend the OECD report on local development in Ireland as a study which could benefit all Member States .
I thank the Minister for his comments , but I wish to come back to a couple of points that Mrs McCarthy raised .
Does he believe that the UK will be the only government at the Dublin Summit that will not be submitting local and territorial pacts for employment for these pilot projects ?
If that is the case , would the Minister like to comment on whether he would be in a position to try to persuade the British Government to change its mind and actually get involved in 1997 ?
I can tell him that , like Mrs McCarthy , there are many broad-based bids that could be submitted from my region which would qualify under these local and territorial pacts , particularly one that has been drawn up by one of the local authorities in my area , Sandwell Council .
It is such an excellent scheme it could qualify immediately and start the processing going .
I just wonder whether he would like to give me a couple of comments on my questions and a general observation on the preparedness of the UK .
It is not for the Council to dictate to Member States what they do but I am so enthusiastic about the whole area of local development and territorial pacts that I personally would be disposed to becoming a persuader in this whole area .
Whatever we can do to treat the most deprived communities and the people living in the most deprived communities - whether they are rural or urban - within the Union we should do and we can , to the benefit of the Union and the citizens draw on each other 's experience .
I do not know whether the UK will be the only Member State .
And some Member States which may not be in a position at Dublin may well decide at a future date to submit proposals .
But , certainly , I have raised this matter with individual ministers in the UK .
We invited a minister from the British Government to the conference in Dublin and , to the best of my recollection , he was represented at the conference .
I appreciate that you do not want to lecture another Member State , but it may be news to you that according to the European Commission there are going to be at least 60 proposals for territorial employment pacts from at least 12 Member States next week in Dublin .
They have received a letter from Mrs Gillian Shephard , the UK Minister for Education , that does say that Britain will not be implementing these proposals because they will simply mirror existing employment partnerships in the UK .
Now I take it from your enthusiastic comments that you do not agree with her on that .
Can I ask you , as the Commission have already confirmed to me : if the British Government changes its mind at a later date , or indeed if the British Government itself changes , will Britain then be able to put forward schemes under the territorial employment pacts at a later date ?
Would you from the Council welcome that ?
My understanding is that if the British Government did change their minds at a later stage , they could hope to participate in the territorial pacts as other Member States have done .
Speaking personally , yes , I share the disappointment because I think that there is great potential for local development in all Member States .
Although there are similar programmes in Member States , the whole partnership approach which has been stressed in the Santer package - which I believe strongly draws on the Irish experience - is unique in the sense that it empowers communities and , crucially , requires communities to take responsibility .
It is a responsibilitybreeding and enterprise-breeding approach to dealing with real problems in the community by empowering the community to tackle these problems themselves .
I really do think this new approach should commend itself to all Member States .
As the author is not present Question No 2 lapses .
Question No 3 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0921 / 96 )
Subject : The situation in the Northern Caucasus
What is the Council 's assessment of the current political situation in Chechnya , Ingushetia and Dagestan , and what plans are there for humanitarian aid for 1997 ?
The Council believes that considerable progress has been achieved towards a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Chechnya .
On 25 November the General Affairs Council welcomed the agreements reached on 23 November between Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin and the leader of the interim Chechen Government Maskhadov .
The decision by President Yeltsin , again on 23 November , to withdraw all Russian troops from Chechnya is also significant .
The Council has also noted the intention to hold presidential and parliamentary elections in January next year .
At the same time the Council recognizes that a great deal of work remains to be done and it hopes that the commitments made will continue to be respected by both sides .
Throughout this conflict the Council has stressed its firm belief that political negotiation constitutes the only means of reaching a lasting political settlement in Chechnya .
The Council is convinced that the OSCE assistance group in Grozny can make a valuable contribution to maintaining the dialogue established between the parties , promoting full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and ensuring access for international humanitarian aid .
The support of both sides for the role of the OSCE is welcome .
The Council has not discussed the situation in Ingushetnia or Dagestan .
The Council would , nonetheless , be concerned that the stability of the region should not be affected by the situation in Chechnya .
ECHO , the European Community humanitarian office , has allocated over ECU 7.4m during 1996 to international aid agencies and NGOS in Chechnya and the Northern Caucasus .
In total over ECU 33.7m has been disbursed to support humanitarian activities in the region since 1994 .
At the third meeting of the humanitarian aid committee on 31 October 1996 , Member States approved a ECU 2.2m package which represents the last phase of ECHO 's global plan for 1996 .
The latest package of assistance will be disbursed to the International Committee of the Red Cross and NGOs to provide food , water , sanitation and medical supplies .
The global plan will cover a four-month period until the end of February 1997 .
Thank you for that very precise reply . I have two brief supplementaries .
First , will the Council arrange for observers to be at the elections in Chechnya on 25 January ?
Secondly , how does the Council evaluate the situation in neighbouring Georgia where serious violations of human rights are on the increase again ?
In relation to Georgia I do not believe the Council has considered the situation there in the recent past but I will discuss the matter with my colleagues and will communicate with the honourable Member .
In relation to the observers , the European Union normally undertakes observations of elections following an invitation to do so .
No invitation to observe the Chechen elections has been received so far .
If such an invitation is received , it will receive careful and favourable consideration .
Question No 4 by Anne McIntosh ( H-0925 / 96 )
Subject : Abolition of duty-free
Bearing in mind that the Council is pledged to abolish duty-free in the long term , has any work been done to examine the impact of such a move on those employed in the transport sector , in particular at airports and seaports ?
Would the President-in-Office not agree that jobs will be jeopardized in the travel industry on the abolition of duty-free .
What counter-measures does the Council intend to propose to offset the negative impact on employment ?
When it adopted the directive abolishing fiscal frontiers as from 1 January 1993 , the Council decided to end duty-free sales to intra-Community travellers .
It felt that in an internal market without fiscal frontiers , there was no longer any reason for duty-free sales for persons travelling within such an area without frontiers .
However , I would draw the honourable Member 's attention to the fact that travellers who leave Community territory are still entitled to duty-free sales .
The Council was aware of the economic difficulties and social repercussions which might have arisen in the sectors concerned when duty-free sales were abolished for intra-Community travellers .
For that reason , it authorized the continuation of such sales for a transitional period ending on 30 June 1999 .
At the meeting of the Ecofin Council on 11 December 1996 the presidency suggested that a study of the economic and social impact of the ending of EU duty-free should be carried out by the Commission but some Member States did not support this suggestion .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I understand the problems in proceeding with this study .
However , following on from my question in which I asked about counter-measures which the Council intends to propose if there is a negative impact on employment , clearly we need to have a study to assess that point .
Would the President-in-Office not agree that his country and mine , being islands , are going to incur a higher cost which will no longer be subsidized through duty-free sales ?
In particular , since it will no longer subsidized after 1999 , the cost of travelling by coach or car will go up , as it can no longer be subsidized by duty-free sales
Could he also assess the effect on tourism in the southern European states if it means that rather than go to Spain , Portugal , Italy and Greece , British and Irish tourists will now visit North Africa , Turkey or any other countries outside the Union .
Would he not also accept that the removal of duty-free sales will make travel more expensive , thereby infringing the spirit of the Treaty which calls for an ever-closer union of the peoples of Europe ?
This particular question has relevance for Member States which are islands .
One figure which I read recently indicates that throughout the Union something like 140 , 000 jobs are related directly or indirectly , in whole or in part , to these duty-free sales .
Another implication for island states is that the cost of air flights could increase .
Many airlines , for example , benefit from duty-free sales and are therefore able to operate at lower costs .
So , it is of direct concern to a number of Member States , not least my own .
I would like to see a study carried out before any decisions are made and I should like that study to be carried out impartially and as soon as possible .
Unfortunately when the presidency proposed this very recently , there was not sufficient support for it , but we will go on trying to get support because I believe at least a study should be carried out before any conclusive decisions are made .
There are Member States which believe that because we have an internal market duty-free should end , but in all the actions we take we have to take account of the implications of those actions .
I should like to see a study done so that we have facts and figures before us when we arrive at a decision .
As you are probably aware I did lobby your government colleagues , Minister Quinn and Minister Michael Lowry , in June of this year , urging that the Irish presidency should take this up as one of their issues .
I very much welcome the initiative that Minister Quinn took , although not with successful results .
You are correct in saying estimates are that there would be 140 , 000 job losses directly and indirectly , a loss of some £ 4 bn in turnover .
And of course the other figure is an increase in landing charges and air fares , which will have a negative impact on tourism and a very negative impact on the viability of regional airports .
I would like to know , in the time that you have left , would the Council be prepared to look at ways in which this particular deadline could be avoided and examine possible alternative policies to compensate for any negative impact in the regional area and the tourism area .
But really it is contradictory for the Council on the one hand to be talking about initiatives to create employment and then to go ahead with a policy which will create unemployment to the tune of 140 , 000 job losses .
I am aware that the honourable Member John Cushnahan has raised this matter with the Ministers he refers to and , because of pressures from myself and other MEPs , including other Irish MEPs , this matter has been raised at Ecofin by the Irish Minister for Finance as the President-in-Office .
I certainly would like to see a study carried out , and we will go on , in any way we can , pressing for that study to be carried out and seeking the necessary agreement in the Council of Ministers to have the study carried out .
I think we have to be practical in our approach to dealing with the business of the Union and we must take into account the practical implications of such a study .
Later in Question Time I will be answering questions in relation to alcohol in other Member States where there has been an extension of the derogation and the possibility of discussions with one Member State which have particular difficulties .
In all of these decision-making procedures we should take into account the practical implications of the decisions we are making and in order to do that a study should be done and we will go on pressing to try to have that study done .
I welcome his emphasis on having a study , but to get this study requires the agreement of Council , and the Minister referred to the fact that this was raised , but unsuccessfully , by the Irish presidency some weeks ago .
May I ask the Minister to confirm whether or not it is correct that only two Member States indicated a positive response to the initiative ?
If that is so at least it sets out for us the extent of the political battle that would need to be fought to secure what I would regard as a minimal concession to hold this study , which itself is a prerequisite to the real issue of fighting for some retention of this particular possibility of duty-free sales .
I do not have in my brief the number of Member States which did or did not support this initiative .
There was not a majority in support of the proposal at that particular time .
My understanding is that we would need at least a qualified majority vote in Ecofin to review and carry out the report along the lines I have suggested and that did not appear when it was put by the President-in-Office .
However , we will go on trying to achieve the necessary consensus on this because it is a matter of concern to a number of Member States .
I think the very least we could do is have a study carried out so that we would base our decision on facts as they affect the citizen of the Union .
Question No 5 has been withdrawn by the author .
Question No 6 by Otto von Habsburg ( H-0933 / 96 )
Subject : Freedom of movement between the European Union and associated States
It is hard to understand - particularly in the light of relations between the Baltic states and the European Union - the continued existence of a visa requirement which hampers the economic and political development of those countries .
Does the Council agree that it is high time that visa requirements were abolished for travel between the countries of the EU and the states associated with it , thereby conferring freedom of movement on the citizens of such states ?
Does the Council have any plans on the subject , and is it prepared to take decisive action to this end ?
When can we expect a clear decision on this matter ?
In reply to the honourable Member 's question I would point out that the Council adopted a regulation on 25 September 1995 determining the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of the Member States .
None of the Baltic States appears on the common list annexed to that regulation .
This does not mean that nationals of those countries do not need visas to enter certain Member States .
Under Article 2 ( 1 ) of the Regulation , Member States shall determine the visa requirements for nationals of third countries not on the common list .
It is on that basis that for their own reasons , which are not subject to Council control , some Member States still require nationals of the Baltic countries to obtain visas when entering that state .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , are you not of the opinion that this attitude of certain states is quite contrary to the spirit of our Union and especially to the spirit of association agreements which we have concluded with these Baltic States , which are now at the stage of preparing to become Members of our Union ?
Is it not therefore the task of the Council to do everything to ensure that the Baltic States are soon included in the list of those countries whose citizens can enter other countries of the European Union without a visa , which would be an action quite consistent with the European evolution we are trying to obtain ?
I have already mentioned that under the Council regulations referred to , the Member States have the facility , if they judge it necessary , to require visas from citizens of the Baltic States to enter their territory .
The presidency hopes , for its part , that citizens of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania will be able to travel freely throughout the European Union 's territory and that will happen sooner rather than later .
Speaking personally , I would accept that the spirit of the associate arrangements we have with these states should permit such travel , and individual Member States already do so .
Question No 7 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0934 / 96 )
Subject : Eurodac register
The Council 's written answer to my question at the October part-session concerning Eurodac ( H-0815 / 96 ) is very evasive about the content of the register .
I consider it reasonable to expect the Council to have a specific opinion on its own proposal for a convention .
I should therefore like to know whether any amendments have been made to the proposal for a convention which will affect the age limit for persons registered or which will ensure that the data on the register are deleted when the registered person has obtained a residence permit in a Member State .
Thank you for the answer from the Council .
I would like to state that there is relevant material available for discussion of these issues ; I have it here in my hand .
It is the draft for the text of the Eurodac-Convention .
There is a proposal for an age limit , 14 years old , at which refugee children may be fingerprinted .
From what I can understand of this text , there is also a proposal that information on refugees shall not automatically be removed once they receive a residence permit .
It would seem reasonable that this information be removed once the refugee can no longer be suspected of seeking entry into the Union again .
I think this is an example of how undemocratic these discussions on Conventions are ; initially it is to early to discuss the issue and then it is too late as the material is already fully finalised and can no longer be changed .
There is no openness , no transparency in the proposals which do exist and there is no opportunity for national Parliaments to discuss these issues before they are finalised .
My question then is this : Is it the intention to put forward a proposal which means that information on refugees will be removed once the refugee has received a residence permit ?
I think there is much to commend the spirit of the question asked by the honourable Member .
I do not personally see why , if somebody is given the right of residence , this information should remain on Eurodac without time limit ; perhaps for some time thereafter , but that time should be limited .
As I have already indicated , no conclusions have been reached on the question of the minimum age at which asylum applicants should be fingerprinted .
It is difficult to foresee when proceedings within the Council 's specialized bodies will result in a text for approval by all delegations .
The question is being examined by a working party of the Council .
This examination is of course taking place in the context of the current practice on fingerprinting of asylum applicants in Member States .
This practice varies from a minimum age of 12 years in some states to an 18-years minimum in others .
I can say that the age of 14 years coincides with the practice in most countries .
But I would emphasize at this stage that it is no more than that .
It is the general practice in most countries and no age limit has been set .
I take the general thrust of the Member 's question , with which I have considerable sympathy .
It seems to be difficult to get a concrete answer .
I can understand this as not everything is yet decided .
But this is not the first time the question has been asked .
I would like to put another question on the same topic : Who is responsible for information in this register which later proves to be incorrect or which has not been put there as information relevant to investigation of a crime or other similar circumstances ?
Who will be responsible for this register and who will accept responsibility for any incorrect information appearing in it which can affect individuals ?
As I have pointed out in my reply to the question , the Council has not entered into detailed discussion of the draft convention , so that sort of detail has not yet been considered by the Council .
As I have already indicated , no conclusions have been reached on the question of the minimum age at which asylum applicants should be fingerprinted and it is difficult to foresee when proceedings within the Council 's specialized bodies will result in a text approved by all delegations .
So most of these questions are very much in their embryonic stages and have not reached the stage where the Council has considered them .
But the views and concerns expressed here by Members are ones which I can assure Members will be raised at the Council at any opportunity we get as a Member State to raise them .
They are questions , not just of concern to Members of the House here , but which will be of concern to members of the Council of Ministers as well .
I would be anxious to ensure that any Eurodac register would be fair , reasonable and compassionate in its application .
Question No 8 by Gerard Collins ( H-0937 / 96 )
Subject : Qualifying criteria for structural funds
Has the Council carried out any investigations into the case for expanding the scope of the qualifying criteria for Objective 1 status for the purposes of structural fund aid to include the unemployment rate and , if not , will the Council now undertake to do so ?
In adopting the regulations on the structural funds in July 1993 the Council determined the criteria that would be used to determine which regions would qualify for Objective 1 status , the most underdeveloped regions in the Union .
These regulations are in place until 31 December 1999 .
Furthermore , the Council confided the management of the funds to the Commission and , in consequence of this , does not intervene in this area .
It would at this stage be premature to speculate on the details of the rules that will govern the application of the structural funds after 1999 .
The Council will in good time re-examine the regulation on a proposal from the Commission before the current set of regulations expires .
While this is not directly related to the honourable Member 's question , he will recall that the Commission in its communication to the other institutions of the Union , including Parliament , of 20 March 1996 , on structural funds and employment , indicated its intention , in full compliance with the existing regulations governing the application of the structural funds , to take into account the employment creation aspects of structural policies under all the objectives .
I thank the President-in-Office for the informative reply he has given .
I wonder if he would now say - having regard to the fact that we have already had public statements from Commissioner Wulf-Mathies and from President Santer with regard to the need to prioritize unemployment and efforts to get rid of unemployment and in particular long-term unemployment within the Member States - that the Council at this stage should perhaps ask the President of the Commission to come forward with proposals to start drawing up the guidelines that will be necessary after 1999 .
We have a very serious unemployment problem .
We have failed , even where the funds have been wisely , properly and correctly spent , to deal with this cancerous problem in our Community , and now is the time to start making new guidelines that will help us to get rid of it .
I support the objective underlying the question put by the honourable Member .
But , as I have just indicated to the House , the rules currently governing the structural funds will expire at the end of 1999 .
There is therefore still more than three years to go before a new set of rules will be required .
It would be premature at this stage to concern ourselves with the nuts and bolts of the rules which are to govern the structural funds into the next millennium .
The Council has agreed to revise the rules in question before 31 December 1999 on the basis of a Commission proposal which , I am sure , will be made well in advance of that date .
The issue which the honourable Member raises in his question will no doubt be of interest when the time comes to discuss the new structure of the funds .
I understand that Mr Collins has done a report on structural funds which will be published shortly and which I will certainly read with great interest .
One of the concerns I would have is that I would want to reach the objective which the honourable Member raises , of highlighting in the areas of greatest need the combatting of unemployment by the maximum use of structural funds .
But by making unemployment on its own a criterion , it may well open up other areas for funding which may not achieve the objective which the Member would necessarily want to achieve in certain regions .
I welcome the President-in-Office 's statement on that because , as the Socialist Group 's regional spokesperson , I think we must not go down the road of only identifying our target in unemployment .
I hope that we will be able to take into account GDP , for example , because a low unemployment rate is not an indicator of the wealth of a region .
In fact , in the UK we have the highest employment-creation rate but we also have the highest poverty rate in the EU .
I would like to think that low unemployment , therefore , does not mean that you are ruled out of being eligible for structural funds .
I should like to say to the President-in-Office that we would like to know a little bit about the timetable for putting those regulations in place and when we would look at those criteria from the Council and the Commission .
It may be three years but three years is a short amount of time .
I do not have a detailed timetable in front of me but I will communicate with the Member in writing .
In relation to the other question which she raises in relation to GNP per capita rather than GDP per capita , this is not something on which the Council has taken a view , for reasons that are obvious .
But the regulation for the post1999 period will be debated in Council in due course on the basis of a proposal from the Commission .
However , as an Irish Minister , I would start from the premise that GDP measures output , not incomes .
GNP , because it allows for profit , repatriation and also for external debt interest payments , is a better measure of the income which is available within a country or region .
In the case of Ireland , for example , GNP is a better measure of the income actually available in the country .
The gap between GDP and GNP is higher in Ireland than in other Member States of the European Union .
In particular , Ireland has a sizeable net outflow of factor payments so the GDP measure therefore overstates the country 's relative income in our case .
So these are relative problems which need to be taken into account .
Question No 9 by Pat Gallagher ( H-0938 / 96 )
Subject : Objective 1 Regions
In view of the risk that some countries which formerly qualified for Objective 1 status will no longer qualify for maximum rate structural fund grants after 1999 , does the Council consider that it is necessary to sub-divide those countries into regions for the purposes of ensuring that those regions which still satisfy the qualifying criteria can continue to apply for structural fund aid at the higher level rates available after 1999 ?
As I indicated in my reply to a previous question by Mr Collins , the current regulations governing the application of the structural funds which apply to all regions , including Objective I regions , will apply until 31 December 1999 .
The Council will , in good time , re-examine the regulations on a proposal from the Commission before the current set of regulations expire .
It would be premature at this stage to speculate on the details of the rules that will govern the structural funds after 1999 .
The proposition put forward in the honourable Member 's question is one that will no doubt be addressed as soon as the debate on the new structure of the funds intensifies in the run-up to 1999 .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply but would he not agree with me that there are regions within the Union , and particularly in Ireland such as my own constituency of Connaught-Ulster , the north and the northwest of Ireland , that are lagging behind the rest of Europe in terms of economic growth and output whether he measures it in GDP or in GNP terms ?
Would he accept that they have not benefited to the same extent from structural funds as have other areas of the Union and , indeed , other areas of Ireland ; that they cannot benefit to the same extent as far as infrastructure is concerned , and therefore that if they do not have the infrastructure they are not conducive to investment - which results in less economic growth in output which in turn results in fewer jobs and more unemployment ?
While he has stated that it will be the end of December 1999 before the criteria which are in place at the moment are changed , I agree with colleagues who believe that three years is a very short period in European terms .
Would the Council consider having a comprehensive study carried out with a view to establishing the GDP , the GNP of certain regions within the present Objective I regions and if necessary , draw from the precedent in the north of Scotland , which is very similar to my own area of the west and northwest of Ireland and , indeed , the south of Italy ?
I accept that there are regions within Objective I regions and sub-regions within those regions that have not done as well as others .
Indeed part of my own constituency in Dublin which some might think is a favoured region is one of those .
In some parts there are very high levels of unemployment , maybe as high as 75 % .
I recall , and am relying on my recollection here , launching a document in the border counties which shows that the share-out of the border counties ' regional funds in the foreseeable future , the per capita share-out in particular , will be much higher than any other region in the current spend , taking into account the various different funds including the Delors package .
But that is not to detract from the general point which the honourable Member has made .
Perhaps a study of the kind he suggests would be a very useful one .
I suspect that the Department of Finance in my own country will have some data in relation to that .
The Irish Government is monitoring , and will continue to monitor , all aspects of Ireland 's position in relation to eligibility for structural funds especially as a consequence of an increase in Ireland 's GDP per capita as a percentage of the European Union average .
The improvement in Ireland 's position is welcome and is a tribute to the successful implementation of our stabilization policies over a number of governments and to the productive use which has been made of the EU structural funds , which have has enabled us to make our economy grow .
But it is too early to say precisely where we go beyond 1999 .
Obviously I want all of Ireland to qualify .
I hope that the criteria chosen will allow for this , given the peripheral position that Ireland is in .
Question No 10 by Brian Crowley ( H-0939 / 96 )
Subject : Secrecy in the Council of Ministers
In view of the presidency 's priority objective ' to implement actively the procedures agreed to make the decision-making of the Union transparent to the citizen ' , will the Council now undertake to make all compromise proposals from the presidency , on legislative texts under discussion in the Council , available to Members of the European Parliament , interested parties and the general public ?
As Presidency-in-Office of the Council , we are anxious that existing measures regarding transparency are respected .
In particular , transparency has been encouraged through the systematic organization of press briefings by the presidency in conjunction with the Secretariat-General of the Council in advance of Council meetings .
These briefings provide an important opportunity to inform the public of relevant points regarding texts , including aspects of compromise texts brought forward by the presidency when appropriate .
In addition , ten open debates took place in Council meetings during Ireland 's presidency .
Arising from the implementation of the code of conduct of 2 October 1995 which provides for public access to the Minutes and statements in the Minutes of the Council acting as legislator , and the Council decision of 20 December 1993 regarding public access to Council documents , the presidency will continue to ensure that all applications for documents are given full consideration .
The Council is at present reviewing the implementation of the code of conduct with the aim of ensuring the maximum effectiveness of the system in the future .
In addition , the Intergovernmental Conference is discussing the question of transparency .
However , under existing rules governing access to documents , the Council cannot make all compromise proposals on legislative texts under discussion in the Council available to the European Parliament or third parties .
Finally , regarding contacts between the Council and Parliament , the honourable Member will be aware of the number of appearances made by representatives of the Council before committees of Parliament - around 40 to date - as well as the regular attendance of the presidency at part-sessions of Parliament .
These occasions provide both sides with an opportunity for constructive debate on issues of major importance as well as ensuring that they are kept up-to-date with each other 's views on a wide range of topics .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his response .
Before I get onto my supplementary , since this is his last occasion in the Chamber in his present office I would like to thank and congratulate him on the very informative way in which he has dealt with this Parliament and , in particular , his willingness to engage in debate and discussion with Members here .
However , be that as it may , your response to my particular question leaves an awful lot to be desired because you did , at the outset , list the want-to-bes - what you want to see happening and what you think is the emphasis for what will happen in the future .
But then you put a proviso in amongst it , saying that under existing rules the Council cannot make available legislative texts or compromise documents .
I just want to point to one specific example .
Recently we had a case whereby there was a compromise proposal from the Irish Council president of the telecommunications ministries on deregulation and liberalization of the postal services .
That was rejected by France and Germany .
It was made available to the public by the Swedish Minister and yet I , as an Irish MEP , who drafted two reports for Parliament on this question , could not get a copy of that document .
Could we have some guarantee that there would be more cooperation and more openness between Parliament and the Council as legislative-making bodies to overcome those problems ?
I thank the honourable Member for his very generous compliment which I greatly appreciate .
The Council is reviewing the implementation of the code of conduct and the Intergovernmental Conference is discussing the whole question of transparency .
So perhaps this is an area in which we can make progress in the course of these two reviews .
If one Member State made available documentation , it did so on its own authority and outside of the code of conduct .
The existing rules governing access to documents can only be amended , as I understand it , by unanimity in Council .
It is not for the presidency or one Member State to release compromise proposals on its own authority .
They are the existing arrangements and can only be changed , I understand , by unanimity .
Compromise proposals are essentially negotiating positions of Member States .
There is no provision at present for these to be made available .
It would require unanimous change to make them available .
However , we are reviewing the situation and the Intergovernmental Conference is looking at the question of transparency .
So I would not rule out some change in the future but it would require a unanimous decision of the Council to make that change .
There was of course some attempt to answer the question , but it did not succeed and that is why I have to put a supplementary question .
Mr Mitchell has admitted there is no transparency by saying that the code of conduct needs to be amended and that the IGC is discussing the issue .
If transparency existed , there would be no need either for amendment or for IGC discussions .
However , the sting in the tail was when he said that there are issues which should not be made public . In other words , for the first time , the Council is saying that it does not wish to legislate in a public and open way .
There will be matters which it keeps secret , in other words it is an apocryphal body .
Please answer us , therefore : at the IGC are you going to insist on full publicity ?
What right have you to hold back certain issues when they concern the life of Europe 's citizens ?
From where do you derive that right ?
First , I must take the honourable Member to task .
He said he did not get a reply to his question .
He may not have liked the reply he received but he got an honest , straightforward reply setting out the situation in reply to Mr Crowley 's question as it stands , with an indication that there are two reviews taking place .
I can do no more than that and , no , I will not give any undertaking on the part of the presidency .
As he clearly understands , this is a matter for unanimous decision by the Council of Ministers and it is for the Council to take such a decision .
Mr President , we are expecting a series of enlargements and I just want to ask whether the Council , that is to say the Irish Republic , would agree to accession to the European Union of a state that legislates in secret ?
If that question was asked in a court of law the reply would be that it is a leading question .
In my own country legislation is made by a bill being presented to Parliament often after there are secret document exchanges between civil servants and ministers .
So , it is not uncommon that in the preliminary stages where legislation is being considered , the documents are not made public .
However , the whole question is a sensitive issue which must be agreed to by all Member States .
An important step in the direction of greater transparency was the agreement of the new code of conduct on 2 October 1995 which provides for public access to the minutes and statements in the minutes of the Council acting as legislator .
This code is an addition to the measures which the Council had taken already to increase the transparency of its legislative proceedings .
I would recall for honourable Members that the European correspondent of the Guardian , Mr James Carvel , who will be known to Members , has a special interest in this area and , commenting on the agreement of this code of conduct , credited Ireland as being one of the Member States which had a relatively advanced position on the issue of transparency .
I would also mention the systematic publication of the results of votes taken by the Council acting as legislator and the decision of 20 December 1993 on public access to Council documents .
But clearly all is not yet satisfactorily achieved in the area of transparency .
If that were the case , we would not be reviewing the situation .
If that were the case , the Intergovernmental Conference would not be looking at the question .
I will certainly take into account the concerns raised by Members when we are trying further to advance the whole cause of transparency in the legislative process .
Question No 11 by Luciano Vecchi ( H-0943 / 96 )
Subject : Political initiatives for peace in Somalia
Five years after the fall of Siad Barre 's dictatorial regime , Somalia has not yet been able to establish a new political system that can build a future for the Somali people .
Abuses of power are still rife , in particular among certain political and military factions in various regions of the country .
Does the Council intend to promote , directly or through one or more governments of EU Member States , a political initiative to restore peace and reach a ' national agreement ' in Somalia ?
The European Union continues to be deeply concerned about the situation in Somalia .
Along with other members of the international community it is seeking to ensure that the necessary conditions exist for the factions in Somalia to reach peaceful agreement on the re-establishment of national government .
The Union is therefore strongly supporting the efforts of the United Nations and the Organization of African Unity to encourage the concerned parties to engage fully in resolving their differences through peaceful negotiation .
It considers a negotiated settlement to be the optimum means of resolving the current conflict in Somalia and of ensuring peace , reconciliation , security and a return to normal life for the Somali people .
In its approach the European Union is maintaining strict neutrality towards the various factions in the belief that Somalia will not be able to take its proper place in the international community until a government emerges that is broadly representative of all its factions and entities .
Notwithstanding the continued conflict in certain parts of Somalia , further positive progress has been made towards consolidating the peace process at the meeting of Somali leaders which was hosted by President Moi of Kenya in Nairobi on 9 to 15 October .
At that meeting the leaders of three major factions ( a ) pledged to continue dialogue in Somalia for a peace process and to preserve the unity , sovereignty and national integrity of the country ; ( b ) agreed to a cessation of hostilities including media propaganda with immediate effect ; ( c ) agreed to allow free movement in the capital Mogadishu and to remove road blocks ; ( d ) undertook to facilitate the delivery of aid to the people of Somalia ; ( e ) urged President Moi to continue his mediation and ( f ) called for international support .
The European Union welcomes the valuable contribution being made by President Moi as a further step towards consolidating the fragile peace process in Somalia .
The European Union is committed to giving its continued support to the peace process and the combined efforts of EU partners , the United Nations , the Organization of African Unity , President Moi , the United States and other members of the international community in support of a successful outcome .
The EU does not consider that the creation of a further channel of negotiation would assist at this time though the EU has a special envoy who is active in the region .
Along with its continued efforts in support of a lasting political solution to the current conflict , the European Union remains committed to contributing as the main international donor to the ongoing reconciliation and reconstruction process in Somalia .
The Union has contributed a total of ECU 60m to Somalia since 1993 and has further committed itself through its second rehabilitation programme for Somalia to funding of $ 60m over the next two years .
The European Union remains ready to support economic development and recovery in Somalia once peace and representative government are restored .
Mr President , thank you for that answer .
I must confess that , despite the major economic and financial effort that has gone into this operation with Somalia - an effort with which the Union has steadily pressed ahead in recent years , which we regard in a positive light and to which , incidentally , the European Parliament has made its contribution - I believe that a major problem still exists , a serious shortcoming with regard to the Union 's political initiative in its dealings with Somalia .
During the last few days , an important meeting has been held in Addis Ababa , attended by virtually all the most important factions , groups and parties in the Somali conflict . At that meeting , it would seem - from news we have received - that a first draft of a possible national agreement has been achieved .
I believe that , especially at this stage , as a further means of persuasion for the extreme factions , in particular those grouped around the son of the former General Aideed , to cooperate in the construction of a future territorial settlement for Somalia , it is of the utmost importance to show that the European Union is involved , is following the matter closely and has a political and cooperative proposal of its own for that country .
Unfortunately , I believe this is still not the case . I hope that the European Union and the Council of the European Union , directly or through one or more Member States , will be able to play a positive part .
The honourable Member raises a question which of course is of concern to the Council of Ministers and to the Member States .
We do not want to be in a situation where too many cooks spoil the broth but we have an envoy there .
We have contributed financially .
We are committed to contributing financially again and , if representative government is established there , we will again review the situation .
As I said in my earlier reply , the EU remains concerned at the failure of the different factions in Somalia to reach an agreement on peace and on the establishment of a national government .
The EU welcomes the progress made at the Nairobi summit and will continue to encourage and support the initiatives of the UN and the OAU .
The Union does not consider that the creation of a further channel of negotiation would assist at this time .
However , it will continue to keep the situation under review and we will help in any way we can to bring about the objective which the honourable Member seeks to achieve .
Question No 12 by Sören Wibe ( H-0944 / 96 )
Subject : Unanimity in the Council on matters relating to alcohol
Does the Council consider that matters involving alcohol , and in particular the import of alcohol into a Member State for personal consumption , should require unanimity ?
Is unanimity in the Council required to alter Sweden 's present rules for the import into Sweden of alcohol for personal consumption ?
First I would recall that the present Swedish legislation on the importation of spirits is a derogation from one of the principles of the internal market .
I did make reference to this in reply to an earlier question .
The Council has permitted this derogation and similar derogations for Denmark and Finland because , in the absence of sufficient harmonization of excise taxes on spirits , the abolition of controls at internal Community frontiers could adversely prejudice those Member States whose excise taxes for spirits are higher than the Community average .
In order to avoid too great a disruption of the regulations in force , it was necessary to limit the extent of the derogation to the minimum necessary .
The Council authorized transitional measures until 31 December 1996 , except in the event of review mechanism .
The Council decided that any postponement of that date would require unanimity .
I would remind Members in this context that the Commission very recently presented to the Council a proposal for the postponement of the derogation from 31 December 1996 to 30 June 2002 .
The reasoning behind this proposal was that the Nordic countries could experience budgetary and social difficulties if the existing derogation ended this year .
The Council could not agree to this .
At its meeting on 2 December last the Council came to a solution which would permit Sweden to maintain its derogation until 30 June 2000 , with a possibility for review of this date , and for Denmark and Finland to maintain their derogation until 31 December 2003 , with no possibility of a further review .
The Council would like to take a decision on this before the end of this year .
This is why Parliament was invited to give its opinion using the urgent procedure .
I thank the representative from the Council for their answer .
The background to this question is partly the great concern in Sweden on the social consequences of increased alcohol imports and partly that the referendum emphasised very strongly that unanimity would be required to amend the import regulations .
Now , I understand from the Council representative that it is precisely the opposite , that in fact unanimity is required for us to be able to get the exemption we desire .
I would still like to ask the Council whether they consider that Article 36 in the report applies . This article maintains that on issues concerning goods which can damage people 's health Member States have the right to introduce import restrictions .
It is proven without doubt that , after nicotine , alcohol is the greatest threat to people 's health .
Is it not the opinion of the Council , therefore , that Article 36 applies ?
I do not believe that paragraph 36 applies here .
I believe that these regulations in relation to the health implications of the sale of alcohol are primarily matters for Member States to deal with themselves .
I would point out that the Council decided that any postponement of the date would require unanimity , and in doing that they have given a further derogation to Sweden until 30 June 2000 , with a possibility for review of this date at a later stage .
The arrangement arrived at by compromise in the Council of Ministers is a very generous one from Sweden 's point of view .
Question No 13 by Jan Andersson ( H-0945 / 96 )
Subject : Rights of the disabled
The UN has adopted a number of standards for living conditions for the disabled in a number of social fields .
What is the Council 's strategy for having the UN standards implemented in every Member State of the Union ?
On 2 August 1996 the Commission presented a communication on the equality of opportunity for persons with a disability , together with a draft resolution of the Council and of the representatives of the governments of the Member States meeting within the Council on equality of opportunity for people with disabilities .
The Labour and Social Affairs Council and the representatives of the governments of the Member States meeting within the Council indicated their agreement to this resolution during their meeting of 2 December 1996 .
In this resolution they reaffirm , among other things , their commitment to the principles and values which underpin the United Nations ' standard rules for the equalization of opportunities for persons with disabilities .
The draft resolution will be formally adopted at a Council meeting before the end of 1996 .
I thank the Council for its answer .
This concerns the standard regulations adopted by the UN some years ago which affect all sectors of society including leisure , education and employment .
They have not been introduced to give disabled people any kind of advantage but to give these people equal living conditions wherever possible .
The fifteen Member States of the EU are among the richest countries in the world .
It should be obvious that EU countries can introduce the UN 's standard regulations in order to set an example to the rest of the world .
This is why I wonder if the Council has discussed a strategy to follow up whether EU Member States will in effect introduce the UN 's standard regulations .
In the resolution to be adopted by the Council and the representatives of governments meeting within the Council , Member States reaffirm their commitment to the 1993 UN General Assembly resolution on standard rules for the equalization of opportunities for persons with disabilities .
As the primary responsibility for action in this field rests with Member States , the resolution calls upon all Member States to adapt national policies where appropriate , taking into account inter alia the need for empowering people with disabilities , mainstreaming the disability perspective into all relevant sectors of policy formulation and removing barriers to full participation .
An important aspect of the draft resolution is to call on Member States to endeavour to involve representatives of people with disabilities in the implementation and follow-up of relevant Community policies and actions in their favour .
In addition , in relation to the Intergovernmental Conference , the general outline for a draft revision of the Treaties proposed by the presidency reflects broad support , though not at this stage unanimous support , for including a general non-discrimination provision in the Treaty .
The presidency text proposes a new Article 6a in the TEC which would provide a legislative base for the Council to adopt measures to prohibit discrimination on specified grounds , and among the categories covered in the suggested text is discrimination on the grounds of disability .
The presidency document also reflects proposals to amend the single market provisions of the EC Treaty to take special account of persons with a disability .
The document notes that such references could be made , for example , in Article 127 or Article 100a of the TEC .
It must be borne in mind in considering possible Treaty amendments that all Treaty amendments require the unanimous agreement of Member States , but the presidency certainly is disposed towards the arguments put by the honourable Member .
Question No 14 by Tommy Waidelich ( H-0946 / 96 )
Subject : Future sources of finance for trans-European networks
There are a serious problems with the funding of trans-European network projects .
Alternative methods of funding should be investigated immediately or the projects will be liable to considerable delay .
Various ways of supplementing the funding arrangements have been considered in the EU , for example the European Investment Fund has been seeking to adapt its loans to the needs of the TEN projects .
Although European Investment Fund operations are a step in the right direction , alternative forms of finance which promote ventures between the private and public sectors will probably be needed .
One way might be to issue ' Eurobonds ' , which the Council has however opposed .
What are the Council 's views on alternative forms of funding for the trans-European networks and why is it opposing the issue of Eurobonds ?
As the honourable Member is aware , the role of the Community is subsidiary in financing trans-European networks , as defined in Article 129c of the Treaty . According to this Article the Community is only entitled to support the financial efforts of Member States through feasibility studies , loan guarantees and interest-rate subsidies .
It should be recalled that EU funding of ECU 2.4 billion for such measures over the years 1995-1999 has been allocated .
The Council has not examined any formal proposal for issuing Community bonds or Eurobonds .
Given current efforts by Member States to control public borrowing , it is unlikely that a move in the opposite direction by the Union will find ready agreement .
As the honourable Member has himself pointed out , investment funding is available from the European Investment Bank , via the European Investment Fund .
There has already been substantial support for priority TENs projects from this source .
Thank you for the answer from the Council of Ministers .
It is true that this concerns an issue of subsidiarity but the current problem is that some Member States have such a poor economy that they are unable to finance the network .
The question is , therefore : can we in the EU help ?
We have those funds already allocated .
This is only a small proportion of the total amount but they could be an important stimulus to the projects .
I know that the issue has been discussed in the Council and that it is included as part of the work of the Commission .
Can the EU help in any other way ?
I think it would be worth trying to get private capital interested in investing in these public projects .
They cover all areas from transport to energy .
I would like to see a willingness on the part of the Council to try this approach in its future work .
It is possible that the fourteen high priority TEN projects will be realised but there is a risk that they will be delayed and that future projects will also be delayed .
Despite the work and the risks , I would like to see a willingness on the part of the Council to try different means of financing these projects , Eurobonds for example .
This is particularly important from the point of view of enlargement as we know that the applicant countries have great need to renew their infrastructure .
I am not an expert on financing of TENs , but my understanding is that borrowing along the lines that the Member suggests is nonetheless borrowing and would have an effect on the overall indebtedness of the Union or on Member States of the Union .
I should point out that the promoters of Community action to finance trans-European networks see it simply as supplementing the action of the Member States with subsidiarity being the watchword .
The Council has to balance the need for additional funding against the need for budgetary rigour , both at Community and at national level .
Additional budgetary funding will always help projects to go ahead faster .
However , substantial funds are already being provided and I am confident that significant progress will be made in implementing the projects .
Some projects already in the pipeline might be slightly delayed , but as priorities the Council believes they will go ahead .
Question No 15 by Konstantinos Hatzidakis ( H-0956 / 96 )
Subject : Violation of the basic human rights of the population trapped in the occupied part of Cyprus
According to recent reports , the Turkish authorities in the occupied part of Cyprus are continuing to obstruct communications between the population trapped there and the inhabitants of the free part of the Island and to deprive their children of the basic right to education .
Recent cases include the refusal of the Turkish authorities to allow Mr and Mrs Hatziyanni , who had crossed over the free part of Cyprus to baptise one of their eight children , to return to their village , so that their four young children now remain in the occupied territories without parental supervision , and their continuing refusal to allow the appointment of a replacement , following the retirement of one of the three Greek Cypriot teachers in the occupied territories .
In view of the above , can the Council say what actions it intends to take to solve these problems forthwith and , more generally , to ensure the protection of the human rights of the few hundred Greek Cypriots now left in the occupied territories ?
The Council has not addressed the specific case referred to in the honourable Member 's question .
However , the Council has made it clear in the past , and will continue to do so , that the democratic freedoms and fundamental human rights of both communities on the island must be respected .
It believes that all remaining restrictions on basic freedoms of Greek Cypriot and Maronite communities in the North of Cyprus should be lifted .
It further believes that there is an urgent need to intensify efforts to promote a comprehensive political settlement in Cyprus under the aegis of the United Nations and has called on both communities to engage constructively in this process .
The European Union is actively supporting the efforts of the UN Secretary-General 's special representative to this end .
I have arranged for enquiries to be made in the particular case referred to by the honourable Member and I will bring the outcome of these enquiries to the attention of the Council .
Mr President , perhaps the Minister , who comes from a country at the other end of Europe , was wondering why a Member of the European Parliament should be taking up our time with the subject of a family which the Turkish authorities are not permitting to return to the occupied part of Cyprus .
But the issue is much more than that .
It is a problem that affects a whole population group , and one which arises in various ways from time to time .
Minister , in 1974 the Greek Cypriots trapped in the occupied areas numbered 20 , 000 , and 22 years later only 400 are left . This , I think is due to our own inertia , that of European society , and more generally that of the United Nations .
There have been many words spoken , including your own statements today , which are reiterations and sound very fine in their wording , but do you not think that words must one day give way to deeds and that the commitments we undertake with our words should become a specific policy ?
Because the facts I reported in my question are entirely true and I got the impression that no specific action is being taken .
Can I first of all say that I am not so far away from Cyprus that I do not understand that you might be concerned about other people .
I might remind the House that the Irish presidency appointed an Irish Ambassador as EU special envoy to try to assist in resolving the problems which the honourable Member refers to .
Secondly , it is right of course for the Member to raise questions in this way and to put the Council of Ministers under pressure .
But , beyond declarations , one of the things we have to do as a Union is to equip ourselves to punch in a political way to the same weight as we do in an economic sense .
The reality is that the European Union has not given itself the facility with which to do that .
The whole common foreign and security policy area is under examination at the Intergovernmental Conference and I hope that it will allow for the Union to be more effective and to have the instruments available to it to act as a Union in trying to resolve problems of this kind .
Other organizations are also active in the area , like the UN , and they have not been successful to date .
It is a complicated and difficult problem .
I can assure the honourable Member that it is one which has concerned this presidency very much and indeed the envoy appointed by Ireland will remain in office under the Dutch presidency .
That has been confirmed already and we will go on trying to do everything we can to bring about a satisfactory solution to the problem .
In relation to the individual case mentioned , the reason I said that I would take up this case is that I did not have any information on it and it was mentioned in the question .
It would have been remiss of me to ignore a particular case which had been mentioned .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 16 and 17 lapse .
Question No 18 by Per Gahrton ( H-0967 / 96 )
Subject : Arms policy and the arms trade
Article 223 of the Treaty places policy on the arms industry and trade entirely within the remit of the Member States but , speaking before the Committee on Foreign Affairs in Strasbourg on 17 September , Commissioner Bangemann stated that it was only for political reasons that the Commission did not treat the arms trade like any other internal market matter .
He pointed out that the Court of Justice in its judgments had gone further than the Treaty and had in fact given the Union powers in respect of arms policy and arms trade .
Does the Council consider that EU law as it now stands entitles the institutions of the Union to act on arms policy and arms matters , and if so , in what respect , and to what extent and with what objectives ?
Or does the Council uphold a strict interpretation of Article 223 which implies that policy on arms does not fall within the sphere of the institutions of the EU ?
The provisions of Article 223 do not , as the honourable Member notes , constitute a reservation of competence in favour of Member States but a safeguard clause .
Article 223 , and in particular Article 223 , paragraph 1b , provides that the Treaty shall not preclude a Member State from taking such measures as it considers necessary for protection of the essential interests of its security which are connected with the production of or trade in arms , munitions and war materials .
In application of paragraph 2 of this article , the Council unanimously adopted , on 11 April 1958 , a list of products which may be covered by these provisions .
This list has not been amended since then .
In accordance with the third paragraph of Article 223 , the lists can be amended by the Council on the basis of unanimity on a proposal from the Commission .
The measures which Member States may take in accordance with the provisions of Article 223 shall not adversely affect the conditions of competition in the Common Market regarding products which are not intended for specifically military purposes - what are called dual-use goods .
There is European Union legislation in force for dual-use goods , comprising both Community and relevant common foreign and security policy provisions .
Questions in relation to armaments policy are already the subject of work and discussion by two Council Working Groups , POLARM ( the European Armaments Policy Working Group ) and COARM ( the Conventional Arms Exports Group ) .
Any actions taken by the Council in this area are without prejudice to the safeguard clause in Article 223 , which may be invoked by a Member State at any time .
I thank the representative from the Council for their answer .
It was very interesting .
I did write a letter to Commissioner Bangemann immediately after the speech that I refer to .
I wrote it in Swedish and I have still not received a reply .
I include this reference for information only , the interesting thing now , in the response from the Council , is that it can only be interpreted as meaning that the Council representative does not agree with Commissioner Bangemann 's speech to the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , when he said that he was able to treat the arms trade in exactly the same way as any other type of trade and he supported this by referring to certain judgements of the EEC Court of Justice .
If I understand the Council representative correctly nothing has changed recently which would allow us to depart from the conditions in Article 223 . This , therefore , should be conveyed , with some vigour , to Commissioner Bangemann .
I am sure under Commission question time the honourable Member will do just that , but can I say to my knowledge , and the advice I have received , the situation is as I have set out .
The provisions of Article 223 do not constitute a reservation of competences in favour of the Member States , but rather they are a safeguard clause for Member States , who may invoke them on security grounds .
He has correctly interpreted my statement on the matter .
Question No 19 by Robert Evans ( H-0973 / 96 )
Subject : Health and safety conditions for construction workers
What measures is the Council taking to ensure that Directive 92 / 57 / EEC and other health and safety legislation concerning construction sites are adhered to within the European Union ?
The Council attaches the utmost importance to the full and accurate transposition of Community legislation by each Member State and to the effective application of national legislation transposing Community legislation .
This position is clearly set out in the Council Resolution of 27 March 1995 on the transposition and application of Community social legislation .
I should also add that , in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty , it is the Commission 's duty to ensure that Community legislation is applied by Member States .
I thank the President-in-Office for that response .
I tabled this question because I am concerned at the case of a man from Hayes in north-west London in my constituency , Mr Stacey , who was killed on a German building site two years ago .
I went to Leipzig to see the building sites there and find out what had happened and it was evident to me that in that part of former East Germany this directive was not being enforced .
I am sure that there will be similar circumstances or situations in other parts of the European Union .
What I am really asking is : what serious measures is the Council taking to make certain that Member States enforce legislation and what action is it taking against any Member States who perhaps are not enforcing health and safety legislation as they should , so that this sort of unnecessary death can be avoided in the future ?
I am very sorry to learn of the tragic circumstances of the honourable Member 's constituent .
Certainly it is my view that the legislation , as set out , should apply to circumstances of that kind .
However , the Council does not have a responsibility in relation to the application of Community legislation : this is a matter for the Commission and the honourable Member might pursue it by way of a question to the Commission .
Question No 20 by Nuala Ahern ( H-0976 / 96 )
Subject : Prohibiting plutonium flights over territory of non-nuclear EU states
The air transport of plutonium or raw fuel containing plutonium between reprocessing plants and mixed oxide fuel ( MOX ) production plants and nuclear power plants which use MOX gives rise to nuclear transport flights over several Member States of the EU , some of which have renounced the nuclear option .
Does the Council believe that each Member State has the right to prohibit such flights over its territory ?
The Council would recall to the honourable Member that the transport of radioactive materials is governed at international level by regulations of the International Atomic Energy Agency , the IAEA .
These regulations aim at ensuring an appropriate safety level for the transport of all radioactive materials .
A revised transport regulation , which reinforces the provisions to be applied in this field , was adopted in September 1996 .
These regulations are integrated into the technical instructions of the International Civil Aviation Organization , the ICAO , which are binding for the contracting parties .
In the context of implementation of these instructions , non-discriminatory derogations are possible .
Moreover , the Council would stress that the provisions of Chapter 3 of the Euratom Treaty on health and safety and the directive laying down basic safety standards for the protection of the health of workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionizing radiation , which has reinforced health protection by laying down stricter dose limits , apply in all the territory of the European Union .
There is some confusion over the new IAEA guidelines , because the International Civil Aviation Organization 's own guidelines and requirements are not taken into consideration and that organization is very concerned .
I have tabled this question because the new guidelines of the IAEA appear to be designed specifically to accommodate the air transport of MOX fuel and this has not been defined as low-leakage or low-dispersal material , as the Commission itself has stated .
Until we can clarify this confusion and incorporate the International Civil Aviation Organization 's guidelines and requirements properly , would the Council not seek to ban the transport of this material over the territories of the Member States and require organizations , such as British Nuclear Fuels Ltd , to refrain from issuing assertions that it has been officially designated as low-dispersal material , because this is not helpful and , indeed , extremely misleading in this context ?
Will he clarify the position regarding individual Member States who are non-nuclear and who have overflights over their territories .
Can they incorporate a unilateral ban ?
The honourable Member will understand that I cannot give her a straightforward answer in relation to part of her question since the rules which apply to the transport of fissile materials are , as I have just pointed out , the concern of the International Civil Aviation Organization , a body not linked to the European Union and to which Member States accede on an individual basis .
I would also say to the honourable Member that if the question involved Community competence it would be for the Commission as guardian of the Treaties to ensure compliance with Community legislation .
However , it is my understanding that a Member State can derogate from ICAO instructions which means that they can refuse the overflight without permission of their aviation authority .
I understand that one Member State of the Union has modified its position along those lines .
So my understanding is that such a derogation is possible .
There are minimum standards but it is possible for a Member State to go beyond those standards individually .
That is a matter for Member States to apply themselves .
As the author is not present , Question No 21 lapses .
Question No 22 by Hadar Cars ( H-0983 / 96 / rev. 1 )

Subject : Union support for former Yugoslavia
In its opinion to the Council adopted on 17 July on Union support for the former Yugoslavia , the European Parliament called for the procurement under this project also to be open to those countries in Central and Eastern Europe which had applied for membership of the Union .
The Council went some way towards meeting Parliament 's wishes and allowed the countries of Central and Eastern Europe to submit some tenders under the aid programme .
What has been achieved since then ?
How much of the sums earmarked has been paid out ?
When will the reconstruction budget have been fully allocated ?
How far have the PHARE countries been allowed to submit tenders , and how many of the tenders received , how many that were successful , and to what value , came from those countries ?
The Council made an important step forward concerning reconstruction aid to the former Yugoslavia by adopting Regulation No 1628 / 96 on 25 July 1996 which sets up a new framework for financing reconstruction activities in these countries beyond what was possible through the existing PHARE regulations .
As honourable Members will no doubt be aware , the idea of allowing persons from the states benefiting from the PHARE programme to submit tenders for Community projects in favour of the former Yugoslavia is reflected in this new regulation .
According to Article 9 ( 2 ) of the regulation , the Commission may authorize participation by natural and legal persons from these states on a case-by-case basis .
Paragraph 3 of this article defines more precisely what is meant by legal persons of a state benefiting from the PHARE programme .
This type of operation could already be carried out under the PHARE regulation , namely in the context of the essential aid programme , EAP , set up after the first donors ' conference on Bosnia and Herzegovina in December 1995 .
Concerning the other question raised by the honourable Member , the Commission , which is in charge of day-today management of the regulation , should be in a position to furnish the information requested .
Thank you for your answer .
All of us in the House know that some funds were taken from the PHARE fund for the countries of Eastern Europe when the somewhat larger support programme for the rebuilding of Yugoslavia was put together .
It was this that motivated the firm decision by Parliament that these countries should be given the opportunity to submit tenders under the aid programme for Yugoslavia .
I have not received any figures from you Minister , as to the extent that these countries have been able to do this and if they have gained any contracts .
I assume however that , even after the presidency period is over , you will do all you can to enable these countries to participate in the rebuilding of Yugoslavia .
This is one way to replace at least some of the money which was taken from the countries of Eastern Europe when funds were moved from the PHARE programme to Yugoslavia while also giving these countries the opportunity to develop themselves .
Mr President , may I conclude by saying that I would like to pass on my thanks and appreciation to Minister Mitchell for the manner in which he and his colleagues have led the work in the Council during the last six months while Ireland has held the presidency .
I thank the honourable Member for his very kind closing comments .
In relation to this particular question , I am aware that he has played a signal part in campaigning to bring about the changes that have taken place .
It is a clear indication that the Council reacts to the views of the European Parliament .
In relation to the specifics of the question raised by the honourable Member , if he puts a question to the Commission I am sure he will obtain details of the day-to-day management of the regulation but it is real progress and it is a good day 's work that these arrangements in PHARE have been made .
Mr President , I too wish to thank the President-in-Office of the Council very warmly for his detailed evaluation of the situation .
I would like to ask him whether any special measures are envisaged for the Kosovo region .
After all , a few days ago we heard from the Serbian foreign minister that this region is now fully incorporated in the territory of the present Yugoslavia and that no special status can therefore be envisaged for this oppressed region .
I would like to know whether the Council can take can take special measures in this regard .
I am afraid I do not have such information in my brief but I realize that it is a matter of great concern .
I will look into the matter and will communicate directly with the honourable Member .
I should just like to thank Mr Mitchell for the way he has conducted the questions .
We have appreciated your company very much and the answers you have given both personally and on behalf of the Council .
That concludes Question Time . Questions not taken for lack of time will be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.15 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Employees ' rights in transfers ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report by ( A4-0367 / 96 ) by Mr Kerr , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the safeguarding of employees ' rights in the event of transfers of undertakings , businesses or parts of businesses ( COM ( 94 ) 0300 - C4-0151 / 94-94 / 0203 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there may not be many of us left here tonight , but that was to be expected .
Nevertheless I want to thank the rapporteur , Hugh Kerr , very warmly for this report and for the arduous negotiations .
There is hardly any other subject here in Parliament , I think , that is so complex but also so important in its details or that has such far-reaching implications for working life in Europe .
I also want to thank Commissioner Flynn for his willingness to adopt our definition of the transfer of an undertaking after the first debate in January and following lengthy negotiations .
My group , the PSE , regards that as the deciding factor because it ensures an improvement in the quality of employees ' rights in Europe .
This is all the more important because at present Brussels , and sadly not just the Council but the Commission too , seem only to be sending out signals about regulation with a view to liberalization and deregulation with the sole aim of maximizing profits .
On the thorny question of insolvency or liquidation I have heard that a compromise seems to have been reached or is on the way .
Yet I would like to remind you once again that at the hearing all the experts underlined that at the time when the procedure begins it is still not certain what the outcome will be .
We are after all agreed that we must attempt to save as many undertakings and therefore also jobs as possible , which is why we are of course in favour of flexible rules .
It is simply not true - unfortunately our colleague from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights is not present - that it is easier to rescue undertakings if we take liquidation outside the scope of the directive .
All our experience , for instance in the Netherlands , has shown a quite different picture .
Finally I have three brief requests to the Commissioner .
Firstly , this will certainly not be the last time this directive is revised .
So I would ask you to consider in your deliberations whether it would not be possible to include the Central and Eastern European states .
We consider this particularly urgent , especially in Germany but also in Austria , because more and more transfers of undertakings are taking place not within the EU but to Poland , the Czech Republic and Hungary .
The second point is company pensions .
This question has already been raised tonight .
Here too I would ask you to find a system , not just for the UK but for the other Member States too , that ensures that claims are upheld .
This too is particularly important now that most Member States have made cuts in their inter-company pension schemes .
That is why the pillar of company pensions must be guaranteed .
Last point : in my statement in January I mentioned that I had heard you were drawing up a report .
When can we expect to see it , so that we can have more data and facts ?
A great deal is at stake here , including the employees ' acceptance of Europe .
I wish you , Commissioner , and the rapporteur Hugh Kerr successful talks with the Council .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the last two years have shown how difficult it is to negotiate the approximation of the laws on safeguarding employees ' rights in the event of transfers of undertakings , businesses and parts of businesses .
Over that period , following intensive discussions in the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , the Commission withdrew its original proposal for a new directive and replaced it with a proposal to amend Directive 77 / 187 / EEC .
In so doing both the Commission and the Commissioner proved remarkably flexible .
The most difficult problem is how to balance the interests of the employees concerned and the interests of the employers who have taken over .
If too much emphasis is put on the rights of employees , the employer will no longer be interested in the transfer .
This kind of situation can lead to insolvency , followed by job losses , especially if the undertaking to be transferred has financial problems .
But that does no service to the employees concerned .
So it is in their interests too for a certain incentive to remain for the transferee employer .
A balance was achieved after two years ' of struggle , slightly weighted in favour of employees ' rights .
Another difficulty resides in the differing legal situations originally pertaining in the Member States .
That is why the EPP considers it essential to make provision for the possibility of bankruptcy in the event of insolvencies and for the appointment of a receiver .
After quite lengthy discussions with the rapporteur , Mr Kerr , we therefore agreed that he will now withdraw his Amendment No 18 , which conflicts with that .
In my view the EPP can then approve the report , a report that has cost me as shadow rapporteur a great deal of time and energy .
I hope that after two years this will clear the way for a sensible solution .
In the interests of the employees and employers concerned we should vote for the amendment of this directive .
Since the rapporteur has only thanked his PSE colleagues , I hope he will not take offence if at the end of my statement I warmly thank him for his work over these two years even though he is a member of the PSE !
Mr President , perhaps I could just inform the Commission , particularly before it speaks , that as Mr Schiedermeier said , we had discussions since I opened the debate and I have agreed to withdraw Amendment No 18 for voting tomorrow .
Perhaps that will help the Commissioner in his remarks tonight .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you may be surprised to learn that I can thank the rapporteur only for the quantity of his efforts and not for their quality .
Our Group does not endorse the majority of the points contained in this new directive , because it moves undertakings farther away from genuine internationalization of the market .
If we really want to work for a single internal market , we must enable the undertakings of the fifteen Member States to conduct a dialogue among themselves - to buy and sell each other .
As framed today , however , these regulations will actually act as a brake on any acceleration of the market in that direction .
First and foremost , we do not share the concept of transfers of undertakings .
That concept , as it is understood today , could involve the application of the directive on the contracting-out of services , causing an adverse impact on employment , the flexibility of the job market and competitiveness .
It is necessary , then , to restrict the scope of this concept .
What we disapprove of most of all , something we tried to correct with an amendment which has not been approved , relates to the duration of communications .
Specifically , the rapporteur envisages an obligation to consult the representatives of the employees as soon as a transfer is planned .
This is unrealistic and liable to create serious obstacles to transfers between undertakings .
As I said just now , our Group tabled an amendment which would have allowed undertakings not to disclose specific information or to disclose it on a confidential basis when any other approach could prove harmful .
In conclusion , we do favour the principle of guarantees for workers in contracts of employment , but without premature disclosure of transfers between undertakings .
The ultimate objective must be to enable undertakings to engage in a more extensive dialogue and to establish a genuine single market .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
I too wish to thank Mr Kerr for the tremendous effort he has put into producing a manageable report .
Despite that there are still a few matters to be clarified , one of which is the scope of the directive .
I would like the Commissioner to tell us if Article 1 as now amended means that if a company has a contract with another company and wants to change the contract , the employees of the other company are then covered by this directive or if it is only services or business which were already underway in the company and which are afterwards contracted out .
I wish the term contracting out to be clarified .
A second point I wish to raise , Commissioner , is the matter of pensions .
I understood that Mrs Veil has finished her work and that her report says that employees ' rights should be guaranteed in all situations .
I think it would be intolerable if accrued pension rights and related finance should not be guaranteed .
Mr Kerr referred to this point .
I strongly believe that employee 's pension rights must be guaranteed during a transfer of firms .
Finally I wish to take up a point made by Mr Garosci .
He said that employees ' consultation is not such a good thing and that it adversely affects the flexibility of the labour market in a globalised economy .
In my country it has often been the employees who on suspension of payment and threatening bankruptcy have played a very positive role in trying to save the undertaking or parts of it .
That is one of the reasons why we certainly shall not vote against consultation of employees .
Mr President , it has been necessary to amend a number of points in the Commission 's proposal from 1994 , as lack of clarity in the text left it open to different interpretations and gave rise to loopholes in the regulations and the legislation which jeopardised an employee 's legal protection and rights in the event of transfers of undertakings , businesses or parts of businesses ; we have already seen several examples of this from England and from Ireland .
Closing such loopholes is not always easy as we all know .
Mr Kerr has great ambitions in this respect .
He has also been very successful in his work and we have a very serious report as a result .
There are two main amendments which I and my group would like to raise and highlight .
Firstly , it must be absolutely clear that an employee 's pension rights are protected in the event of a transfer of an undertaking or business .
As has already been mentioned , it is especially important that the position of that group so often affected by closures and change , meaning women on low wages and women working part time , must not be made worse .
In connection with this , the amendment on the principle of non discrimination is extremely important .
Secondly , it must be clear in the Directive that the term transfer refers to every step of the transfer programme which affects the employees , both in companies with economic activity and in businesses concerned with the public good .
The Directive must also be equally clear on not allowing ' artificial bankruptcy ' or ' stimulated bankruptcy ' to infringe employee 's rights .
Mr President , I would like straight away to thank Mr Kerr most sincerely for his report .

I fear that Mr Kerr might very well feel somewhat down-hearted today because he has been going around so long with this report under his arm that it is almost as if he is giving away his eldest daughter in the church to the bridegroom .
I had actually thought that he might well be keeping this report into his second term of office for it was such a difficult one , but apparently that was not necessary .
We are now in a position to debate it here , and that in itself answers some of the problems .
This is really a very difficult directive .
It was already difficult in its first version , it has become more difficult now that the Court has handed down a number of rulings which had serious consequences or the consequences of which went too far for some people ; it is extremely difficult to put things right again .
We originally thought that the Commission 's first proposal went too far in the direction of what the British government wanted and not only we but other members of the Council also took great pleasure in saying no to the British government , because the British government is always saying no itself .
But that did not make a solution to this problem any easier .
Today I would say to anyone who has criticisms that it was an extremely difficult political act .
It was very difficult to bring the various interests together fairly and I am happy that our two groups in particular managed , together with the Commission , to reach an acceptable solution .
Because what do we need ?
We need a large majority in this House for the amendments which are acceptable .
And secondly we need the Commission to be able to accept these amendments .
We await the final judgment but before that we have already got the clear impression that the broad outline of what is before us is acceptable to the Commission .
If that is not the case then of course the situation is changed .
That is what this is all about .
That is what we have achieved and that is why we have every reason to congratulate not only Mr Kerr but also the Commission , and indeed ourselves as well that we have managed to produce this .
Mr President , I think it regrettable that the Christian Democrats are saying here , ' our two groups ' .
I think this is a parliament in which various groups are represented and I should not like to be overlooked .
I did actually say ' in particular ' , but I must also say that on this point I must pay homage to Mrs Boogerd-Quaak and admit that here she is right .
Mr President , first let me thank the rapporteur , Mr Kerr , and all those who have contributed to this debate from all sides of the House .
This is one of the most important labour law issues to come before this House for quite some time .
I put it in the same bracket as the European Works Council .
I should also like to thank those associated with Mr Kerr on the committees , Mrs Waddington and Mrs MosiekUrbahn and Mr Thomas .

I also join with Mr Kerr in thanking Mr Stephen Hughes , who cannot be with us today , and all colleagues for the extraordinary work which has been accomplished over the past two years .
I commend the excellent quality of this report .
In September 1994 , as you all know , the Commission adopted a proposal for a Council directive with a view to revising and replacing the Council Directive 77 / 187 on the safeguarding of employees ' rights in the event of transfers of undertakings , businesses or parts of businesses .
The revision had a three-fold objective : to reshape and clarify the current directive 's scope and definitions in the light of the relevant case law of the European Court of Justice ; to allow for greater flexibility in the event of transfers in the framework of insolvency proceedings with a view to ensuring the survival of the undertakings concerned ; and to improve the information and consultation requirements , in particular , in transnational situations , and to reinforce the status of employees ' representatives .
The proposal aims to reconcile the need to guarantee improved standards of employee protection in cases of company restructuring with the key objective of preventing company closures and maintaining current levels of employment within the context of greater flexibility , reinforced autonomy for the parties concerned and improved legal certainty .
So , I am extremely pleased that this three-fold objective has not been questioned by the House , and that a good number of the Commission 's revised provisions have received the full backing of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
These include , amongst other things , the definition of the transfer in the first sub-paragraph of Article 1 ( 1 ) , the extension of the directive 's scope to sea-going vessels , non-standard employment and non-profit making undertakings , the provisions concerning transnational transfers , the reinforced acquired rights of employee representatives , the need to establish the joint liability of the transferer and transferee , and certain miscellaneous provisions .
I do not intend to conceal , however , that there were substantial , albeit reconcilable , differences between the House and the Commission as to the extent and contents of some of the revised provisions .
I am particularly glad to announce now that after a fruitful debate and very lengthy discussions of a most detailed nature , the Commission is ready to accept , in full or in part , fourteen of the seventeen amendments adopted by the Social Affairs Committee and that I can propose to the Commission that we should adopt one of the seven amendments tabled to the House as well .
These numbers speak for themselves and the consensus constitutes a considerable achievement as we are well on the way to attaining the Community 's aim of modernizing a piece of legislation - the acquired rights directive - which lies at the very heart of Community labour law and the systems .
I should like to analyse the amendments one by one in the context of the three main objectives envisaged by the Commission .
Firstly , re-shaping and clarifying the directive 's scope and definitions .
As regards the non-application of the directive to the transfer of only activities and functions , which our two institutions found to be the most contentious point , the Commission will honour its decision of 7 February 1996 following Parliament 's resolution of 18 January 1996 .
It will therefore delete the second sub-paragraph of Article 1 ( 1 ) and table the future text as a proposal amending , not replacing , the current directive 77 / 187 .

The Commission can therefore accept Amendments Nos 1 , the title , 2 , first recital and 4 , the second sub-paragraph of Article 1 ( 1 ) .

The Commission also welcomes the principle of joint and several liability as between the transferer and the transferee proposed in Amendment No 5 , the second sub-paragraph of Article 3 ( 1 ) .
However , to improve legal certainty and to avoid needless legal disputes , such liability will be limited to the obligations which arise and fall due before the transfer .
Amendment No 6 , Article 3 ( 3 ) cannot , however , be accepted .
Extending the material scope of the directive to supplementary company or inter-company social security schemes would hinder rather than facilitate the transfer of undertakings as going concerns .
It would also impinge upon social security laws and in particular upon the wide variety of Member States ' supplementary social security systems .
The Commission considers , however , that the impact of restructuring processes upon supplementary social security schemes should be the subject of further research and intends therefore to carry out a comprehensive study on this particular issue .
I hope the House will support that .
I should also like to make reference to Article 3 ( 3 ) , where Member States may adopt measures to guarantee their workers ' interests in this regard as well .
There seems to be some cover there , and we will do a comprehensive study on the whole issue .
Amendment No 19 , Article 3 ( 4 ) ( a ) which is new , introduces a necessary safeguard clause to rule out any fraudulent practices prejudicial to employees ' interests .
Therefore it is acceptable .
Amendment No 7 , Article 4 ( 3 ) , which improves the Commission 's text , can be taken on board .
However , the expression ' legally enforceable ' is deemed unnecessary and has therefore been deleted .

We find Amendment No 8 , Article 4 ( 4 ) , which clarifies the Commission 's text , fully acceptable .


Amendment No 9 , Article 4 ( 5 ) , deletes Article 4 ( 5 ) on the grounds that the powers conferred therein to the judicial authorities , in particular the power to alter or to terminate employment relationships , are alien to the legal systems of most of the Member States ; and the Commission agrees and will delete that paragraph from its future proposal , improving information and consultation requirements and reinforcing the status of employee representatives .
Amendment No 10 , Article 6 ( 1 ) , is new .
It makes explicit in the light of the case-law of the European Court of Justice the Member States ' obligations to provide for employees ' representatives .
It also states that such representatives should be independent of the employer .
I welcome a clarification in this direction which is consistent with the negotiating powers accorded the employees ' representatives by Article 4 ( 3 ) as revised .
Accordingly the next text will make explicit that the employees ' representatives , be they trade union representatives or representatives elected amongst their numbers by the employees , that they will be guaranteed the necessary independence to enable them to perform their duties .
We cannot entirely go along with Amendment No 11 - that is , Articles 6 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) .
The Commission considers that its proposal is clearer and more coherent .
The Commission is prepared , however , to amend its text to make clear that the transferors ' and the transferees ' obligations to inform applies from the moment that the transfer concerned is contemplated .

The Commission endorses the spirit and objective of Amendment No 12 , Article 6 ( 4 ) a - that is new too - which caters for situations where the decision leading to the transfer is taken by a natural or legal person who is neither an employer nor a controlling undertaking .
The text will be redrafted , therefore , to make it clear that in considering alleged breaches of the information and consultation requirements , account shall not be taken of the fact that the relevant information was not provided to the employer by the natural or legal person who took the decision leading to the transfer .

Amendment No 13 , Article 6 ( 5 ) rejects the threshold of 50 employees , introduced by the Commission proposal and maintains the current text .
Amendment No 3 , which introduced a recital to justify such a move , argues that , pending future harmonization in the field of information and consultation of employees in national undertakings , this issue should be addressed through the future framework instrument .
I appreciate the consistency of this argument and I would therefore ask the Commission to endorse it .
If the current text is maintained , however , it does not call for the introduction of the recital proposed by Amendment No 3 which , accordingly becomes superfluous .
On some of the miscellaneous provisions : Amendment No 14 - that is , Article 8 - can be accepted , not as a replacement for Article 8 of the proposal , but as a separate new provision so that it is fully in line with the implementation measures put forward in my social action programme 1995-97 .
The second sentence , however , becomes superfluous in the light of Article 9 of the Commission proposal .
I very much welcome Amendment No 15 - Article 8a , which is new - in the wake of the Commission 's communication on racism , xenophobia and antisemitism of 13 December 1995 .
It will constitute substantial value added to the transfer of undertakings directive .

Amendments Nos 16 and 17 are consistent with Amendments Nos 1 and 2 and should , for this reason , be accepted .
Amendments Nos 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 and 25 will be rejected as they are either incompatible with certain amendments we are ready to accept or they introduce derogation clauses which endanger the directive 's aims and objectives .
To sum up at this juncture , the Commission can accept fully or in part 15 amendments : Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 and 19 and rejects nine others , one concerning a new recital and eight concerning operative provisions .
Together with the new amended proposal I intend to submit to my colleagues in the coming weeks a memorandum on the interpretation of the current transfer directive with a view to providing guidance for employees , their representatives , employers and European citizens at large , on the correct interpretation and application of this crucial piece of legislation .
Before I conclude I would just like to say to Mrs Weiler that I regard the whole question of the reform of the social security systems as hugely important .
I have a consultation debate going on at the moment within the framework for the debate on the future of social security and its provisions .
I will be coming forward in the spring with a followup communication that will go into all the matters that she raised .
I am very pleased that Mr Schiedermeier was able to come on board in so far as this particular directive is concerned .
It says something for the consensus that exists in the House this evening .
I would like to say to Mr Garosci that I support his point of view in so far as the highest guarantees must be provided for all of the employees , but I cannot go along with the point he made about confidentiality .
My position is quite simply stated - once it is decided to have a transfer , the employees should be informed .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak made a very good point on the question of pensions .
I have answered that previously .
I have to say to you that the European Parliament did not need that definition .
That is the reason we withdrew that particular point in Article 1 ( 1 ) .
Therefore each case will be taken on its merits .
In principle , it can cater for the contracting-out that concerns you so much , and case law will apply in all these situations .
It is evolving quite well in that regard as well .
Finally , I would like to underline the importance of the proceedings that are taking place here today .
They are important to the whole future of social policy and the modernization within a new context of adequate flexibility and improved standards of protection .
I would like to thank the House most sincerely for this historic , landmark situation that is taking place here insofar as European Community labour law is concerned .
It is a real step forward and I congratulate the House on their efforts .
Commissioner Flynn , allow me to express my regret that I cannot address you in your proper Gaelic name as a leader of a tribe in Gaelic .
I have tried to find out , after Taoiseach and Tánaiste , what would be the proper name for yourself , but I am afraid I was not able to until now .
I am continuing my search but that does not indicate any lack of will to honour you as we should and as we do .
Let me add something else , with respect .
If anyone had any doubts about the importance you attach to the question which has been discussed , I think that your exhaustive answer on each and every point has not left us any margin to continue nurturing that doubt .
The only problem is that unfortunately you have taken some 14 minutes , whereas five minutes are provided for Commissioner 's answers .
If we go on like this I would be happy to stay until 1.30 a.m. but I am not sure the interpreters will be very happy .
I just want to convey my appreciation to the Commissioner for his very comprehensive response and particularly the idea of sending out a memorandum of clarification , which is very necessary , particularly for the courts , to clarify exactly where the Commission is .
I think this has been an excellent example of Parliament and the Commission working together and I hope that the Council will receive it in that light .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow morning .
Agreement amending further ACP-EC Convention
The next item is the recommendation ( A4-0387 / 96 ) by Mr Wurtz , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the draft Council Decision concerning the conclusion of the Agreement amending the fourth ACP-EC Convention of Lomé signed in Mauritius on 4 November 1995 ( COM ( 95 ) 707-6075 / 96 - C4-0278 / 96-96 / 0023 ( AVC ) ) .
Thank you , Mr Wurtz , for those introductory remarks .
Mr President , I must begin by congratulating Mr Wurtz on his report and the Commissioner , Mr de Deus Pinheiro , on reaching an agreement on altering the Fourth Lomé Convention .
What is at stake here are the special links , past and present , between the European Union Member States and the responsibilities that we cannot shirk , and on the contrary which we should be thinking of developing further .
We therefore justify the strengthening of the requirement of a democracy clause and extension of political dialogue , burying once and for all the idea there could be a trade-off between democracy and economic growth .
In all countries , even the least developed , respect of democracy is an inviolable value and a condition for growth in an open and demanding world such as the one we live in .
I was the rapporteur for the opinion approved by the REX Committee and I think I should emphasize that the right perspective for these countries cannot be a protectionist one .
Without our help and fundamentally with their effort , in the terms of one of the conclusions , we should ensure their competitiveness in an open world economy .
On the other hand , we should couple the aid we give with an opening of our market to their considerable production .
This opening has to be gradual on both sides , with adjusted deadlines and the prior promotion of the necessary restructuring ( not following the poor example set recently when the deadlines set in the Uruguay Round for the free import of textile products were brought forward ) .
In our cooperation with the ACP countries we should also welcome other forms of progress made in terms of what we are analysing , succeeding in bringing about , against a background of tough restrictions , an overall increase in financial support ( unparalleled by other rich countries in the world ) , and improving the efficiency of our action , introducing greater coherence , better coordination and closer complementarity between the Community 's development policies and those of its Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lomé Convention is the European Union 's development aid instrument par excellence .
Priority has long been given to agriculture and self-sufficiency , to the detriment of transport .
As a result , the infrastructure has seriously decayed .
Fortunately , there is now a revival of interest in transport , which is indeed a critical factor in development , especially for landlocked and island states .
The foreign trade link is thus a strategic issue for the competitiveness of the ACP countries .
The members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism have therefore unanimously approved the provisions regarding transport contained in the revised text of the fourth Lomé Convention .
There are three points I would particularly like to stress .
First , our committee welcomes the fact that this chapter covers all areas of transport , especially the infrastructure aspect , and welcomes the priority to be placed on air and sea transport , which are fundamental sectors for the island states .
In this respect , we subscribe to the declaration of principle in the Convention regarding the liberalization of sea transport and medium-term need for African merchant fleets to achieve a framework as close to free and fair competition as possible .
Even so , if this is to be achieved , the ACP states must be allowed sufficient time to adapt to the conditions of competition , so as not to destabilize the sector or destroy the African companies .
The training of personnel will be particularly important .
Secondly , we approve the changes to Article 129 of the Convention enabling ACP countries to request EIB intervention .
Finally , let me stress the great tourist potential of these countries and the need to develop this job-creating sector .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism shares the rapporteur 's view that the European Parliament should give its assent to this revised convention .
Mr President , our rapporteur has rightly taken the opportunity offered by this assent procedure to sound the alarm regarding the deterioration of the Lomé process .
This convention is , in point of fact , in the process of losing its consistency .
It is being eroded by the chaotic proliferation of free-trade agreements , which are devoiding it of its commercial substance and being negotiated with no heed to their effects on our ACP partners .
It is being eroded by fraud regarding the origin of the ACP products , which is enabling any product transiting through an ACP state to benefit from the advantages of the convention .
And , finally , it is being eroded by the growing doubts among our partners in the South regarding our genuine commitment to continue cooperating with them on a preferential basis .
The Committee on Fisheries has also taken this opportunity to state its serious concern regarding this situation .
The fisheries sector is essential to the development of our partners in the South .
Above all , it is essential to the stability of the rural populations .
The opinion our committee has adopted emphasizes what it regards as the essential points .
First of all , it stresses the value to the fisheries sector of the principle of decentralized cooperation , as proposed by the Commission text , and hopes that , within this new framework , consideration will be given to the possibility of tailoring a special programme of decentralized cooperation to the fisheries sector .
It welcomes the insertion into this revised version of measures allowing for the protection of local production within the framework of Union food aid .
It is important that the aid we provide should not enter into competition against new local production .
The Committee on Fisheries reminds the Commission of its concern regarding guarantees of product origin . It calls for the responsibility for this guarantee to be transferred to the services that issue the EUR 1 certificates , rather than being left in the hands of the Community importers , which is already the case as regards the guarantee of the health quality of these products .
Finally , the Committee on Fisheries is very seriously concerned at the impact of the proliferation of specialized free-trade or SGP agreements , whose provisions are sometimes counter to the interests of our ACP partners .
Mr President , the issue is the plight of some of the poorest people in the world living in 70 developing countries .
A report of the United Nations Development Programme this year highlights the following : the assets of the world 's 400 billionaires exceed the combined annual incomes of countries with 50 % of the world 's population .
In 43 countries average incomes are today less than they were in 1970 .
The poorest countries with 20 % of the world 's people have seen their share of world trade fall between 1960 and 1990 from 4 % to less than 1 % .
With regard to the impact of AIDS on Africa , for example , projections show that by the year 2000 life expectancy will have fallen from 62 to 47 .
Each year some 15 million people , 1 , 700 human beings per hour , die from poverty-related causes .
At the same time where the ratio of the share of the global income of the richest 20 % vis-à-vis the poorest 20 % has doubled from 30 to 1 to 60 to 6 , official development aid as a percentage of per capita income has decreased from 0.54 % 15 years ago to 0.27 % today .
In fact while global inequality has doubled , international solidarity has halved .
Mr Wurtz points out in his statement that as far as the financial package for the eighth European Development Fund is concerned , we have not achieved our aim of preserving the European Union 's contribution at the level it attained five years ago in real terms .
That is the issue and clearly the package of Lomé IV - the financial package - is an absolute disgrace and an incredible reflection of priorities and lack of solidarity .
Could I also say that bringing this report , this initiative , to the European Parliament when we do not have any say in the budget whatsoever is a repeat of the nonsense and a repeat of the charade ?
We of course along with the Commission want to seek a change which will lead to a proper budgetization .
Could I say that the important principle of partnership which is at the centre of the Lomé Agreement is a very unequal partnership .
We see that in terms of human rights .
It is assumed generally by Europeans that human rights abuses only take place in ACP countries and not within the European Union .
Nevertheless , we are at the end of an era , we are involved in a valuable discussion .
A Green Paper has been published by the Commission .
We look forward to a better deal for developing countries , moving forward with proper priorities .
Despite this we have to recommend that in the interests and at the wishes of the ACP countries we reluctantly say yes to endorsing this agreement .
Mr President , can I begin by thanking the Commissioner for the enormous amount of work he did to obtain the agreement on Lomé IV in what were very difficult circumstances .
Might I also congratulate Mr Wurtz on his excellent report which so clearly highlights the successes and failures of the Lomé IV Agreement between the EU and the ACP countries .
He advocates a yes vote on the revised version of Lomé IV and its financial protocol , even though he has sound reservations in doing so .
He is quite right to point out that the ACP countries want this agreement signed and ratified as quickly as possible by all the Member States and that these developing nations are banking on an early entry into force of the amended convention .
Satisfied or not , they need Lomé and that is the reality this Parliament cannot ignore .
The ACP / EU Agreement was built on a partnership of equality between the partners , but there has been a growing feeling in the ACP countries that the partnership is becoming a very one-sided affair , with the EU imposing its will on the ACP nations because of cutbacks in financial aid both at multinational and binational levels .
We must all , therefore , welcome the Commission 's Green Paper , looking for a clear direction for the future on where EU / ACP relationships are going .
I hope the ACP nations will have a major input into that document and I am sure that regional cooperation will play a major role .
What started out as a midterm review turned out to be a fairly major change in the way that Lomé operates .
New demands and criteria were written in .
Of course respect for human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law are identified as the cornerstone of ACP / EU cooperation ; but I have to say that I personally begin to wonder whether good governance , peace and stability are not more important than pure western-style democracy for some of our more fragile developing nations .
If we want to see foreign investment and joint venture partnerships in developing nations to improve their economies , we will only have it if there is political stability .
Punishing countries like Zambia by withdrawing aid because they have changed their constitution could lead to the destabilization of one of the few stable states on the African continent .
Their elections appear to be free , fair and peaceful .
I am sorry to relate that as one who has been involved in Lomé since 1978 , I have never known such strong feelings of dissatisfaction from the ACP nations with regard to their relations with the EU .
ACP nations in many instances must do more to help themselves .
Aid is only part of the answer , trade is a vital element .
Mr President , over the years , at the various stages of conclusion of the convention , everything has been said about the effective scope of the Lomé Convention .
But I feel I must recall a few essential points of which we should be aware in the context of the Lomé Convention of the year 2000 .
I feel sure I need not remind the House that the 70 ACP states have a total population of 600 million , and that the latest financial protocol , set at ECU 13 , 000 million , represents a benefit to each individual inhabitant of a mere ECU 20 over five years .
That the increasing inequalities and increasing marginalization of the poorest countries are the consequence of a process of impoverishment which is creating new economic , social and environmental divisions .
That the future enlargement to include the CCEEs inevitably threatens a substantial reduction in the EDF , and that it is thus impossible , under such conditions , to kick-start the economy of a struggling country .
However , it would be unjust to blame the Lomé Convention for the endemic poverty which characterizes a number of ACP states .
Indeed , it is unanimously acknowledged that the Union 's development aid has no parallel anywhere in the world .
The objectives stated in the Lomé Convention , despite all our declared ambitions and statements of goodwill , will be achieved only if the Union equips itself with appropriate financial and supervisory resources , and , at institutional level , takes upon itself the necessary powers to conduct a common foreign policy , to improve the political dialogue with the ACP countries and define a new approach to this partnership .
Regarding the decentralized cooperation defined in Title III of the Lomé Convention , I should like this apostil to be more explicit , especially regarding the substantive , organic , formal and financial powers of the French overseas departments , which are integral regions of the European Union in a position to benefit from their geographical situation by concluding agreements with the ACP countries .
And , once again , I emphatically demand that the French overseas departments should be associated with every stage of the conclusion of conventions between the Union and the ACP states in their geographical area , as a logical consequence of their integration into the Union and due consideration of their very specific situation .
Mr President , the Group of the Radical Alliance entirely agrees with Mr Wurtz 's view regarding the changes made to the fourth Lomé Convention .
As far as principles are concerned , the changes relating to the institutional political framework and to the commercial and financial rules seem to us to be an improvement .
But what happens to this improvement when we consider the specific implementation of these excellent principles - the value of the eighth European Development Fund and our debt commitments ?
There is no escaping the fact that those who believe in what the draft opinion calls ' a logic and ethos of codevelopment ' can only be disappointed .
Under pressure elsewhere , and distracted by its own social problems , the European Union is unable to increase or even maintain the total volume of aid it provides .
And yet it would certainly be in its interests to do so , and the Member States , while indulging in displays of national egotism at the council meetings , have not taken any significant move towards the writing-off of debts , without which it would be impossible to trigger development .
We would indeed have very good reason to refuse our assent , but we understand the arguments - our partners ' expectations , the fear of something worse - which make it necessary to vote in favour .
All we can do is hope that , as we come to think about the next stage , Lomé 2000 , we really shall be able to increase awareness of the following obvious fact : if the European Union hopes to preserve a civilization founded on humane values and if it wants to reject both the free-trade ideology and the spread of an unprincipled materialism , then its destiny is linked more closely than ever to the ACP countries .
I am sorry to have to pressurize you because you have far exceeded your speaking time .
It embarrasses me to do this when you were only allocated one minute .
Mr President , the debate on the European Parliament 's assent to the amendments to the fourth Lomé Convention comes at a very difficult time as far as the European Union 's development cooperation policies are concerned .
At this very time , the debate has opened , on the basis of the European Commission 's green paper , on the future of the Lomé Convention .
At the same time , the majority of the industrialized countries are continuing to reduce their commitments to the less developed countries .
The Lomé Convention is , for the present , the most important world-scale instrument of North-South cooperation .
Although they are not free of contradictions , the new items introduced by the 1995 revision are generally positive , even if the financial protocol for the five-year period 1995-99 falls far short of what we asked for .
Today , we must approve those amendments , partly because the assent procedure does not give the European Parliament any power to make changes .
We must , however , also send out a strong signal for the future .
We must avoid giving the impression that we merely want to keep things as they are .
The Lomé Convention must undergo a radical process of change , in which the concepts of partnership , political dialogue and global cooperation are maintained and strengthened .
What we need , in fact , is radical change to the instruments and the objectives , with a genuine focus on the idea of promoting sustainable human development , human rights and democracy , and the development of local economic potentials .
The impact of globalization on the poorest countries needs to be controlled within the framework of a new commitment to equity and justice worldwide .
As of now , we need to lay the foundations for a direct involvement of civilized society in the administration of public affairs and the processes of development .
Africa is Europe 's future , and Europe is Africa 's future .
In the course of the planning and concrete administration of the Lomé instruments in future years , what must emerge is a new , consistent commitment to finding solutions to the great social , economic and political problems that threaten the present and future of the whole human race , but take a particularly grave form in the ACP countries .
Mr President , first I would like to thank both the Commission and the rapporteur for the documents we have received .
In development policy we keep finding , sadly , cause for complaint that not enough can be achieved .
But I think we should regard this mid-term review as a chance to consider whether any positive aspects can be reported .
I am reassured to find that with Article 366 we now have a solid instrument for protecting human rights .
We also hope that it will be applied without any derogations and will be a means of persuading the countries involved to implement human rights , not only when they are threatened with pecuniary disadvantages , but , in a sense , as an integral part of their policies .
We should , however , also and always link development policy with foreign policy , economic policy and other areas , which is why I am also very grateful for the opinions delivered by colleagues from the committees asked for their opinion .
Another aspect that is considered in this mid-term review is the environment ; especially against the background of the WTO negotiations in Singapore I certainly want to congratulate the Commission on its success in this area .
But the environmental aspect cannot dissociated from the demographic trend .
In this area we sometimes seem to be limping along behind the rising figures .
Nevertheless , as we saw today from the most recent UN documents , at least the world population growth , which is most marked in the developing countries , is not rising to the extent that was feared .
The next phase of Lomé will certainly be a difficult undertaking , but as a German philosopher once said : ' In precarious situations what is needed is confidence ' , and that is how we should approach this task !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have with me twenty pages of notes on a matter which , you will agree , is far more important .
I wish to begin by paying tribute to the European Parliament , to rapporteur Wurtz and the Members who have taken the floor during this debate , and telling them that I go along with everything they have said , with virtually no exception , and in particular understand the concerns for the future that they have voiced .
As for development cooperation , the European Parliament has always been at the forefront and always supported the Commission .
The European Parliament has been able to find innovative ways of doing this , by means of a set of proposals , requirements and alarms .
I can tell you , ladies and gentlemen , that this was one of the reasons why the Commission decided to prepare a Green Paper on the future of EU / ACP relations .
But it is no longer possible to accept that the Commission makes proposals in which the debate is left to a group of interested parties without enabling all other players in the development field to take part and help to make the basic proposals .
I think that the work on revising the Lomé Agreement show that it was necessary to hold a debate so that the roots we have put down can be made even deeper , so that the efficiency we have achieved can be enhanced , so that certain arguments used in the debate eon the revision of Lomé IV , within the European Union , could no longer be used in the future .
This is an important moment but perhaps the decisive moment will come soon , when we have to put forward proposals for the future .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank you , on behalf of the ACP countries , for the effort you have made to improve that cooperation .
I can tell you that the Commission , once again and increasingly so , will always be open to your suggestions and your concerns about this issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
Water quality
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0395 / 96 by Mr Eisma , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the quality of bathing water ( COM ( 94 ) 0036 - C4-0036 / 94-94 / 0006 ( SYN ) ) ; -A4-0394 / 96 by Mr K. Collins , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive on the quality of water intended for human consumption ( COM ( 94 ) 0612 - C4-0199 / 95-95 / 0010 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , I was appointed some two and a half years ago as rapporteur for this bathing water directive and at last I am in a position to present the report here today .
It could almost be described as a life 's work , but the reason is that in these two and a half years we have completely revised the whole of the European policy on water , and that is one of the reasons for the delay , for our only now coming to debate this directive .
The debate this evening is about a directive which will affect every single citizen in Europe .
Many people go on holiday to places where there is bathing water and many people even let that criterion determine their holiday destination ; these people in Europe must have the certainty that there is very little chance of becoming ill by bathing in water which has received the Commission stamp of approval .
Public health was my main point of departure in drawing up my report .
That is why I disagree with the Commission 's criterion , Mrs Bjerregaard , that this directive should be cost neutral .
If there is a serious chance of people becoming ill by bathing in water then there is something wrong with the standards being maintained and it may well take some money to put that right .
I wish to comment on a few important amendments in my report .
First of all extending it to include other water sports in addition to bathing .
Surfers and divers , for example , are often in the water .
Why should we protect bathers but not other people enjoying water sports ?
If the Commission believes that the same standards cannot apply to these other water users as to bathers , then I would like the Commission to tell me now a solution can be found to that one and I hope that the Commissioner will take up this point at length in her reply .
One essential amendment is the definition of bathing water .
In the past Member States have proved very imaginative in bypassing the old definition .
I am thinking of the United Kingdom and I am looking for Mrs Jackson , who is not present in the Chamber , but who is responsible for the United Kingdom not designating a spa such as Brighton , for example , as a spa and for not designating any bathing water in a fresh water area .
Yes , Mr President , if you do not do that then it is going to cost a pretty penny if you are then expected to meet all these obligations .
I think it very important that bathing water should be defined more clearly than the Commission has done .
The same holds true for the definition of the bathing season .
In the past a bathing season of a few weeks has been set in warm parts of the Union , and that is an example of directives being badly applied .
That is why we also changed that point .
That brings me to the backbone of this directive , the annex with the parameters .
I can support the bulk of the Commissions 's proposal adapted to the new scientific knowledge .
But amendments are proposed to a few points , the most important of which is the parameter for faecal streptococci .
It is not surprising that the Commission 's proposal , which does after all go back to 1994 , has been overtaken by new scientific evidence and the results of the most recent studies are reflected in Amendment No 36 .
It is a strict standard and much bathing water which met the old standards will have problems with this one , but it is public health that is at stake .
In this context I would remind you of the statements made by Mrs Jackson , who has now arrived in the Chamber , on the enormous costs resulting from both the bathing water and the drinking water directives .
The figures you quote , Mrs Jackson , are not right .
You reckon that implementing the bathing water directive in the United Kingdom will cost £ 4 billion .
Not only will the costs be much lower , because many measures which will produce less discharge will already be carried out under other directives , I am thinking for example of the directive on urban waste water and every PC directive , but there are also new techniques on the market which make it cheaper to treat sewage .
A good example of that is the island of Jersey , in your own country , where sewage treatment with ultraviolet radiation costs £ 2 million as against the earlier estimated cost of £ 11 million .
I would like to hear Commissioner Bjerregaard on the subject of the costs of this directive .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner to explain how she thinks this directive should be integrated in the future into the framework directive on water .
I myself have certain ideas on the subject as can be seen from Amendment No 14 , but I am very curious to hear the Commission 's reaction to them .
Mr President , the other side of this in a related argument is about ensuring drinking water of high quality .
We think this is a Europe-wide priority and that is why we had to take account of scientific progress since the last directive in 1980 and why we approve of the general idea of having a new and improved proposal .
I have to say that the 1980 directive was not well implemented because it was over-complex and confusing and , as a result , we now have new standards .
The old mixture of different ways of measuring have been replaced by parametric values which Member States must reach .
These values are clearer and are in line with current science .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection spent a great deal of time on this directive .
Cooperation among most members was very strong and the amendments we agreed all follow some very important principles and I shall now outline some of them .
There was immense pressure to improve health and environmental standards so no amendments were accepted which would weaken the protection of public health from the 1980 directive .
We have made recommendations about tightening up several parameters , most importantly lead and pesticide requirements .
We brought forward the time which Member States have to implement the lead parameter from 15 years which the Commission suggests to 10 years .
There are some fringe people in Parliament who want five years or four years or perhaps last week but they are fringe people and one assumes they will remain so .
At the same time we have made a requirement for Member States to devise a plan within five years on how to eradicate lead from the water supply .
No responsible individual in the European Union believes that lead should be in the water supply in any quantity .
As far as pesticides are concerned , we have reintroduced the total pesticide parameter because it is the best and safest way to ensure health protection against pesticides reacting with each other as cocktails .
I said there was pressure to improve health but what is more important is that the pressure is realistic .
The members of the committee got together to work out compromises on some very difficult and technical matters like tri- and tetrachlorethene and trihalomethanes .
I will not go into any detail here because it is far too late and people no doubt have had other cocktails on the way here tonight .
But the point is that we have substantially but realistically found ways to tighten up these parameters for most Member States .
I must emphasize that Finland , Sweden , the Mediterranean and so on do not have the same problems as Denmark and Germany .
We have had to find a middle way .
I recognize that there are people who do not want to find a middle way but in the interests of all the citizens of Europe , not just a favoured few , we have to do so .
So we have introduced other parameters where necessary , with regard to the problem of endocrine disrupters for example .
The standards we have used are based on publicly available information and on the most recent reputable science .
Most parameters adhere to the World Health Organization recommendations .
We believe in openness and democracy and therefore several amendments have been tabled to tighten up reporting requirements and to ensure that the consumers and the European Parliament are kept informed .
In conclusion , the amendments we are tabling suggest that we want a proposal in line with Parliament 's house style .
We want to drop comitology .
We want to strengthen the health parameters .
We want better information to consumers and we insist on the prevention and precautionary principle .
It is an important proposal because its scope is wide .
While everyone may be interested in lead and pesticides , there are other technical issues involved as well .
We have tried to accommodate a wide range of views and there have been a few heated discussions along the way but on the whole I am pleased with the cooperation and the progress that has been made between us , among us and , I have to say , with the Commission .
It is in our interests because we want to improve the less than wonderful record of implementation of previous drinking water directives .
One final note : there are those in Parliament who have issued an intemperate , untruthful and unrealistic interpretation of this report .
They have said that it is merely in the pocket of the United Kingdom Government .
These untruthful people do not seem to recognize that , whereas they are saying that , the United Kingdom Government has said that I am some kind of environmental extremist .
If I have achieved a middle way between fanatics of opposing views , then I have acted in the true spirit of European consensus and therefore I have no hesitation in commending the report .
Mr President , good quality bathing water is important for public health , the environment and tourism and this proposal represents a step forward .
It is good for tourism .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for accepting a number of amendments from the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I would mention extending in the second recital the term ' bathing water ' to include water used for recreational purposes .
Incidentally it would be logical and clearer if the rapporteur were also to amend Article 1 ( 2 ) accordingly .
I am also grateful for accepting the blue flag as a symbol of outstanding water quality .
It is a symbol that people can easily recognise .
But I regret that the rapporteur did not accept our proposal to introduce 31 January as the deadline for the publication of the water quality directive .
Why not ?
Consumers are entitled to be informed in sufficient time on the quality of bathing water and water for recreational purposes at their planned holiday destination .
Some 200 million Europeans chose a destination with recreational water for their summer holidays .
Most of them book early to make sure of getting a reservation during the busy summer months .
Early booking is important in tourism and 15 May , as proposed by the rapporteur , is just too late .
Everyone I have consulted assures me that it is possible , Madam Commissioner , to process by 31 January the information received from measuring water quality in the late summer , in other words four months later .
I think 15 May is a typical example of a bureaucratic approach , devoid of reality and so a missed opportunity .
I would like the Commissioner to explain clearly why the experts here should be wrong .
Finally I wish to pay tribute to the efforts of my country , the Netherlands , where the central government and the water sport organisations are working together to reduce discharges from water sports into the external water .
May I ask the honourable Members not to allow their assistants to sit on the Members ' benches but in the seats provided for that purpose at the back .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . On behalf of the Socialist Group I would like to congratulate Mr Eisma and Mr Collins on their reports .
In my speech I shall concentrate on the directive on bathing water .
Other colleagues from my group will discuss Mr Collins ' report .
At the end of the day we can more easily relate the directive on the quality of bathing water to current events .
First of all this is done by extending the scope of application of the directive to cover all areas where bathing is not prohibited .
Then we must ensure that water destined for water sports comes under the scope of this directive .
Not only bathers but people enjoying water sports come into contact with water and that water should also be subject to quality standards .
The quality of bathing water plays an increasing role in the battle for tourists .
And in the longer term strict quality standards is an economic benefit .
That is why it is also in the consumers ' interest that bathing water is monitored in the same way everywhere and the results published in an understandable and uniform manner .
To avoid any kind of manipulation we think that newly opened bathing areas should be immediately subject to the provisions of this directive .
We should not be allowing postponements .
That would mean experimenting with the health of bathers in the first few years .
Member States must therefore ensure that every bathing area opened to the public meets the requisite standards and continues to meet them .
If measurements show that polluted water forms a threat to public health then the Member States should prohibit bathing in the relevant area .
But this ban must be widely supported .
It is not enough to post a prohibition notice beside the water .
The public must be properly informed through the press , radio and television .
Finally it has been proved necessary to tighten the standards of the parameter for faecal streptococci while we include new parameters for such things as pesticides , nitrates and phosphates .
All this with a view to protecting public health adequately , a consideration which must weigh more heavily than any short-sighted tourist interest .
We also want the Member States to transmit the necessary evidence to the Commission when they make their report .
No monitoring of the reports has been possible to date as these have been one-sided accounts without any documentary evidence and that too must be remedied speedily .
My colleagues will speak at greater length on the Collins report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the directive on bathing water quality , approved as far back as 1976 , can now be seen to be clearly out of date ; so it is only right that it should be revised .
With regard to its practical application , it has unfortunately transpired that some Member States found themselves in considerable difficulties , so much so that , after various amendments , it was not until 1990 that the directive was accepted in all Member States .
What is needed , then , is simplification of the regulations , and that is something that can be done , partly thanks to the major advances since 1976 in physicochemical analysis and , especially , microbiological analysis .
In the Commission 's view , this should make it possible to reduce the number of analyses and , consequently , the costs as well .
So the complex and difficult problem confronting us is finding the right balance between the need to simplify analyses to a point where all Member States can cope with it and the basic need not to reduce safety levels for bathers by weakening the directive .
We are also confronted with the problem of providing fuller and clearer public information on water safety levels for bathers , making use of broadcasting services among other resources , to ensure that comprehensible and comprehensive data are available to all .
Our amendments and those tabled by other groups , many of which have been supported by the Group of the European People 's Party , are designed to help solve these problems .
Another difficult point is identifying the areas in which the checks should be carried out .
The 1976 directive referred to areas frequented by an appropriate number of bathers , and this phrasing made it possible to consider over 16 , 000 bathing areas within the Union .
That may seem a very large number , but you must bear in mind that in countries such as Italy and Spain there are over 8 , 000 kilometres of coastline , comprising an enormous number of bathing beaches , many of which are regularly frequented by tourists and local residents .
The Commission 's introduction of the new definition of bathing water as water in which bathing is not prohibited and is traditionally practised by large numbers of bathers restricts the number of areas to be monitored .
It would seem , indeed , that this definition would exclude from supervision all areas where bathing is practised by a moderate number of bathers .
We shall not be voting for the PSE 's Amendment No 16 because , if it were approved , it would extend monitoring and analysis to cover all the Union 's thousands of kilometres of coastline , including unfrequented areas .
This problem , then , calls for reflection by the Commission , the Council and Parliament itself , which may be able to propose a compromise solution on the occasion of the second reading .
Subject to those reservations , the Group of the European People 's Party believes that the directive under consideration is certainly deserving of approval .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the context of the review of Community legislation on water quality , and in accordance with the Council 's conclusions of December 1993 , the present proposal introduces substantial changes by comparison with directive 80 / 778 which is currently in force .
It aims , in fact , to guarantee better protection of human health and , for the first time , lays down a number of minimum quality requirements for drinking water throughout the Community .
Although on the one hand it is fair to say that this proposal does tend to simplify the present directive by adjusting the reference parameters concerning contents of lead , boron , copper , etc . , on the other hand it is necessary to stress how little attention was paid , during the discussions by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , to certain fundamental aspects of the utmost importance .
Specifically , it is surprising that there has been insufficient discussion of the problem of copper which , in the Commission 's proposal , has been inserted into the table relating to chemical parameters - which lists poisons such as arsenic , cyanide , mercury , lead , etc. instead of appearing in the table relating to indicator parameters , which are used to check and speed up measurements of possible changes in water quality whose beneficial properties are clearly highlighted in the report issued by the World Health Organization in October 1996 .
I should point out that this shortcoming has given rise to many suspicions , which have been heightened by a study of the amendments approved by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection ; by way of example , let me quote the amendment to the fourteenth recital , in which the Commission is called upon to bring about the drawing up of European standards in respect of materials for the supply of drinking water .
What will these new materials be , what vested national interests may there be ?
In addition , I should point out that although the reduction in the maximum lead content and the consequent reduction in lead piping is justifiable at least from the health standpoint , we should certainly not forget that the burden of this investment is causing hesitation by the majority of the Member States .
For Italy alone , a figure of 30 billion lire has been calculated , 80 % of which is accounted for by the replacement of piping within dwellings , to be carried out over 15 years .
Since water is the most widespread of all substances , it is important that it should be completely clear for the protection of the consumer .
Mr President , the amendment of both the bath water directive and of the drinking water directive which we are now discussing arises out of the decisions concerning the principle of proximity which were adopted at the summit meeting in Edinburgh in 1992 .
Both directive amendments are causing many people to ask whether this was the form of the principle of proximity which the Council had in mind .
There are always reasons for being careful when environmental directives are suddenly to be simplified , because simplifications can all too easily lead to deterioration [ of the environment ] at the end of the day , and we have also seen movements in this direction .
But we must also ask ourselves , of course , whether the right cuts have been made and whether we are getting enough for our money , and as parliamentarians it is our duty at all times to ask ourselves these questions .
The problem with the drinking water directive is that it is , at one and the same time , a minimum directive and a directive in which water is regarded as a commodity .
It would therefore be quite unacceptable if the proposed limit values for lead , for example , were not observed , regardless of whether it will result in considerable costs in other countries - and it is recognized that this will be the case - but if the limit values are not observed , we will not be guaranteeing any protection for those groups of people who want to have lower lead levels .
And this has the effect of undermining the whole question of the extent to which it is actually a minimum directive .
What I mean is that this directive must be seen in a context in which what is being discussed is a minimum directive , but where water is at the same time being regarded as a commodity .
Turning now to the actual amendments , as far as the bath water directive is concerned , the Liberal Group is able to vote in favour of all the amendments , except for Amendments Nos 38 and 39 , which we regard as excellent proposals in terms of drinking water , but finds them too stringent when it comes to bath water .
With regard to the matter of the drinking water directive we require a continued discussion of the costs involved , but under no circumstances can we accept the limit values not being observed , because there is documentary evidence of the risk of harm to women and children if they absorb too much lead .
Mr President , last October , in the debate on the report by Mr Florenz on the feasibility of and need for a framework directive on water in Europe , we already recognized that 15 to 20 % of European water was of inadequate quality .
Today we debate the revision of two directives , one 21 and the other 18 years old .
In our view the majority of the amendments tabled and approved in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection should be accepted so that the directives are properly applied .
Until 1990 , not a single Member State had incorporated the bathing water directive properly and acceptably into their national legislation and there were multiple application problems .
So in view of the new possibilities of physical and chemical analysis now available , and also in view of the consumer information directive , revision is essential .
It is also necessary to take an overall view of the problem .
A year or more ago , in the hearing held in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , the need to take account not only of the quality , but also of the quantity of water , was already recognized .
I would also like to mention here that not long ago , in my own country , over 20 deaths and 200 cases of illness were caused by water-borne legionella bacteria .
So it is essential to revise the directives to guarantee water quality in Europe , which is under serious threat today .
Mr President , there are two types of compelling argument in favour of amending the 1980 Directive on drinking water .
The first type of argument relates to scientific knowledge of the toxic effect of pollutants on human health , which is much more advanced than it was .
Secondly , we now find pollutants in drinking water which did not exist 15 years ago , or were present only in very small quantities .
What is the present situation as regards the quality of surface and underground water ?
It is deteriorating .
The Commission itself acknowledges as much in its latest report .
In particular , there are very serious problems concerned with the presence of nitrates and pesticides , and with organochlorinated residues , too .
There are two possible attitudes one can adopt .
Either we strengthen the Directive to provide the best health protection possible , or we make it more flexible by adapting to reality , all in the name of realism .
Unfortunately , the Commission has opted for the second approach , with the exception of one parameter relating to lead .
In respect of certain essential parameters such as pesticides , chlorinated solvents and trihalomethanes , its response has been entirely inadequate , considering that many of these are carcinogenic substances .
With regard to one particular parameter , or rather one family of parameters , radioactivity , no limit value has been set and I would draw it to the attention of the House that , contrary to what was said in committee , there is also limit value for radioactive elements in the corresponding Euratom Directive .
That is why , knowing that many surface waters are contaminated by radioactivity , we tabled an amendment on this subject , and of course other amendments on the parameters I mentioned just now .
I hope these proposals will be interpreted not as a sign of peevish radicalism but , quite simply , as evidence of our concern to improve the health of Europe 's citizens .
Mr President , I wish to speak to Mr Eisma 's report on bathing water .
The Commission has explained the reasoning behind the proposal for an amendment to the directive on the quality of bathing water .
Little mention has been made of the fact that 21 years down the road this directive is still applied in very different ways .
Not only is there a major difference between the countries in the way they define what bathing water is , but standards of water quality leave much to be desired .
That is why we need a clear directive on the quality of bathing water where little scope is left for individual interpretation .
Water is less mobile than air but it still crosses borders .
A good system of indicators , complete with border values , is therefore essential .
The proposal before us today is a good point of departure .
The rapporteur has made a few useful additions to it .
I have questions on two points .
First of all the scope of application .
The Commission wanted to limit it strictly to places where people go bathing .
The Environment Committee accepted amendments to extend this to all water used for recreational purposes .
This kind of extension has far-reaching consequences .
Much more water still has to be monitored and that over a much longer period .
What does the Commission think of extending the scope of application ?
I would also like to hear the Commission 's opinion on the relation between the bathing water directive and the future framework directive on water quality .
How does the Commission view Amendment No 14 in this context ?
Mr President , on this occasion I shall take the floor immediately , and tell you that I wish to address the House , more specifically , on Mr Collins 's report on water for human consumption .
As a number of things have already been said , I should like to address my remarks more particularly to the Commission , expressing my amazement that it ventures to propose what seems to me a totally unrealistic , by which I mean particularly low , standard of 10 ìg of lead per litre of water - but it says that this standard must be applied within 15 years .
Well , if there really is a problem for public health , I can see no reason to wait 15 years before dealing with it .
This proposal lacks consistency .
I , being more consistent , propose that we should do better - that we should reduce the permitted content of lead in water intended for human consumption from the present 50 ìg per litre to 25 ìg per litre within five years .
I believe this in itself is a step forward .
Then , at the end of five years , we can revise the Directive .
Why should we do that ?
Quite simply because we do not as yet know of any toxicological studies of the effects of lead in the blood .
I should be interested to know , therefore , if the European Commission has decided to initiate such a study .
I should also like to know if the Commission has decided to initiate studies of the consequences of using plastics for water piping .
Today , some doubts have been expressed about the consequences of using plastics in endocrinology .
Here again , we lack the relevant scientific knowledge .
Perhaps we may hope to have such knowledge in five years ' time , if the European Commission puts its mind to it .
Finally , I should like to make it clear that it is particularly important to harmonize the methods of sampling and monitoring lead concentrations ; because the fact is that at present the methods for monitoring the concentration of lead in water are not harmonized .
The same applies to sampling methods , which vary from country to country , making it particularly difficult to determine a standard .
I am also amazed at the Commission 's new position on copper .
There are no facts available to us that argue in favour of such a hardening of the Commission 's attitude on copper .
We really should consider these problems of copper and lead in drinking water much more in their context .
We all know that the WHO standard of 10 ìg per litre is one that applies to babies .
Well , we also know that people in the European Union no longer use , and have not for many years used , drinking water - tap water , as we call it - for babies .
All young mothers are perfectly well aware that they should use mineral water to prepare their babies ' bottles .
So there is no need to apply to the entire population a WHO standard which was intended for a specific population of babies .
Those were the questions I wanted to put to the Commissioner .
Mr President , drinking water must be clean ; drinking water must not only be healthy , because then we immediately find ourselves in an assessment of what people are able to tolerate before they fall sick .
That is why drinking water must be clean , and this is also the starting point for the drinking water directive as it applies today , but which so many countries have completely ignored for many years .
In industry even the most backward of regimes are united in their dissatisfaction with the directive as it stands .
It is recognized that even approved substances are able to find their way into drinking water , in addition to what is carried over from the ground water .
The water is further spoilt when it is transported via lead pipes which governments have failed to replace in their attempt to save money .
Drinking water is polluted in almost all Member States , but we do not protect people 's health , or the environment , by relaxing the limit values in order that Member States might better comply with the directive .
We achieve protection by imposing rigorous limit values .
As the Commission knows , the European Parliament has strenuously defended the purity requirements of the current drinking water directive before the Commission and the Council of Agricultural Ministers who wished to approve new pesticides , even though it was known that these would find their way into the drinking water cycle .
The chairman of the Environment Committee gained the Court 's agreement and a new permit had to be withdrawn .
The World Health Organization can provide a reference framework , since it is widely recognized that the WHO is not a reckless organization that places horrendous obstacles in the way of health .
But when the WHO is of the view that tetrachlorethene and trichlorethene are carcinogenic , it is our clear duty to insist that these must not be found in drinking water .
It may well be the case that these harmful chlorine compounds are already present , but this is our own fault and we must make it our aim to alter the situation .
The limit values which the Commission has proposed are too high .
The EU 's environment regulations must be based on a high level of protection and on the principle of caution , even when it comes to minimum standards , and what we are dealing with here is a minimum directive .
I can well understand why , at a certain point , a rapporteur felt tempted to change the legal basis to 100 A. The design of the directive proposal prepared the ground for this , in that it recommended that the Commission should take account of the Member States ' wish for greater protection of the environment .
It was this form of conditional guarantee which the civil Danish government of the mid 1980s denies that we had obtained , but which we did in fact obtain .
Fortunately we are agreed that what we are considering is an environment directive and minimum standards .
However , it is not sufficient in this regard to look at the legal basis .
The formulation of the directive itself must be along the same lines .
The rapporteur shared this view .
It is essential that the Commission be able to go along with this line of thought .
The combined limit value for pesticides must be re-instated .
This combined limit value stipulates that there must be no pesticides in drinking water .
Unfortunately we find the pesticides we are looking for in Denmark itself .
The combined limit value is our guarantee of a ceiling for total pollution .
We know too little about the interaction of substances and about the substances into which they are broken down .
The principle of caution must prevail .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of our directives had already , for the first time , imposed minimum quality requirements for water intended for human consumption .
The European Commission has presented a proposal for an amended directive intended to ensure greater protection of consumer health .
It is that proposal that is before us now .
It contains two essential measures to improve water quality : a reduction in lead content and a reduction in pesticide levels .
In the brief time allowed to me , I shall confine my remarks to pesticides .
In this context , a single value of 0.1 ìg per litre for every substance , whatever the substance in question , is not in line with the World Health Organization 's standards .
A fortiori , the cumulative level of 0.5 ìg per litre for all substances has no foundation whatever in public health practice and is in any case inapplicable .
In point of fact , given the diversity of organic pesticides - insecticides , herbicides , fungicides , nematocides , acaricides , algicides , etc. it is more important to observe , as does the World Health Organization , a specific value for each substance , while setting a value of 0.1 ìg per litre as a warning threshold or parametric value of water quality for each of the pesticides .
This is why I am asking the House to approve Amendments Nos 104 and 105 which I have tabled on behalf of the UPE Group .
These amendments attach the full importance to genuinely scientific data , avoiding what would otherwise appear to be arbitrary standards .
The way the Commission has watered down the directive goes directly against the will of the consumers , who are unequivocally demanding more stringent standards of protection of drinking water .
As has been said , we need a high level of protection , in particular high precautionary parametric values .
It is up to the Commission to guarantee these precautionary parametric values ; it must not allow our number one living resource to turn into a lethal cocktail .
So I once again strongly urge the Commission to ensure that the total limit value is firmly enshrined in the common position .
For if it is not firmly enshrined there , then we will be allowing precisely this lethal cocktail of poisons to be introduced into our number one living resource .
I think the European Parliament must send out a clear signal here too .
We are not in favour of the proposal from the Committee on the Environment to double the limit value for the carcinogenic trihalomethanes to 110 microgrammes per litre , in excess even of the Commission proposal .
For all these carcinogenic substances , the German drinking water regulation sets a limit value of 10 microgrammes .
I think we have to demand a high level of protection against these substances .
We should call on the Commission to submit a binding proposal on endocrine substances too .
We have proof that these substances can be found in drinking water and that they are dangerous .
To conclude let me once again declare that we regard it as most important that our amendment on fixing a limit value for radioactivity in water is adopted .
I believe limit values are always a political decision too , and that is a political decision we have to take today .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal for a new drinking water directive states among other things , in Article 1 , that the purpose of the directive is to ensure that water is healthy .
Parliament has proposed the addition of ' and clean ' .
But what do we mean by the words ' healthy and clean ' ?
Are we speaking about what is toxologically , and thus scientifically , acceptable , or are we thinking in terms of what is acceptable from the ecological perspective ?
I take the principle of caution seriously and adopt the latter possible interpretation .
For me clean water means unpolluted water .
The Commission clearly has a different understanding .
The Commission has used the WHO 's standards , but since the WHO is an organization which operates at a worldwide level , and primarily among the poorest countries , our target level in the EU should be significantly higher .
This is particularly the case , as already mentioned , for the limit values for the two substances trichlorethene and perchlorethene .
These have seen a raising , and thus a limiting , of the existing values to 40 and 70 ìg / l respectively .
This is despite the fact that the Commission 's own scientific advisory committee has said that trichlorethene is probably carcinogenic , which now also appears to be the view of the WHO 's cancer research centre .
There is also a serious legal problem that has not yet been clarified .
The legal basis is quite correctly Article 130s , but at the same time Article 13 lays down that it is not possible to ban or limit the importation of water or foodstuffs that include water , provided that these fulfil the minimum requirements .
How can this be harmonized with the legal basis of the directive which provides the possibility for setting up tighter national conditions ?
This abnormality needs to be removed from the directive .
I would like to conclude with some praise .
I was very pleased to read in the Danish press that the Environment Commissioner is intent on re-instating the total limit value ; this I would most definitely have approved here this afternoon .
Mr President , the directives covered by this joint debate , especially the one on drinking water , are exceptionally important .
The absolutely universal need for water and the impact of water on the health , culture and welfare of the human race are legendary .
That is why the economic impact of any revision of the directive is exceptional , so I think I should congratulate the Commission on its initiative , the rapporteur , Mr Collins , on his resolute examination of the directive , and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which has lived up to its name and debated this directive exclusively on criteria of health and consumer protection , leaving economic considerations in the background .
Finally , I would like to make two very short comments .

First , copper : we think this is dealt with wrongly , and it would have been logical to include it in substances that are undesirable in excessive quantities , not amongst the chemical parameters , and we cannot understand the rapporteur 's rigidity on this . Strictly scientific and health criteria have not been applied to copper , which , in our view , remains harmless in moderate quantities and an excellent material for water pipes .
Secondly , lead : we have certainly been entirely guided by conscience , leaving the economic impact of lead out of consideration .
But Parliament must monitor the situation so that , if necessary , economic assistance with a structural focus is available to the countries that have to replace their lead pipes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , lead is not meant for drinking .
Lead is a poison which cannot be excreted by humans once consumed .
Lead causes serious health damage to humans , which is especially severe in the case of children and pregnant women .
So it is quite understandable why the WHO has reduced its guide-value for lead in drinking water from 50 microgrammes to 10 microgrammes .
That still does not mean that there does not remain a small , however small , element of uncertainty .
But it certainly means that all states must endeavour to comply with this value as quickly as they can .
As we heard today , the WHO does not exactly have the reputation of calling for the most stringent guide-values .
In fact the WHO guide-values are minimum rather than maximum values .
So there is certainly no option but to replace lead pipes and lead fittings if we want to comply with the value of 10 microgrammes of lead .
That will cost money , a lot of money .
In the field of health and the environment we keep being faced with the need to repair and make up for the sins of the past .
Nobody wanted to harm anyone in the past by using lead .
Today we know how dangerous lead is , today we have no excuse not to take action .
The Commission is suggesting a transition period of fifteen years , the rapporteur , who is unfortunately not present , ten years .
I would be glad if the Member States could act that quickly .
In any case they must and will have the opportunity to make the necessary investment .
Europe is truly fascinating in its variety .
The Danes reckon on no costs , obviously they have no lead pipes .
The French are reckoning with very high costs .
The directive will not compel the individual home-owner to replace his lead piping , but what is the point of renovating the distribution system if even more lead gets into the drinking water through the household installations ?
One obvious task for the Member States would be to draw up renovation programmes , to offer fiscal and financial incentives and also to grant financial assistance to those home-owners who want to renovate .
Of course the Union must offer help here and formulate a plan for granting financial aid .
People might also resist this .
I believe that if in future people no longer judge accommodation only by its size , location and price but ask what the water is like , the market will soon adjust to that and a home with lead piping will quite simply have a far lower market value than one with good , fresh water .
Water is life and if we adopt a good drinking water directive tomorrow we will have done something towards protecting it .
Thank you , Mrs Flemming .
That was your maiden speech in this House and I congratulate you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group , as was anticipated by previous speakers , certainly takes a favourable view of the principles that inspired the proposal for an amendment to the drinking water directive .
Furthermore , previous speakers have tabled certain clarifications to the proposal put forward , which has presented us with various amendments .
I have no desire to dwell on the scientific aspect , which has already been dealt with by my colleagues , especially as regards the relocation of copper within the directive .
I would however like to point out that this directive will have a very heavy economic impact , and that our group has proposed that the final deadline for compliance should be put back by five years , while at the same time a system of incentives is introduced to reward those who are the first to comply with the new regulations and parameters contained in the directive .
We believe that this is an intelligent way to avoid imposing these heavy economic burdens too quickly upon the European tax payer , burdens which , let me remind you , will , throughout Europe , take some 100 , 000 million ECU out of the budgets of all us taxpayers .
Mr President , I would say that the European Parliament is issuing its opinion today in favour of a healthy revolution which is related to the quality of life , in this case drinking-water .
Emphasising the Commission initiative , I wish to welcome the work done by the rapporteur , Mr Collins .
It is true that these congratulations are a European Parliament habit .
But in any case I wish to congratulate him even though I disagree , on a particular issue , with the position taken by Mr Collins .
But I think that he has taken a fair stance in favour of increasing water quality models and because overall his report take the right approach .
From the Portuguese perspective , we had a recent case , a sad one , of aluminium in drinking-water , at an Evora hospital .
In England , in 1988 , a similar accident occurred , in Cornwall .
There have been repeated cases of nitrate and pesticide pollution .
These accidents are justify and emphasize the importance of this directive .
I would like to touch upon a number of points .
First of all , if this directive is meant to fight lead in water , we must look into alternative materials and look at the studies on this matter .
What are the effects of PVC ?
What are we to replace ?
What are we going to be using ?
Secondly , the costs .
This directive represents one annual Community budget .
Community funds , structural and otherwise , will have to be earmarked , if the directive is to be implemented .
Thirdly , we go along with and applaud restricting the use of pesticides .
Intensive farming and pesticide use harm the soil and underground water supplies , pollute water and put at risk an increasingly rare commodity .
We defend the switch of copper content from chemical parameters to indicative parameters , with a 2mg / litre limit or 2000 microgrammes / litre , reducing those set out in the 1980 directive .
The framework planned is sufficiently restricted and , in my view , it is wiser to integrate copper into indicative parameters rather than chemical ones , along with arsenic and other elements .
Mr President , there is no question about it : water is essential to our lives .
This applies to humans , animals and the ecosystem .
That is why we need a series of parameters , namely precaution , prevention , combating at source and the polluter-pays principle , all of which we have added to the Commission 's proposal .
It is up to you , Commissioner , to be rock-hard in your insistence that these parameters , both quality parameters and emission parameters , are implemented .
The reaction by Doeke Eisma , that some colleagues here want opting-out clauses for the event that things become too expensive after the directive enters into force , shows quite clearly that there are weak points in European water policy .
To pollute the rivers first and then to clean them up by the use of technology is quite definitely the wrong road to follow .
Let me say something about bathing water , and here I am strongly critical of my green friends , especially those from Germany .
It is as though they were throwing the baby out with the bath-water .
Anyone who believes one could introduce parameters for drinking water quality into the millions of bathing waters in Europe is playing into the hands of our common enemies of the environment !
If you want to achieve 0.1 microgrammes of pesticides in protected drinking water reserves - which we quite certainly want , and of course the catchment parameter too - you cannot do this for bathing water . You cannot even monitor it , you cannot check it , you cannot do anything .
All you can do is show that in this area your feet are not on the ground !
Let me say again that the question of cost is , of course , important , but I ask you , cost cannot be an opting-out parameter !
I am shocked to see some colleagues seriously discussing that here .
I am in favour of 0.1 , I am in favour of 0.5 , I am in favour of clean water .
We need clean water , and we have to implement the precautionary principle and the minimum requirement .
If we manage to do that we will be on the right road !
Mr President , Directive No 778 / 80 on drinking water laid down for the first time a series of mandatory requirements for drinking water quality which would apply to every country in the Community . It is fair to acknowledge that it is undoubtedly to that directive that we owe the overall improvement in water quality recorded in Europe during the last ten years .
Everything must grow old , and that includes directives .
In 1993 the European Council in Brussels invited the Commission to initiate a radical revision of the regulations on drinking water ; however , as the Commission itself acknowledges , the present proposal is only one element in the process of simplification , consolidation and updating of Community legislation on water .
Its purpose is not to protect resources but solely to guarantee the quality of the water supplied to the consumer .
It is not by chance that a fundamental aspect of the new directive is the reduction of the maximum lead content from 50 micrograms to 10 micrograms per litre , admittedly within a reasonably long timeframe , because lead is a toxic element .
However , the same cannot be said of copper , which has not only been scientifically proven to be harmless but is known to be actually necessary , in small doses , for human health .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has addressed the problem of financing the replacement of piping and also the problem , a significant one for governments , of the water supply to dwellings .
It would be a good moment , however , for the Commission to demonstrate to us that replacing lead or copper piping with plastic is definitely better for human health .
We look forward to seeing a demonstration in this House !
Mr President , I want to return to the question of cost .
I think it is very important to note that the European Commission has failed to produce any statement of the cost of either directive .
When the Commission representative was asked what the bathing waters directive would cost , he said it would cost a negligible amount given that it would come on top of the 1976 directive , and that was the major cost .
That is untrue .
It is untrue on the basis of statements of figures produced by the British Government ; it is untrue on the basis of figures produced by those who administer water services in the United Kingdom .
It is an appalling failure of the Commission that it produced absolutely no cost impact statement on the drinking water directive about which we have heard so much .
I know that you can say : ' She is only saying this because she wants to know the cost in order to act against the directive ' .
That is not the case .
I want to know the cost because I think that we , on behalf of the people of Europe , ought to be able to legislate with our eyes open in the knowledge of what this is likely to cost .
Mr Collins has shown the glimmerings of honesty on this , by recommending that in order to meet the cost of the ' lead in water ' issue , we should have an Objective VII of the structural funds .
I would like to know what the Commissioner thinks about that .
On the bathing waters directive , there are people in the gallery here who come from Torbay in Devon .
They are , or possibly were , Liberals .
Certainly the Liberal Group is not speaking on their behalf .
They represent a part of my country which is spending or partly spending some £ 3 million in all as a country to bring bathing water up to the standards of the 1976 directive .
In addition to that it is estimated that putting into effect the Commission proposals on bathing water would cost between £ 1.6 billion and £ 4 billion .
On top of that , Mr Eisma , who is a Liberal , wants to extend the bathing waters directive to all waters used for water sports and recreational purposes .
What is a recreational purpose ?
If it is sailing - and I think it must be - then how do you reconcile that with the fact that we have a round-Britain yacht race ?
If that race goes round Britain then consequently all United Kingdom coastal waters would presumably come within the orbit of this bathing waters directive .
Mr Eisma says that the figures which I have been producing are not accurate .
How on earth does a Dutch Liberal backbench Member of the European Parliament presume to comment on figures produced by the authorities of another Member State ?
I reject that .
I think it is important that this Parliament should be honest with the people of Europe about the cost of what we are recommending .
We are not honest .
We must be .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after we have just talked so much about costs I would like to start with a point I had actually intended to raise at the end , namely the lead content of drinking water .
We know what a serious hazard the lead content of water poses to the health of pregnant mothers and small children , and then we talk about costs !
I think the costs of replacing pipes should be contrasted with the costs of treating the sick .
Especially at a time when health costs are rising in every country , we have to consider what we can do to protect the health of the people of Europe .
We should not on the one hand had save a few costs while on the other allowing a costs to escalate in the health system .
I want to thank the rapporteur for his work on this directive and also take this opportunity to thank him for allowing me to work with him for a number of years , even before I became a Member of this Parliament , in his endeavours to improve the European environmental situation .
I think water has to be pure and clear ; it is our most important commodity .
It is the basis of what we cook and eat and I believe that pollutants must be eliminated on principle ; that applies both to pollutants that are well-known such as nitrates , pesticides , chemicals and organic chlorine compounds and to those whose harmful effects we are only just beginning to recognize .
I very much hope that the Commission will carry out a study and submit proposals on means of eliminating pollutants that disrupt endocrine functions from drinking water .
I believe that what a leading European physicist once said , namely that water is the mirror of our future , could be taken as the guiding principle of our activities and that the Commission and the Council must take up Parliament 's proposals to ensure that this mirror remains clear !
Mr President , at long last the water directives have been put before Parliament .
I cannot overemphasize how important the revision of the directives is from the point of view of countries which have for years been applying scientifically more advanced methods .
Without the adoption of the new directives , we would be compelled to go back in time nearly twenty years .
This would be impossible to explain to the public .
The Union should be ambitious when dealing with water , as with regard to other fields which directly affect the health and safety of the public .
The Member States should be pressed to adopt and implement the highest possible standards .
When work is carried out , results are achieved .
In Finland , for example , high levels of trihalomethane in drinking water used to be a problem .
Now , thanks to numerous efforts , the situation is well under control and levels have fallen to the EU average .
There will be an opportunity to return to the environmental protection of waters in connection with the future framework directive on the protection of waters .
I hope that Parliament will manage to persuade the Council to act more promptly in this respect than it did with regard to the directives currently under consideration .
Mr President , I feel it necessary to divide my answer up into two sections , because there are a number of amendments to which I am obliged to respond ; so I will first make a few comments on the proposal regarding bathing water .
First of all , of course , I would like to thank both the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their work and would thank rapporteurs Doeke Eisma and Petrus Cornelissen in particular .
Since directive 76 / 160 on the quality of bathing water is one of the oldest legal provisions , in recent years - and this has been a prominent part of this evening 's debate - there has been some discussion in recent years , mainly because it has not been brought into line with technical and scientific advances .
These advances have now made it easier to define pollution indicators for the purpose of predicting the presence of substances that cause disease .
In addition bathing , and thus the quality of bathing water , are an important factor in tourism , and the tourist industry requires common criteria throughout the European Union so that holiday makers can make their choices on a comparable basis .
It is also apparent from the amendments that the committees have been attentive to this .
The main purpose of this proposal is to simplify and improve the present directive both with regard to citizens and with regard to the authorities of Member States .
In terms of citizens by guaranteeing that the standards are high and in accordance with the latest scientific knowledge and , through greater transparency , by ensuring that they are kept regularly and fully informed about the quality of bathing water in their own countries and also , of course , at their holiday destinations .
In terms of the authorities by limiting the number of parameters that must be taken into account , and also by making it possible for them to detect instances when the water quality is temporarily not in compliance with the standards , and to do something about it .
There are many areas in which the Commission is in agreement with the committee 's amendments .
Amendments Nos 4 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 and 14 , which have been referred to in particular by Mr Eisma , Nos 18 , 21 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 28 , 31 , 33 , 34 , 35 and 36 , which have also been mentioned , and Nos 37 and 40 can be confirmed either in full or in principle .
Amendments Nos 6 , 17 , 22 , 27 and 29 must be altered somewhat and can therefore only be approved in part .
On the other hand the Commission cannot approve Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 19 , 20 , 25 , 30 , 32 , 38 and 39 .
It is not possible , at this point in the debate , to give reasons for rejection in individual cases .
However I shall make comment on some of them .
Our inability to accept Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 8 is due to the fact that they alter the main thrust of the directive , with the result that the focus is turned from the environment and health to tourism .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 6 , part 2 , and 22 , part 4 , because they would entail a profusion of symbols and would confuse citizens with a new symbol in terms of the already widely recognized blue flag .
I would say that in general terms I concur with the glowing comments which many speakers have expressed concerning use of the blue flag .
The Commission notes the well argued request for the guaranteed quality of areas of water for recreational purposes .
However , this does not mean that it would be a satisfactory solution to extend the area of application of the bathing water directive to cover other areas of water used for recreational purposes .
For this reason we cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 5 and 15 .
We have , however , taken note of this and will consider the extent to which it is possible to introduce arrangements with respect to the areas of water for recreational use .
Finally we come to Amendment No 14 which is aimed at integrating the bathing water directive in a general framework directive on water policy .
This can be accepted in principle .
We agree with this amendment in terms of avoiding weakening the directive , but at the present moment we have no immediate plans for integrating the bathing water directive into the future general framework directive .
The wish for a general framework directive for water was proposed in the summer of 1996 after consultation with the parties affected by the integration of all water related legislation into a consistent policy .
The Commission has therefore come to the conclusion that the bathing water directive represents an independent contribution to integration of the health and environment policies , and for the tourism policy in its own right .
It is also our view that the bathing water directive benefits from having a clear , independent identity .
Even if the bathing water directive , though not as such , eventually forms part of the general framework directive on water , there will still be close coordination with the latter directive since bathing water and the corresponding provisions for this will be incorporated into the water management plans which are to be drawn up in the context of the imminent general framework directive .
There has also been extensive discussion with regard to the scientific basis for certain parameters such as faecal streptococci and enteroviruses .
Recent scientific research has shown , on the one hand , that the Commission 's proposal with regard to faecal streptococci as the most suitable indicator for faecal pollution has been correct .
On the other hand the same research has also shown that it is necessary to introduce a more stringent standard to achieve an acceptable health risk ratio .
Research currently being performed by the World Health Organization , the WHO , concerning the quality of areas of water used for recreation , shows similar results .
The Commission can therefore approve Parliament 's Amendment No 36 on this .
Many other comments could be made about the proposal , but I will leave it at this and express my thanks for the treatment of this subject .
I trust I have covered the main points in the comments expressed in the debate , and will now move on to comment on the proposal relating to drinking water and revision of the drinking water directive .
Once again I would like to thank the rapporteurs , and rapporteur Ken Collins in particular , but also the assistants who have worked on the proposal .
I would like to thank them for their contributions and for their clarification of the many individual points that have been raised in connection with this proposal which naturally has a far-reaching and important political content , but one which is at the same time a very technical proposal .
The main purpose of the proposal is to simplify , update and improve the existing directive from the point of view of both citizens and of authorities in Member States .
From the citizen 's point of view by ensuring that the standards are high and in accordance with the latest scientific knowledge and by making the directive more transparent , so that we can ensure that the public is regularly informed about the quality of the drinking water supplied to them .
And from the authority 's point of view by reducing the number of parameters that must be monitored , and by making it possible for them to react to situations in which the water quality is temporarily not fully in compliance with the standards .
The Commission has worked hard to achieve what in my opinion is a good , well thought out proposal which makes up for deficiencies in the existing directive , at the same time as maintaining and , in many cases , improving the high level of protection .
Of the , I believe , 124 amendments we are able to approve 22 completely , 13 in principle and 1 partly , but there are 89 which we cannot approve .
In its examination of the amendments and in its formulation of the original proposal , the Commission has been very careful to ensure that , in accordance with the recently adopted communiqué on implementation of the Community 's environmental legislation , proposals will only be put forward if they are able to function and be carried out .
As guardians of the Treaty the Commission must clearly ensure that directives are carried out fairly and consistently .
In view of the present directive 's shortcomings with regard to enforcement , the Commission is particularly watchful to ensure that the revised directive can be implemented correctly .
The Commission is able , without reservation , to approve Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 16 , 18 , 20 , 25 , 28-33 , 36 , 38 , 40 and 42 , dealing with the issues various speakers have raised in connection with the combined limit value , in addition to Nos 48 , 49 , 50 and 64 .
They all improve the text in that they either provide additional background material or they introduce reasonable and logical requirements , remove scope for misinterpretation , give greater transparency and , in some cases , a higher level of protection .
There are 13 amendments which the Commission is able to approve in principle , namely Nos 6 , 10 , 17 , 19 , 26 , 39 , 41 , 44 , 45 , 47 , 58 , 65 and 77 .
As far as trihalomethanes are concerned , the Commission is prepared to approve the rapporteur 's Amendments Nos 41 and 45 which I have already mentioned .
These provide a significant tightening up of the standards contained in the proposal .
The new Amendment No 121 contemplates a further tightening of the provisions .
I can well understand the background to this proposal , but I cannot go into this at the moment .
However I can promise that we will consider this in detail in due course .
The Commission can partly approve one of the amendments , namely No 7 .
The Commission cannot approve the other amendments , and I shall dispense with specifying them individually .
These have been identified in what I said earlier .
However I will pick out some of them and show why the Commission is unable to approve them .
I would be happy to return to the others , of course , if anyone requests this at a later stage .
In general the Commission cannot approve amendments which , in its opinion , cannot function or which would make implementation unreasonably difficult .
As I said earlier , it was one of the purposes of the proposal to rectify some of the existing directive 's shortcomings and this applies in particular to those provisions which cannot function in practice .
That is why we cannot approve Amendments Nos 8 and 9 which require the assurance that water reclamation areas are protected from pesticides and nitrates .
Even with the best will in the world this form of assurance cannot be safeguarded .
To approve this amendment as it stands would make the full and proper implementation of the directive next to impossible .
Amendments Nos 22 , 23 and 24 are aimed at removing the reporting procedure that must be used if a Member State wishes to lay down more stringent standards or additional parameters .
I must confess that the proposal to allow these provisions to be omitted is an attractive one .
The Commission is of the view , however , that it cannot approve this amendment at first reading , but has not ruled out the possibility that it may accept the proposals when this aspect is debated the second time round .
I cannot stress strongly enough that the purpose of the reporting procedure is not to prevent the use of more stringent or supplementary standards , but simply to ensure that such standards are not used in such a way that they act as trade barriers and thus prevent functioning of the internal market .
Amendments Nos 12 and 34 are aimed at introducing a new factor and a new article containing provisions on materials that come into contact with water .
The Commission agrees that the question of the materials used for water pipes , which several speakers have addressed , is of considerable relevance for the quality of drinking water obtained from the tap .
However , this is primarily a matter for directive 89 / 106 , the so-called building materials directive , but we must define the precise relationship between these two directives more clearly at a later point .
The committee procedure proposed by the Commission is procedure II .
Amendment No 37 would mean that the committee procedure was completely removed .
During formulation of the proposal the Commission has made every effort to ensure that amendments of annex I , parameters and parameter values , are protected throughout the whole legislation procedure , including Parliament .
On the other hand the updating of annexes II , monitoring , and III , target methods , must be via the committee .
In the Commission 's view , this is the most effective way of dealing with what are primarily technical matters .
I have some further comments on Amendments Nos 43 , 51 and 46 , as well as on a few others .
If no rapporteurs wish to insist on a response to these amendments today , I will conclude the debate by expressing thanks for the positive acceptance of the proposal and of the amendments .
Madam Commissioner , I too would like to thank you very much for trying to answer many of the issues raised .
That effort , of course , took up 18 minutes , thank God !
I am pointing that out because I have repeatedly asked the Bureau and Parliament 's Sittings Service to calculate the average length of speeches by Commissioners , which is around 10 minutes , and not to allow just 5 minutes in the draft order of business so we are always behind with our programmes .
Mr President , I am very pleased with the Commission 's answers but I have one question .
The Commissioner says that she cannot accept Amendment No 3 , extending bathing water to cover water for other recreational purposes , but will do something about it .
Can the Commissioner also tell us when she will be able to tell us how she intends to introduce rules for other water sports , surfers and the like ?
I would appreciate more information here .
Mrs Jackson , my backbencher colleague , wonders how I dare challenge her estimates on the costs .
I have given my arguments and I shall not repeat them .
But Mrs Jackson , I ask you in a spirit of collegiality if you will take up my arguments and discuss them further with me .
Will you please only address questions to the Commissioner , and not make comments about Members who are not in Parliament at this time .
Mr President , I asked my backbencher colleague , Mrs Jackson , why she refuses to believe me when I challenge her estimates on the costs resulting from these directives .
I have given my arguments , Mr President , and I shall not repeat them , but I am asking Mrs Jackson in all friendliness to take up my arguments and discuss them further with me .
Mr President , I am of course not untouched by the charming appreciation of the Commissioner of the rapporteur Mr Eisma and myself .
But that does not mean that I as a parliamentarian would not like to have an answer to the one question I put .
What are the Commissioner 's specific objections to introducing 31 January as the deadline for publishing the water quality in the interest of consumers and of tourists ?
Is the Commissioner willing to explain her objections , if necessary in writing in view of the late hour ?
Mr President , perhaps you are aware that there is still one report to be debated .
However , it is now 12 minutes to midnight . I have a duty to develop my subject and my colleagues must also have their say .
The allocation of time must be fair .
We cannot go on debating other issues ad infinitum to the cost of my own report - on so important an issue .
Mr President , I just wanted to ask if you could tell us where Mrs Jackson is .
I cannot believe she has not had the courtesy to stay and listen to the Commissioner 's reply .
She came in here , made a statement making no positive proposals , simply attacking the opposition party from her own country , and has not had the courtesy to be here to listen to the Commissioner 's reply .
It should be investigated .
Mr President , I am naturally sorry that it should have taken 18 minutes , but because of the great number of amendments to which Parliament requires a response , it is simply impossible to make it any shorter .
With regard to the repeated question about advancing the date for the bathing water report , I can only say that until we have established another form of cooperation with Member States , this will not be a possibility .
This year there were many tiresome errors in the bathing water report that we presented , because we received information so late that there was not enough time to adopt it .
That is why we laid down a procedure which was initially very strict , but which on occasions can result in incorrect information .
We would very much like to go into this at greater depth and in writing , because it is also our wish , of course , that the figures be made available as soon as they possibly can , but this is not possible with the procedure currently laid down .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
Conservation of wetlands
The next item is the report ( A4-0238 / 96 ) by Mrs Kokkola , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the wise use and conservation of wetlands ( COM ( 95 ) 0189 - C4-0224 / 95 ) .
Mr President , I am sorry I interrupted earlier , but I am thinking mainly of the interpreters , whom I would not wish to keep beyond their work schedules . It was not on my own account .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with the Commission 's communication on the wise use and conservation of wetlands , the European Union is acquiring its own policy , and will I hope go on to set up the necessary legislation for the preservation and conservation of the wetlands that still remain .
Wetlands are now recognized as very valuable ecosystems , and for that reason they are governed by an international treaty , the RAMSAR Convention .
Though the European Union itself is not a contributing party , Community action for the conservation of wetlands begins with the first action programme for the environment .
I would therefore like , very briefly , to explain why the functions of wetlands are important for the environment and for mankind .
Wetlands are among the planet 's most productive ecosystems , and are characterized by exceptional biodiversity .
They regulate the water supply and restrain flooding .
They prevent coastal erosion . They retain pollutants and toxic substances , and recent research has shown that some wetlands are carbon-dioxide sinks and so contribute towards restricting the greenhouse phenomenon .
They contribute substantially to marine resources and their destruction would have serious consequences for the fishing industry .
However , I will not go further into all this , but would like to stress how important it is to implement already existing Community measures for the preservation and conservation of wetlands , such as :
the implementation of NATURA 2000 ; -fulfilment by the European Union of its obligations under international conventions to which the EU is a party ; -the incorporation of the policy on the wise use of wetlands ; -in the European Union 's other policies and activities ; However , Mr President and Madam Commissioner , let me make some other points which I consider supplementary and very important if we are to save the ' water-holes ' which until only a few years ago , for lack of correct information and knowledge , were regarded only as sources of ' noxious influences ' against health and the environment .
Mr President and Madam Commissioner , the creation of a special system for wetlands is considered an important step for their preservation , since policies so far have not managed to prevent their loss and degradation , though of course the necessary resources must be provided .
In other words , wetlands of international importance according to the RAMSAR Convention and areas classified as subject to special protection should automatically be included in the NATURA 2000 network , the Commission should take steps to list all Europe 's wetlands as soon as possible and to chart their locations and sizes .
The listing would bring to our attention wetlands which we do not know about , and so make it possible to protect them .
Besides , the very act of listing them would help to generate awareness of their value as natural and cultural heritage , and would sensitize public opinion to them .
A database must be created to enable the collection and exchange of information .
More and better training programmes should be organized to improve the performance of those whose decisions and activities affect wetlands .
The Commission should develop an integrated programme for the management of water resources and for their conservation .
Cooperation should be established in whatever concerns wetlands , with all other countries associated in any way with the European Union .
Recognition and support should be given to the role of nongovernmental organizations , which have offered much in the area of wetlands preservation and can offer much more .
In conclusion , Mr President and Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , having drawn your attention to some of the points in the report which I consider very important , I hope this report will be accepted and believe that it is not too late for the Commission to adopt appropriate measures to preserve and conserve these stretches of water , mud , marsh and reeds , which are so important for ecological balance .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all of us know , if only because we have passed through them at least once in our lives , that wetlands exist throughout Europe , and , I am very glad to say , they are all different .
We all know , too , that these wetlands have a soul , a sensitivity , a culture and of course an economic , ecological , environmental and scientific value .
In short , they have a history , including a political history , and they form part of the national territory and heritage of every Member State .
The responsibility for their use and conservation rests exclusively with those who live in them and use them , and so it is of course necessary to protect them not only in the general interest of the Member States but also with a view to the special interests of those who maintain them and live off them .
No text , no legislation , no directive , no necessarily arbitrary law can replace the men and women whose hearts and minds and hands have shaped these exceptional areas .
Only a combined action by the various partners is guaranteed to be effective - all the more effective in that the various partners have different objectives .
Agriculture , fish-farming , forestry , hunting , respect for property - these tourism-related qualities are more important criteria than those reflected in various directives or conventions such as RAMSAR , Habitat , Natura 2000 , etc . , which are far more restrictive .
The instruments of the CAP , even when improved in the context of making an exception for wetlands , will only be isolated measures , complex to explain and administer and quite possibly with no lasting value .
This leaves us , then , with the special status of these wetlands to which the rapporteur referred a few moments ago .
As they are exceptional areas needing efficient management , specific financing must be provided on a level appropriate to this situation , which deserves better than empty words and will give users a meaningful pointer to better management .
For this reason , in the spirit of this motion for a resolution , we shall be voting in the same way .
Our committee , Mr President , has found that there are many regions where important fishing and shellfish farming activities are directly linked to the maintenance in Europe of well managed wetlands .
It is therefore a priority to prevent their desertification .
The future of the wetlands is bound up with the presence of those who made them .
If there are no more people to breathe life into them , maintain them and manage the water , in a generation 's time there will be no more wetlands in Europe .
Hence the urgent need for these areas , which are easily identified and often straddle administrative borders , to be subject to a specific system of the same type as that which successfully put a stop to the rural exodus in mountain regions .
The need , then , is to come up with a specific system and a specific financial instrument which will allow profitable activities to be continued despite the extra costs associated with the specific constraints of these ecologically sensitive and fragile environments .
With this in mind , the Committee on the Environment has adopted the majority of our suggestions , and I thank its members for doing so .
A specific policy appropriate to the diversity of the wetlands , and sustainable , with compensations offsetting the constraints , a ' wetlands ' section within the framework of the PESCA programme , the inclusion of a ' wetlands ' component in the PHARE and TACIS programmes , and the management of Europe 's wetlands in partnership with the ecologically related African wetlands , as recommended by the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in Windhoek .
However , our committee particularly stressed the need , before defining any instruments for the management and conservation of wetlands , to involve those who manage them ; marshland syndicates and associations , fishermen , fish and shellfish farmers , farmers , landowners , hunters and other wetland users .
The liaison committee of European wetlands guardians which has just been set up will be a particularly knowledgeable discussion partner , which it will soon be seen to be essential to consult , as unanimously recommended by our committee .
Our committee also emphasized the need to learn the lessons of the OGAF-type agricultural and environmental programmes already undertaken , especially in the United Kingdom and France , which absolutely must be perpetuated by releasing the necessary financial resources .
Otherwise , the present operators will leave and the younger generation will not settle in these areas .
The research currently being carried out under the aegis of the Studies Directorate of the European Parliament , particularly on the basis of experience in the Poitou marshes , could make an important contribution , Mr President , to the quest for a sustainable solution to the problem of conserving Europe 's wetlands , a natural and human heritage that absolutely must be preserved .
This has to be a priority , and we must act quickly .
Mr President , after congratulating the rapporteur on his excellent work of course , the first thing I must mention , on behalf of the Socialist Group , is that the coastal wetlands are disappearing from our European shores or receding dramatically and the only way to protect and look after this very fragile common heritage is through Community cooperation and solidarity . So there is an urgent need to draw up a plan for the sustainable and integrated development of our coastlines , as announced and promised in the Fifth Action Programme .
In its day , CORINE was enormously effective in providing comparative data based on comparable criteria for selected wetlands making it possible to assess the position precisely .
So although the Commission 's text is adequate and necessary given that the conservation of these fragile ecosystems requires evaluation and management of the shoreline which takes account of the interdependence of wetlands , as highlighted by migrating birds , it is still not enough .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the dramatic transformation resulting from physical and chemical disturbances , polders , drainage , drought , agricultural desiccation , tourism - I am sorry Mr Cornelissen is not here - water contamination , etc . , due to misconceived development , which also , if I may say so , contravenes the Treaty on Union , are causing the destruction of these beautiful wetlands and hence seriously threatening our migrating birds through the habitat they frequent , their breeding grounds and their wintering and rest areas .
We must not repeat the terrible human destruction that caused the tragic silent spring so well described by Rachel Carson years back . Please let us fulfil the Fifth Action Programme in one go .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Mrs Kokkola for her excellent report .
We all know that most wetlands have been lost and the remaining ones are under threat of damage or extinction ; and all this is happening while wetlands occupy a very special place in the ecosystem .
The Commission rightly says that we must stop the disappearance of the wetlands but unfortunately the Commission has failed to make extra funds available .
I fail to understand how the Commission and Member States can imagine how the wetlands can be preserved and protected without extra funds .
The lack of specific funds will unfortunately be translated into lack of action .
The Commission 's demand that wetlands be restored or produced afresh strikes me as being ineffective .
No artificial substitute can provide a proper alternative for the present natural wetlands .
Unfortunately wetlands are not yet considered an inseparable part of a river basin or coastal region .
If wetlands are to be kept then I think that can only be done if action is integrated into other policies .
I would call in this context for special attention to be paid to agriculture , fisheries , transport and regional policy .
At the moment integration leaves a lot to be desired .
There is no coherent legislation in this field .
I invite the Commission not to leave it at this communication but to move to action as quickly as possible and present a proposal for legislation aimed at guaranteeing that wetlands be kept in Europe .
Mr President , we owe Mrs Kokkola and all her colleagues a debt of gratitude for the work she has done .
In her report , she mentions the various conventions the European Community has signed - Bonn , Berne , Brazil , etc. and the need to comply with them .
She also mentions the various directives covering protection of natural areas and wetlands , like Directive 79 / 409 / EEC on the conservation of wild birds and the ' Habitats 43 ' Directive .
If there was compliance with the conventions signed and the directives approved , I think we would probably protect the wetlands better .
But sometimes even the European Union runs into contradictions .
Last week a delegation of the Committee on the Environment visited Greece and we had a meeting with nongovernmental environmental organizations .
The basic concern expressed by these organizations related to a grandiose project in Greece financed by European Union funds : the diversion of the River Acheloos .
There is a debate going on in Greece between those in favour and those against , because they think there should be water in the Thessalia valley and that the agricultural resources there should be exploited .
But there is no doubt that if this diversion comes about it is going to affect the delta of the Severino and Acheloos rivers very seriously .
Does this mean only Greece is using European Union funds to undermine the directives and conventions that have been signed ?
No .
It is going on in Spain too .
Wetlands in Spain have been seriously affected , like the Santoña marshes or the river Eo - the frontier between Galicia and Asturias , very close to where I live .
European funds were used there too .
So a fundamental point in trying to prevent the deterioration of the wetlands is for the European Union to control the funds it grants to the various countries extremely well so that they are not used for the very opposite of what we are defending here .
Mr President , in congratulating and enthusiastically supporting Mrs Kokkola on her report , I should like to illustrate the pressing need to act to conserve our wetlands by talking about the outer Thames marshes in my constituency in the UK .
The West Canvey , Bowers , Pitsea , Fobbing and Mucking Marshes all together form an extensive interlinked area of wetland totalling more than a thousand hectares .
They are home to large populations of wintering birds including some 300 to 400 black-tailed godwit , and provide habitats for rare plant life such as the ' least lettuce ' , one of only two locations in the UK .
Rare brackish insects live in the myriad of ditches and creeks , comparing in importance only to the Somerset levels in the whole of the country .
Yet in 50 years over half of these rare wetlands have been lost .
Agriculture has destroyed grazing marsh whilst the unrelenting rise in the sea level is eliminating the intertidal habitats .
Nearby landfill waste sites may now contribute economically to the management of the wetlands but long-finished sites such as Westwick at Canvey remain a scar on the environment whilst leachate and pesticides from agricultural uses are an ever-present threat to the quality of the water .
Over the last 15 years our local authorities have acted to arrest the decline but they do not have the resources to do more .
Perhaps because wetlands lack public awareness and support , formal status as a site of special scientific interest has never been formally secured .
Tonight we say that such a site does require international as well as national protection .
We encourage initiatives like that of Thurrock , Basildon and Castle Point Councils , which cooperate together in protecting land , much of which has a single watershed .
In our proposals for the structural funds , including PESCA status which my area already enjoys , we seek to apply European funding to protect and enhance the wetlands .
As 10 , 000 school children a year undertake educational visits to the Wat Tyler Country Park at Pitsea Marsh , we seek to find new ways to allow increased public access and awareness without compromising the environmental protection offered .
Wetlands such as these really are the land that time forgot .
They are wilderness habitats , unchanged over centuries and therefore quite literally irreplaceable .
Tonight we signal our determination to end the loss and degradation of wetlands for all time .
Mr President , I would like to start by expressing my pleasure at the excellent report from Mrs Kokkola .
I would like to concentrate on a particular aspect of wetlands .
They can act as traps for nutritive salts and can therefore protect our seas from excessive nutrients .
This is a great problem in the Baltic Sea .
Excessive nutrients can threaten the reproduction of species .
Certain of the programmes , under Regulation No 2078 / 92 , covering environmental improvement in agriculture include incentives for establishing wetlands but this is just for the acreage set aside for this purpose .
I think that this should be supplemented with support to help with the investment necessary to create good wetlands which can act as nitrogen traps .
The regulations need to be changed as part of a good initiative for the environment .
I hope that the Commission will propose the necessary amendments to Regulation No 2078 / 92 .
This will also have a positive effect on employment as an added bonus .
Investment in wetlands , primarily designed as traps for nitrogen and phosphorous could become a reference point for corresponding initiatives in Poland and the Baltic States , through the PHARE programme for example .
This would be a decisive move to improve the environment in the Baltic Sea .
I would like to propose fruitful cooperation between Commissioner Ritt Bjerregaard and Commissioner Franz Fischler for the benefit of the environment and to reduce the environmental damage caused by agriculture .
Mr President , Europe must take action to protect its wetlands .
It is time for a new attitude from the European Union and the Member States .
I therefore welcome the European Commission 's communication and this report .
In my country the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds has identified 354 wetland sites where the amount of water being extracted threatens their very future .
That includes more than 100 rivers and 200 top wetland sites .
There are also another 130 sites threatened by future plans .
In the Somerset Levels and Moors in my constituency we have some of the country 's finest wetlands .
The sites identified as being at risk include Berrow Dune and the River Yeo .
We must act now to safeguard their future .
The first step should be to bring the North Somerset Levels and Moors into the environmentally sensitive area .
The source of the threat is clear : agri-business and the water industry are taking vast amounts of water from our rivers and wetlands .
I understand their need for secure supplies of water .
But we have to introduce measures to ensure that they take it in a responsible and sustainable way .
Two key changes are urgently needed .
Governments must phase in charges for taking water from our rivers .
That would soon encourage the water companies to take a more responsible attitude .
We should also require water resources to be taken into account when planning permission for housing or industrial development is considered .
Across our continent we have ambitious targets for protecting endangered wildlife ; but if we do not take action to protect our wetlands we do not stand a chance of meeting our own targets .
It is time we shook off our complacency and took action .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity of thanking the Environment Committee , and in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Kokkola , for their commendable work in considering the Commission 's report and also for their cooperation with Parliament 's other committees and for the comments the speakers have made here this evening .
The preservation of water areas quite clearly presents us with a considerable challenge .
On the one hand we have , for a long time now , been concerned with the ecological , economical and recreational significance of such areas .
Many provisions have already been introduced at different levels for the purpose of their preservation .
As Mrs Kokkola , among others , has stated , the RAMSAR Agreement was reached as long ago as 1971 .
On the other hand - and this has been the central debate here today - we have been witnesses to the fact that many areas of water are gradually disappearing or being spoilt .
This means that good intentions have not been matched by action .
Over half of the EU 's water areas have recently disappeared or been adversely affected by urban development , partly through thoughtless use , but also through deliberate exploitation of the environment .
Their essential importance for bio-diversity is obvious .
The same applies to their economic and social functions .
We do not need many catastrophic floods such as those that affected various Member States in 1995 , to see that areas of water play an important regulating role .
Nor do we need any further reduction of fish stocks to understand the vital importance of water areas as breeding grounds .
The central question is what we can do to change this trend .
The Commission 's report underlines some of the most important steps that can be taken to ensure preservation of both water areas and the biological world .
The Community 's general objectives for these areas are simple , but at the same time ambitious .
We wish to avoid a further loss of water areas and further devastation , whilst at the same time ensuring sensible use .
The Commission is pleased to note that Parliament 's draft decision supports these general aims .
The water area policy must be integrated into policies for the various areas of action .
Many people here these evening have stressed the connection with both the fishing policy and the agricultural policy , and pointed out that it is necessary to combine them by means of several different instruments .
As far as legal acts are concerned , we place emphasis on implementation of the bird and habitat directives .
I cannot miss the opportunity this evening of stressing that there is still a long way to go before we reach the point where these have been implemented in the Member States .
We also place emphasis on careful consideration and on the implementation of legal acts relating to water quality and the recently adopted proposals for assessment of plans and programmes from an environmental perspective .
These three complementary elements of EU legislation will provide a basis for implementing the objectives that are laid down for the preservation of water areas .
The Commission would also like to continue the assessment of plans and programmes if investments can be supported from the structural funds .
On the basis of this experience it will take an active part in preparation of the amendment of the structural fund provisions which is planned by the year 1999 .
It is necessary to ensure that better care is taken of the environment in general , and of wild animals and plants in particular .
Preservation of water areas is a test case which will demonstrate whether our attempts to integrate the environment in terms of agricultural , fishing and transport policies is to be crowned with success .
Let me say in closing that I greatly appreciate the fact that the resolution is the result of cooperation between four of Parliament 's committees .
I see this as a great spur for promoting integration of the environment with the other policies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 12.25 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , in this House yesterday we all witnessed the very important process of awarding the Sakharov Prize to Mr Jingsheng , and the moment when his sister received the Prize on his behalf because he is still in prison , was deeply moving .
It reminded me of the same experience last year with Leyla Zana , who is also still in prison .
I believe the European Parliament should proclaim that it has not forgotten her , that it should send a personal message to Leyla Zana and ask the Turkish government to respect the European Parliament 's position .
Mr Papakyriazis , I understand your sentiments , but that has nothing to do with the Minutes .
Mr President , I am sorry , I forgot to sign the attendance list yesterday but I did take part in the debate and I voted as well .
Mr Martens , we can all testify that you were here , doing your job , and we shall give evidence on your behalf to all the television stations .
Mr President , on the question of television companies , I have taken recently to signing two registers , the one on the right-hand side and the one on the left-hand side .
I have to report to the House a sad case of discrimination because I have never been filmed yet and I feel sorry about that .
Is it because the producers of these films are only photographing the good-looking ones in this Chamber and cast aside the unphotogenic ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I have the impression that we are going to have a light-hearted morning , but I really cannot allow things to go on like this , because we do have a lot of difficult and time-consuming votes to get through today .
We really must make a start on what we are supposed to be doing .
Mrs Roth , on a point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order pursuant to Rule 127 , I should like to express the sorrow of my Group and that of many other Members of this House that , as I understand it , you are now making your last 10 a.m. appearance in the chair you now occupy .
I feel we should express our sorrow and some of the sadness that we feel at parting , and also our thanks for all the work you have done .
In recent days we have been giving ' Mr CFSP ' some thought .
I have my doubts about the value of that proposal , but I do believe you have really succeeded in giving this European Parliament , as its President , an image of pugnacity and wisdom .
I should like to offer my most sincere thanks on behalf of our Group and , I feel sure , on behalf of many other Members here in this House .
( Sustained applause )
( Mrs Roth presented Mr Hänsch with a bouquet )
Ladies and gentlemen , I am of course touched and most grateful for those kind words .
But I must point out that I still have an hour 's voting to conduct , and I may yet make half a dozen or more mistakes .
So please wait !
Mr President , with respect to Rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure , I would like to make a personal comment .
The city of Strasbourg used to provide a marvellous service here outside one of the buildings from which we could hire bicycles .
This service has now been withdrawn because we are told that the bus spoils the surroundings .
I really think it a pity if Parliament 's Members are unable to put up with this bicycle service , so I would ask you to ensure that we are again given the opportunity of hiring bicycles outside the building .
I really hope you will be able to take the necessary action to secure this .
Mr Blak , I am glad to note your suggestion and it will be one of the last things I attend to .
Mr President , I wanted to make a comment on the minutes .
I have a correction which I think concerns the item you wanted to take , namely Item 2 of the minutes of yesterday - the Izquierdo Collado report .
I presume this should be the Izquierdo Rojo report .
Secondly the last sentence of that paragraph says that the report had been due to be taken on Friday .
What I would like to suggest is that we take the speaking time from Friday and add it to the speaking time on the fisheries debate today .
This is an extremely important subject and although Members are more interested in Christmas festivities the fishermen of Europe are waiting for 1 January .
I would ask for support to have an hour added to the debate on fisheries so that we can do justice to this extremely important subject .
As far as your first comment is concerned , Mr Macartney , we will change the Minutes accordingly . As for the second , we have to stand by the resolutions we have adopted .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Welcome

Ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the House I should like to welcome a delegation from the Russian Duma and Federal Council , led by Mr Alexander Shokhin , Chairman of the State Duma Delegation for Relations with the European Parliament , who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
This visit forms part of the fifth inter-parliamentary meeting between the European Parliament and the Russian State Duma .
The European Parliament attaches very great importance to relations with Russia , and we look forward to a constructive and successful meeting .
On behalf of the House , I once again bid you welcome , and wish you a useful , interesting and pleasant stay in Strasbourg .
Votes
Mr President , after the meeting of the Committee on Budgets efforts were made to find a solution to this issue and I wish to read the following oral amendment to add to the justification of this particular budget line : ' The reserve may be released during the course of the budget year if the agency proves to the budgetary authority that the available funds have been fully executed according to the terms of the work programme and that further means are necessary for operational purposes .
The agency may also apply for further appropriations in the framework of a supplementary and amending budget if it is proved to be justifiable and the means are available . '
I hope that this will enable the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , which has asked for a separate vote , to vote in favour of this amendment .
First , I have to ask the House whether it agrees to our accepting this additional amendment in oral form .
Are there any objections ?
It appears not , so we can adopt that procedure , and I will have the amendment put to the vote in the form just explained by Mr Brinkhorst .
Mr President , I think this is an extremely important vote .
I hope the outside world will be aware that some people on the right in this House , under intense pressure from people outside this institution , particularly from some elements of the Commission , ...
... have turned their backs on the people fighting for democracy and human rights in Turkey !
( Loud applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , we knew that this was an important vote .
We all know that .
And we all know that it was politically controversial .
I have already given the floor to Mrs Green and I shall now give it to Mr Martens as well , but please let us not get involved in a debate now .
I shall not allow any further speakers .
Mr President , last Wednesday I put a very precise question to the President of the European Commission .
I asked him if the European Commission would be acting in line with both the spirit and the letter of the resolution we adopted here on 19 September 1996 .
The Commission President confirmed that it would .
To us this is a good enough guarantee that we do not need to have these appropriations in the reserve .
We think it is in the general interest to trust the good faith of the European Commission that it will implement our resolution of 19 September .
Ladies and gentlemen , Parliament has made a decision , like it or not .
There is - please just listen - there is no point whatsoever in starting a debate now .
What could we achieve ?
Now , Mrs Roth , if you have a point of order then of course I have to take it .
Mr President , this is not about a debate , it is about equal rights for all .
You were supposed to guarantee that .
If you allow the chairman of the Socialist Group and Mr Martens the right to comment on this vote , then you have to allow the chairmen of the other Groups the same right .
This has nothing to do with debate and everything to do with democracy .
I too should like to be allowed to comment on this matter .
It was a bad vote , because its effect was to vote away a large slice of this House 's credibility .
We made it clear on 19 September , with 30 votes against , what we in this House insist upon .
We confirmed that vote again in October .
To say now that we can trust what Mr Santer says seems to me to be just a pretext .
What Mr Santer says is one thing , and what Commissioner van den Broek does is another .
And you know it .
( Loud applause )
As one might expect , we now have a queue of people wanting to speak .
Well , in an attempt to be fair in a difficult situation , I suggest that I should now allow those who have asked to speak - Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , Mr Cox , Mr Pasty and Mr Alavanos - to speak for one minute each .


But then we really must get on with the vote .
Mr President , on the issue of substance in that vote , I want to say on behalf of the Liberal Group how disappointed we are that we did not leave in the hands of Parliament the capacity to deliver by a large majority what Parliament actually believes in .
The European Commission , with whom we have a code of conduct and whom we trust to honour that code of conduct , has spoken to this Parliament with two voices : the President 's voice of reason and the firmness of resolve not to accept our entreaties on Turkey on the part of Commissioner van den Broek .
That is why this House needed to place the issue beyond any possible doubt by voting for the reserve , and we regret that decision today .
Mr President , I shall be very brief and will simply remind the House that the MEDA credits do not concern Turkey alone but concern all the Mediterranean states which joined us at the Barcelona conference .
It was because we did not want the MEDA credits to be taken hostage - this being a problem which relates solely to relations between the European Union and Turkey - that we opposed the blocking of those credits .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European United Left , I want to express my sorrow about this development .
In my opinion the attitude of these Groups goes against the rights of the European Parliament , and that is important in view of the IGC , and it also goes against our efforts on behalf of human rights , in Turkey and all over the world .
And I want to ask Mr Martens , if he is consistent with his vote , to vote against the Lalumière report on human rights .
Mr President , before the vote on block 7 , I should like to intervene pursuant to Rule 125 to request that you declare one of the amendments in that block inadmissible . The amendment in question is No 253 .
The issue is the placing of ECU 100 million from the Structural Funds under the heading ' cross-border cooperation in the structural sector ' .
The Committee on Budgets has actually resorted to sleight of hand : these credits could not be entered under heading 3 without exceeding the ceiling of the financial perspectives .
These credits are placed in block 4 .
However , this disregards the legal basis .
A decision taken by the European Parliament and the Council on 23 July 1996 is cited , but that decision does not relate to an amendment of the legal basis , and could not have that effect .
If we adopt this amendment , we shall effectively be giving the Commission the power not to implement what we are going to vote for .
So this is simply a procedural device , a political trick .
The majority in Parliament can do many things , but in doing so it must respect the rules that govern us .
Mr President , may I state very clearly in this House that the vote taken on this was within the interinstitutional agreement and fully in line with the financial perspectives .
So I would formally contest the statement by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
I leave it to you to decide what to do on this point but we have absolutely no reason to believe that anything illegal has taken place on this point .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have had it looked into .
According to the Rules of Procedure I have the final decision on admissibility .
After due consideration , I decided to rule that these amendments were admissible .
I call upon the President-in-Office to inform Parliament of the Council 's standpoint on the results of the votes on the 1997 draft general budget .
Parliament has just adopted the Community 's budget for 1997 , bringing to a conclusion a budget procedure which at times proved particularly difficult .
I suppose it could hardly be otherwise given that budgetary discussions are currently every bit as difficult in most of our Member States .
I appreciate that this budget procedure has given Parliament considerable problems .
I can assure you that it was the very same for the Council .
We might therefore regard the Community as having emerged unscathed from an exercise which could well have brought the two arms of the budgetary authority into conflict without tangible benefit to either .
Let me confine myself to the essentials and be brief .
The Union 's budget satisfies the requirements of budgetary rigour , applying to all the Member States .
At the same time we have been able to take account of a number of priorities shared by both arms of the budget authority including , in particular , research and the Northern Ireland peace process .
Taken as a whole this budget can , in the current financial climate , be regarded as satisfactory and , on behalf of the Council , I can agree to the new maximum rate for non-compulsory expenditure which results from it .
The budget has been adopted in full compliance with the Interinstitutional Agreement and with the ceiling on the headings of the financial perspective .
Obviously , it must be implemented in the same way .
Your resolution expresses disillusionment with the dialogue procedure this year .
I would like to be a little less pessimistic about that .
In fact some of the crucial provisions of the budget you have just adopted were significantly and directly influenced by the discussions the Council held with your delegation before the two readings of the budget .
Agreement also proved possible on the fisheries information procedure , which was not easy .
Admittedly , the longstanding problem of the legal basis has not been resolved and I regret that .
But there is no doubt that our positions are somewhat closer than they were .
We must all work together to improve the budgetary dialogue procedure which , by its very nature , will continue to be as difficult as it is essential .
I would just like to make a couple of personal comments about that procedure .
I do not believe that the difficult 1997 budget is a once-off exercise .
With the advent of EMU , the stability pact and future enlargement , rigorous financial discipline and very low growth budgets are going to be the norm rather than the exception .
In these circumstances tensions will inevitably grow rather than diminish between the three arms of the budgetary authority and particularly between the Council and Parliament .
I believe that the structures and relationships , as they currently stand , may not be able to cope with that tension .
But that is for the future and for others to deal with .
It only remains for me to thank you and all of those in both Parliament and the Commission who have done their utmost to bring the Union 's budget procedure to a successful conclusion .

In particular , I want to pay tribute to the formidable negotiating skills of Mr Brinkhorst , Mr Samland and Mr Fabra Vallés .
Parliament is well represented by those three gentlemen .
I want also to thank the Commissioner .
Mr Liikanen has been of very , very significant assistance both in the depth of his experience and the quality of his advice in enabling this procedure to be successfully concluded in very difficult circumstances .
( Applause ) It only remains for me now , despite all the difficulties we have had , to wish you and your families a very happy Christmas and a prosperous New Year .
( Loud applause )
Mr President-in-Office , thank you for your comments and clarification . I shall review the situation in the light of the powers vested in me by Article 203 ( 7 ) .

Mr President , it might have been better if the representative of the Council presidency had been present at the political debate on Tuesday , then he could have answered these questions .
On behalf of the Committee on Budgets , then , I should like to state that Article 203 gives the Council presidency the right to decide whether the maximum rate was retained in the budgetary procedure after the second reading of the budget in the European Parliament .
The Council President has made a declaration on this , and has confirmed that the total figure adopted by Parliament is accepted by the Council .
However , he has also declared that the budget must be implemented in accordance with the interinstitutional agreement .
The Council President does not have this right in this declaration .
I therefore wish to state on behalf of Parliament that the budget will be implemented in accordance with the budgetary procedure pursuant to Article 203 , as has happened throughout the period of almost 40 years during which the Community has existed .
Mr President , I asked for the floor before this vote .
I know that this House has a great deal of power , many different competences , and that it wishes to extend them .
But I do not believe it has the power to move ahead in the timetable and anticipate decisions that have not been taken .
In recital D , I believe that the reference to the results of the Ecofin Council of 14 December is , to say the least , a somewhat cavalier approach .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , before you move on to Mr Fabra Vallés ' motion for a resolution regarding our vote on the Brinkhorst resolution and the budget , I would like to offer a clarification .
We also voted , in the comments on the budget , in favour of the distribution of ECU 100 million in the ' research ' reserve .
I simply wanted to emphasize that this was an indicative distribution .
This refinancing decision is actually a matter for the codecision procedure , and it will be up to Parliament to fix the final distributions on second reading .
Mr President , Amendment No 2 from Mr Killilea is completely superfluous .
It only repeats Mr Anastassopoulos ' report , Mr Miranda 's working paper on the 1996 budget and the document on the provisional situation that I presented for the year 1997 .
At the moment , the only thing missing - given that the will is there and the decision has been taken - is a report from the Secretariat General quantifying the possibilities of this rotation .
So in my opinion we should vote against .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
That concludes the voting on the budget .
Mr Brinkhorst , as rapporteur , would like to address the House again .
Mr President , as the President-in-Office of the Council said , having come to the end of difficult but important year , I would like first to thank colleagues on the committees with whom I have had the opportunity of working .
We have worked together very closely and I should like to thank them .
Sometimes they had very difficult choices .
I should like in particular to thank the budget secretariat .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , that 's it !
In a few minutes ' time I shall be flying off to the European summit in Dublin .
When you elected me as your President two and a half years ago , you did me the greatest honour and you also handed me the most difficult task in our Parliament 's gift .
Today , I deliver that honour and that task back into your hands .
As President of our Parliament , I have had the opportunity to learn some priceless lessons .
The first is that we have a Secretariat-General , we have officials , we have employees , all of whom are ready and willing to put their high qualifications and all their energy at the disposal of our Parliament .
That willingness , ladies and gentlemen , is often much greater than we suspect , and we are wrong not to make better use of it .
My thanks go to Secretary-General Vinci and all his staff in Parliament 's services for their great personal loyalty , their dedication and the conviction with which they work in Europe 's interests .
At the start of my term of office , as some of you will remember , I promised to represent the European Parliament not just in the capital cities of the European Union but also in the regions .
In keeping that promise - or perhaps I should say in endeavouring to keep that promise - I have come to know our Union in all its diversity .
That diversity is not our weakness , that diversity is Europe 's strength !
( Applause ) I have made more than 40 visits to the regions , and have enjoyed meeting many Members personally in their constituencies and at work in their regional organizations .
I have had the opportunity to speak with many , many hundreds of European citizens .
And I have learned something : the hopes people associate with Europe , and with the European Parliament too , are far greater than the scepticism with which Europe is viewed .
What people expect are firm convictions and clear messages , and that is what we have to give them .
( Applause ) After all , we in the European Parliament - watcher over the Commission , co-legislator of the Union , forum of the nations , elected representatives of 370 million people - we have good reason to be more calm and confident .
We should not be weeping and wailing about rights we feel we ought to have but making consistent , courageous use of the rights we do have , down to the last detail , and working tirelessly , passionately and perceptively to strengthen parliamentary democracy in the Union !
( Applause ) We are no European version of a national parliament , we are no copy of any one of our national parliaments - we are different !
And being different does not mean being worse .
We have to be different !
We have our own strengths , and we have our own shortcomings , too .
We are unique !
Let us stay that way , because that is our strength !
( Applause ) You have placed great confidence in me over the last two and a half years .
I have constantly been aware of that confidence , and I thank you all for it , because that confidence has been my support .
It has given me the courage to make decisions - even difficult , unpleasant , unpopular decisions .
If individual Members feel that I have on occasion treated them unjustly or discourteously , then I ask their forgiveness today .
What I have done over the last two and a half years may sometimes have been right , may sometimes have been wrong , but it was always done in the belief that I was serving the interests of cooperation between our peoples in the European Union and in our Parliament .
I thank you today from the bottom of my heart !
( Loud and sustained applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , following that intervention by President Klaus Hänsch , you can well imagine that it is a very emotional thing for me to take his place in the chair of the House .
I am going to give the floor to all those group chairmen who express the desire to speak , asking them to confine their speaking time to one minute .
That , in fact , was what the President proposed just now , so as not to encroach on voting time .
President Hänsch , on behalf of my Group I congratulate you on the way in which you have presided over this House for the last two and a half years , with great authority and with great style .
I was moved yesterday listening to your speech on the occasion of the award of the Sakharov prize .
Mrs Green has recalled other speeches , great speeches , and you have headed and represented our Parliament with considerable style .
You have also carried through reforms to restore credibility to this much maligned Parliament .
These reforms were necessary , they have to continue .
It was you who set the ball rolling .
I thank you most sincerely for that .
You preside over our Parliament with great authority .
You are due to leave shortly for the European Council .
That is not an easy theatre in which to operate , as I know from experience , but there too you have represented us most excellently .
You will be doing so again , today , tomorrow and the day after .
I fervently hope you will continue to be active in Parliament .
We need you .
You have never made any secret of your European convictions , you have declared them with great aplomb , as you yourself have said , in the regions , and in MEPs ' constituencies as well as their capital cities .
I think you have been a brilliant president of this Parliament .
My thanks to you .
Madam President , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I would like to say to Klaus Hänsch , as his twoand-a-half year term of office comes towards and end , that we believe that he has conducted the business of this House firmly but with great fairness .
We believe that he has represented Parliament at European Councils and throughout the regions of this Union with authority and with distinction .
Klaus , if I may call you that , you have added value to the presidency of this House .
We congratulate you on a job very well done .
Let me say that we wish you a Happy Christmas , but also a very prosperous and politically active New Year .
Thank you for all the work you have done on our behalf .
Madam President , President Hänsch , in the absence of our Group President , Alonso Puerta , may I thank you for your work over the last two and a half years .
Some of us believe it is important to maintain good personal relations despite political differences .
That avoids unnecessary conflicts .
And we believe relations between our group and yourself have been cordial and friendly .
We thank you for that as well .
We wish you a great future and we also hope we can continue to work together , with many other Members of Parliament , for a different Europe , a Europe of solidarity and fairness , which reflects the aspiration of all Europeans .
Madam President , President Hänsch , the European Parliament is not an easy parliament to direct .
You have directed it with fairness , and I say that on behalf of a small group .
Admittedly , we were not always satisfied , but then the rules themselves are not always satisfactory .
Within the limits necessarily imposed on you , though , you did make sure that we received a hearing , and I thank you for it .
You have also been a firm president - some would say very firm , perhaps meaning too firm .
For my part , I believe that it is necessary to show firmness in this House , and that a worthy representative of the European Parliament needs a great deal of authority outside these walls .
Those are qualities which you have shown .
And that is why , on behalf of our group , I offer you our respect and our thanks .

My dear Mr Hänsch , you have already had your bouquet , before the vote , and despite all the aggravation I would present you with another now , but twice would be too much of a good thing .
What I regard as your most important achievement is that you have succeeded in politicizing the debate in this House .
So it is not my intention now to say a solemn farewell - you are still with us , and I give you fair warning that we shall cross swords with you again , either here or in North-Rhine Westphalia , where there is a desperate need for people to fight in our common cause .
What I really liked so much about you , if I may say so , was that apart from all the weighty and important speeches you have made in this House , you have made equally weighty , clever speeches on apparently minor occasions .
You have made an effort to give important political significance even to those minor events , an example being the exhibition that opened in this House this week .
It was an exhibition of pictures of Auschwitz concentration camp , produced by young people .
A small occasion that became an important one because of your presence and what you said .
I thank you for it .
Well , I mustn 't ramble on all day .
I just wonder why it is that Parliament cannot adopt a principle that always works so well elsewhere : never change a winning team .
Madam President , I have no wish to make President Hänsch miss his plane or to steal time from colleagues who still have work to do .
On behalf of the UPE Group , I should like to say just two words : thank you .
Thank you for that clear and concise message .
Ladies and gentlemen , everyone is well aware that the circumstances this morning are quite exceptional .
We are now going to proceed with the next item - the votes .
They are very long .
We shall interrupt them at about 12.15 pm to enable us to debate Mrs Lindeperg 's report .
This evening , after the voting on the topical and urgent debate , which will take place as usual from 5.30 to 6.00 pm , we shall resume voting on those reports we could not vote on this morning .
I hope everyone is clear about this .
Votes ( continuation )
Madam President , I welcome the debate on the report by my colleague Michèle Lindeperg , which is to take place at 12.15 pm .
However , it does seem to me that something may have gone wrong here and that the priority should be given to the votes .
Also , I am surprised to see that the reports which were scheduled for yesterday 's voting time have now been put back , with priority being given to four of them , and with no qualified majority requirement to justify this reversal .
Mrs Berès , I have two things to say in reply to that .
The first is that we are concerned with legislative procedures , and that is why we adopted this procedure .
Secondly , it is 12.15 p.m.
I can tell you that Mrs Lindeperg 's report should take about 40 minutes , and if we start at about 12.40 p.m we will be able to finish at 1.15 p.m.
That will enable us to vote until 12.40 p.m.
So we have a good half-hour ahead of us , and we are going to try to get on as quickly as possible .
Madam President , the agenda also includes the report on the protection of minors , by Mrs Zimmermann , and my report on adoption .
It seems unlikely that we shall be able to vote on them this morning , since they are the last two reports on the agenda ; and yet I feel they are very important reports , which were , among other things , planned and produced to mark the 50th anniversary of UNICEF .
I therefore request that the vote be postponed to the next part-session , in January , so that all Members can be present and the debate can be given the weight and importance it deserves .
Madam President , it saddens me greatly that we cannot vote on this report today .
After all , we were all trying - the committee and Parliament - to have a European Parliament vote on these two reports on this particular day , the fiftieth anniversary of UNICEF .
That was actually the starting point , the reason why those reports are on the agenda now .
It really is sad if we 're going to keep postponing them because other important matters arise .
Of course it was important for us to say our farewells to Mr Hänsch this morning , but as a result we are seeing the further postponement of reports which actually represent a very important political input for Europe 's citizens , especially those who cannot speak for themselves .
I must in all honesty say I should be rather upset not to hold the vote until January , because we shall then be even further away from the fiftieth anniversary , so we shall have even more difficulty in arousing public interest .
We want our vote to become public knowledge , so I would prefer it if we could vote before the end of this week .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am afraid we are wasting time .
I think Mr Casini may not have heard me when I made it quite clear , this morning , that we would be voting on all the reports today , not tomorrow morning .
Reports that are not voted on now will be voted on this evening at 6.00 p.m.
I therefore propose to leave things as they are and to continue with the voting .
Madam President , it seems to me that all the political groups agree that the Zimmermann and Casini reports are very important and topical .
I therefore propose , if the House agrees , that they be put to the vote immediately , before the other reports .
I feel this is extremely important and do not think we should leave a debate on minors and adoption to six o 'clock this evening , when we are unlikely to have a majority befitting such an important issue .
Mrs Todini , I offer my thanks in advance to all Members who will be present this evening to vote on these reports which are indeed very important .
I tried to speak before we started to vote on this report but was unable to .
Mr Kerr 's report has not been translated into Swedish ; only about 30 % of the text is available in Swedish .
This applies to the amendment as well .
The Commission 's document is not available in Swedish either so I cannot vote on it .
I really do not think that we should vote on this report today .
I would just like to say that I have the report in Swedish here !
This is a problem of distribution rather than translation , because the text does exist in Swedish .
That being so , I am well aware that the situation is a difficult one .
I have just finished taking the vote on two reports which were drawn up in German .
If there really was no Swedish translation , I would ask you if you wanted to delay the vote .
Since that is not the case , I think we can continue the vote .
It is true that part of the text is in Swedish but the majority of it is not .
As this is the text of a law , all of it should be available in Swedish .
From what I have heard from my colleague in the party , the same is true for Finnish .
But perhaps Mr Andersson has the text in Finnish as well ?
Madam President , I must apologise to Mrs Lindholm .
She is right ; some of the text is in English .
Ladies and gentlemen , I really don 't think that 's possible .
Members cannot be asked to vote on a text when they do not fully understand it .
Madam President , this problem has arisen because the report was originally drafted before Finland and Sweden joined the European Union .
The original report dates from 1994 .
I likewise know that no complete Finnish version exists , but we are perfectly willing ...
I put the question to the House : does the House agree that this vote should be delayed until all the translations have been done ?
Madam President , I have to say that the honourable Member is quite correct .
This text was drafted in September 1994 when Sweden was not a member of the Union .
It is unfortunate that it is not in Swedish .
However , I have to say that it has taken them two years to discover this and they should not have discovered it at this point in the debate .
This is an extremely important debate for the future of social Europe and we should continue with the vote now .
I put the question to the House , therefore , and I rely on its good sense .
Who is in favour of continuing this vote despite the problems which , unfortunately , have only just been drawn to our attention ?
( Parliament decided to postpone the vote )
The vote is therefore postponed until we have all the translations .
Ladies and gentlemen , I see this as a mark of respect for the linguistic pluralism of this House .
Personally , I believe we have opted for the better solution , though of course I do regret that these difficulties were not pointed out earlier .
If such an event were to occur again , it should be pointed out to the registrar before the vote .
Madam President , I am glad the House has made that decision , but you are in danger of setting rather dangerous precedents because if this House had voted to continue the report then it would be overruling its own rules .
The document should be available in the languages of the Members present .
We have entered dangerous ground when you use the majority to squash the views of a minority .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that this was a very unusual situation .
This was a report prepared at a time when our Swedish friends had not yet joined the Union , and there has been a technical problem .
Naturally , I regret the fact that our colleagues failed to point this out to the registry service before the vote , which would have saved some time .
Madam President , you raised a very interesting principle .
You said that this House should never vote on anything that it does not understand .
That is a fascinating principle .
Perhaps you should refer it to Mr Fayot as chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure to see if he could do anything about it .
Madam President , the question I want to ask is this : what happens to the votes already held on this report ?
My view is that these votes have been taken , so the result stands and next time we go on from where we left off . That is my question .
Ladies and gentlemen , I do assure you that I deeply regret the fact that this was not pointed out to us before the votes .
Indeed , I have just said so .
First , we have wasted time .
Secondly , this puts us in a very uncomfortable position .
I think that , since the House has decided , by a very large majority , that we should postpone this vote , I believe we should consider that to apply to the whole report .
There would be little point in continuing with an interrupted vote .
It seems to me that , given how the House has just voted , the intention of the House was indeed to postpone the vote on the whole report until such time as all the translations are available .
I ask that the votes on Mrs Zimmermann 's and Mr Casini 's reports should be taken immediately .
A postponement until January was refused a little while ago , so I now ask that these two votes should be taken immediately .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Madam President , I would like to make an appeal to the House about the de Brémond d 'Ars report because this is an issue where we have a major dispute with the European Commission .
If we vote this evening we might get an inconclusive result .
We may not have sufficient Members to take a proper decision on this issue and we need to make a clear statement to the Commission .
I would like to ask that you put to the vote whether or not we vote on de Brémond d 'Ars because it is a major issue concerning postal workers in the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , I must admit to being somewhat puzzled by this , because I almost get the impression that the part-session finishes at 1.00 p.m. on Thursday .
If that is your decision , I suggest that each Member should accept his responsibilities .

Madam President , we are not saying that we want part-sessions to close at one o 'clock on Thursdays ; what we actually want is for the French Government to provide connections between Strasbourg and the Member States , because there is a problem in this respect .
It is ridiculous for important reports to be put to the vote at times when fewer Members are present , while other reports that are of considerable or major importance are debated by a full House .
It smacks of political manoeuvring .
Madam President , I shall come straight to the point .
We are required to debate this report , which is an institutional report - this is the annual debate laid down in Article K.6.
The President-in-Office of the Council is present , having been invited to attend this debate at this point in the agenda .
We have already had an incident last year because we ignored our agenda .
All I want is that we should stick to the agenda this year .
Together with the whole of my group , I am voting against the 1997 budget and the related resolution , because :
Firstly , it has taken a step backwards in relation to the first reading , concerning the issue of MEDA finance for Turkey , and gives the green light to financial aid for Turkey regardless of the violation of human rights , the Kurdish problem , the Cyprus problem , and Turkey 's aggressiveness towards Greece.-Secondly , it is a budget for the single currency and for a one-sided financial approach , which has reached the peculiar point where the European Parliament has supported a reduction of the funding proposed by the Commission itself.-Thirdly , because it imposes a restrictive policy on the structural funds.-Fourthly , because it signals the essential abandonment of the trans-European networks and the developmental rationale they stood for .
Mr Brinkhorst 's report on the draft budget contains certain fundamental points with which I should specifically like to express my agreement .
The principle of zero budget growth seems to me both opportune and prudent .
Opportune because it demonstrates the European Parliament 's concern to apply to the Union the same principles of budgetary discipline which the Maastricht Treaty imposes on the Member States if they are to qualify for economic and monetary union .
And prudent because a realistic analysis of the real expenditure reveals an appreciable margin for readjustment .
Secondly , it seems to me that the European Parliament is right to reintroduce into the budget certain amendments designed to strengthen the internal cohesion of the Union : initiatives to benefit the young unemployed , strengthening of equal rights for men and women ; support for respect for human rights ; aid to refugees and displaced persons , etc .
Regarding the application of the MEDA programme to Turkey , I voted in favour of Amendment No 279 proposed by the Committee on Budgets .
The reply by the President of the Commission fails to reassure me that the Commission does intend to comply fully with the spirit and letter of the resolution adopted by the European Parliament on 19 September .
Finally , I welcome Parliament 's vote in favour of Amendment No 45 relating to measures to combat violence against children , adolescents and women .
The protection of children and the weak must be a priority of the Union if it is to fulfil its function as a repository of civilization .
Those on the right of Parliament have bowed to political pressure from the European Commission which has always operated a double standard in its dealings with us on the subject of Turkey .
The majority of this House was anxious to underline our commitment to democracy and the upholding of human rights in Turkey ; for that reason I worked hard to have funding for Turkey under MEDA placed in the reserve .
The position of most EPP members ( happily there are some sensible MEPs amongst them ) and the UPE is altogether incredible and blinkered , given that both President Santer and Commissioner van den Broek have indicated that they beg to differ from Parliament on the question of projects in Turkey .
So there is no guarantee at all that the spirit and the letter of the resolution of 19 September 1996 will be upheld .
Those on the right of this House have thrown away Parliament 's credibility and at the same time demolished the powerful strategy which we were able to deploy in favour of human rights in Turkey .
We welcome the review of Parliamentary expenses which has now commenced in the special working party set up by the European Parliament .
We have previously tabled a motion to the Presidency of the European Parliament to establish a travel card for Members .
This proposal now forms the basis of the review by the working party , together with the ideas presented earlier by Klaus Hänsch .
We are trying now to find real solutions , within the system , which are comprehensive .
We prefer to see constructive solutions which can be accepted by a majority in the European Parliament rather than disconnected and unworkable proposals .
Eisma report
First I want to congratulate Mr Eisma on his work , and the Commission on updating Directive 76 / 160 in line with the Fifth Action Programme for the Environment .
Seas , lakes , rivers and tourism are cross-border , although the Council and the Commission do not always remember that , especially as regards tourism and bathing water quality , a priority in this respect .
I want to concentrate particularly on the amendments on evaluating the contamination or danger from certain water sports , because where I come from people run the risk of losing a leg , hand or foot in the tourist season , what with the wretched jet-skis , the water-skiers who totally disregard the regulation distance from the coast and the speedboats and yachts which fail to control the quality of fuel used or their faecal discharges .
All this goes on at the cost of the poor bathers ' health and the local population who spend the rest of the year looking after the places which fall outside the scope of the directive we have debated .
Noise , danger , filth , oil , plastic , rubbish and stench , because unfortunately many tourists leave their concern about the environment at home when they go on holiday .
So I applaud the amendments , except those on the blue flag which are out of place here .
With that reservation , I shall vote in favour .
I will be voting for the Eisma report on a Council directive concerning the quality of bathing water .
This report does three things .
First , it widens the definition of bathing water to include all waters used for recreational purposes .
Second , it makes the regulations relate directly to health hazards thus directly linking safety with pollution level .
Third , it will thus create a new resource of safe water for the tourist industry throughout Europe which will allow the potential economic benefits to far outweigh the costs of implementation , even on the basis of OFWAT 's fanciful figures .
This report offers an opportunity for investment not a financial burden to be met .
One of the key reasons this report will be resoundingly adopted is because of the efforts of organizations like Surfers Against Sewage who have demonstrated so comprehensively that the present directive and its lax implementation by the British Government has cost hundreds of millions of pounds in health-care , social and lost production costs in the UK .
I thank them for their efforts .
Kenneth D. Collins report
I declare that the Portuguese socialists in the European Parliament voted for Amendment No 13 calling for the setting of Objective 7 in the Structural Funds to introduce co-participation and financial assistance for the replacement of water mains systems and distribution networks , a vital process for reducing the lead content of drinking-water and whose overall costs are enormous : one year 's Community budget at European level , 200 billion escudos in Portugal 's case .
This amendment was rejected by the House ( by 189 votes to 179 ) and the PPE members all voted against , something we must emphasize .
In the framework of the work carried out on this directive , we now await the initiatives of the Commission and the discussions in Council so that this error can be rectified .
Sixteen years have passed since the adoption of the last directive on the quality of water intended for human consumption .
The proposal for a directive which is before us takes account of the changes that have taken place since then , both technical and scientific .
I am alarmed to see the findings of the European Environment Agency : increased nitrate content in more than 60 % of rivers , deterioration of the water table , increase in the quantity of pesticides in water , etc .
Does this mean that the first directive was ineffective ?
Not a difficult question to answer if we confine ourselves to its transposition in the Member States .
Finally , I associate my vote with those of my French socialist colleagues on the matter of lead piping , asking for a period of adaptation .
Directive 80 / 778 / EEC relating to the quality of water intended for human consumption established , for the first time , a number of quality requirements for potable water throughout the Community .
Bearing in mind the technological and scientific advances achieved since then , and pursuant to the conclusions of the European Council in Brussels in December 1993 , it was appropriate to revise this directive , hence today 's debate and vote .
While we fully endorse the rapporteur 's objective of guaranteeing a high level of human health protection and , consequently , a quality supply of drinking water , we cannot accept certain amendments proposed by Mr Collins and the Committee on the Environment .
Our main objections are to Amendments Nos 46 and 47 ( Annex 1 , Part B , note 3 ) .
Although it seems necessary to conform to the WHO recommendations on water quality and so to aim at the objective of 25 ìg / l as the maximum concentration of lead permitted in potable water , it is unacceptable to propose any reduction in the period allowed for compliance , particularly bearing in mind the financial issues this would raise .
( The 15 years proposed by the Commission are appropriate . )
The Commission states that the only way of arriving at 10 ìg of lead per litre is to eliminate lead from the water mains and from domestic sanitary installations .
Between 75 % and 95 % of the necessary expenditure will relate to the replacement of pipes in dwellings and will therefore be borne by the householders .
The remainder will be borne by the public authorities and water companies - in other words , ultimately , the consumers .
It goes without saying that these provisions , if they were to be implemented , would inevitably entail an increase in water prices - an increase which , in the case of France , would obviously be damaging to the local authorities which are already on the point of financial strangulation .
On the other hand , there is no proof at present that the new materials proposed as a replacement for lead piping ( PVC ) are totally reliable .
More detailed scientific studies are needed unless we want to find ourselves changing the entire system again in ten years ' time , at the expense of the European taxpayers and of their health .
It is scandalous that not a single Member State has provided the data requested on violations of the directive we debated last night , especially when it is about the quality of water intended for human consumption .
It is certainly not easy to determine the position on drinking water quality in the Union , even though providing citizens with healthy water is one of the first obligations on Member States .
I introduced an amendment to the earlier legislation to replace lead piping through the LIFE financial instrument and that was adopted , so I support Amendment No 13 which seeks to add a new objective 7 to the structural funds in view of the enormous costs involved .
Finally , it is essential to adopt appropriate measures to guarantee that water intended for consumption does not contain bacteria .
I will conclude as I concluded in the debate in committee : water is not a ' merchandise ' . It is much more than that .
Please let us at least call it a resource if we cannot remember the debate in classical Greece about water as a source of life .
Obviously I will vote in favour .
I strongly deplore the fact that the report on the proposal for a directive concerning the quality of water intended for human consumption has been adopted as it stands .
I should like to emphasize a number of fundamental points .
First of all , as far as lead and copper are concerned , everyone knows that the situation varies greatly from one Member State to another , and I would emphasize that it is essential to take these differences into account .
Next , it is very contradictory on the part of the European Commission to propose a text which provides for a very low parametric value and , at the same time , a very long period for complying with it .
The proposed value is alarmist , and the period for implementing it is latitudinarian .
Such a message , in public health terms , cannot be taken seriously .
Furthermore , I am sorry to note that the financial implications of this proposal have not been given sufficient consideration .
To comply with the level proposed by the European Commission , those Member States which have water mains consisting of lead pipes will have to make a gigantic financial effort , despite the fact that no one knows at present what the best replacement material might be as far as long-term health is concerned .
After all , the plastics mainly used at present raise serious questions , especially as regards endocrine problems .
For all these reasons , it seems more sensible to proceed by stages .
I therefore strongly deplore the fact that the amendment proposing a five-year period within which the Member States would be required to comply with the parametric value of 25 ìg / l for lead concentrations in water was not adopted .
Certainly , according to this approach , the Commission should institute the scientific and , especially , toxicological studies that we currently lack to enable the parametric value adopted to be revised at the end of this five-year period .
Most ACP countries , signatories of the Lomé Convention , are countries where there was a European presence for decades or even centuries .
The Convention has been an instrument to perpetuate that European presence in those parts of the globe .
Now that the instrument is coming to an end , I think it is time to hold a major debate on cooperation after the year 2000 .
It would be intolerable for Europe , for the sake of immediate economic interests alone , to concentrate on relations with big eastern and Latin American markets and overlook African countries or tiny Pacific nations where living conditions are worsening year after year in many cases .
The Lomé Convention should be maintained so that we retain a platform for dialogue between North and South , between rich and poor countries .
I think that that would be a way of promote the defence of human rights in the world .
Christodoulou report
It is extremely important that those European States which wish to become members of the European Union be allowed to do so , provided they take a democratic decision on the issue .
We should also be preparing places in the EU for Russia , Belarus , Ukraine and Moldavia , in our opinion , should they wish to become members .
On the other hand , those European countries which decide against EU membership must not be treated unfairly or with hostility by future European cooperation .
New Member States must be shown great flexibility and long periods of adjustment must be allowed if we are to cope with an enlargement of the EU eastwards .
Exceptions are needed in areas such as free movement within the internal market .
It is important that countries seeking membership are formally recognised as Members as soon as possible .
The practical problems which arise as a result of enlargement can be resolved at a later date .
But no country must be turned away , if we are to avoid divisions in Europe .
I would also like to point out that a rapid reform of agricultural policy and a change in the regional structural funds must also take place as soon as possible .
My main proposal ( as usual ) is that joint agricultural policy and regional policy be returned to national level .
The CCEEs wish to join the European Union as soon as possible .
At this stage , however , a strictly budgetary approach will mean that we are neglecting certain essential preliminaries .
The European Union must be fully functional in order to welcome new members , unless we propose to convert it into a mere free-trade area , dominated by financial considerations at worst and economic ones at best , disregarding a European political and social model .
The intention behind enlargement must be to strengthen the cohesion of the group around shared democratic values , not just to create a bigger and bigger , more and more liberal economic union .
Enlargement must not be conceived merely in terms of enabling candidate countries to make the transition to a market economy .
Another essential preliminary is the reform of the European institutions . The integration of the CCEES into the EU does not depend solely on the success of the reforms undertaken in those countries but also , and perhaps primarily , on the ability of the existing Member States to reform the institutions in the course of the IGC .
The signals reaching us on the eve of the European Council in Dublin are not encouraging .
Some Member States seem to be forgetting that enlargement , by their own desire , has a fixed timetable .
And yet , today , the institutional questions are being postponed to the end of the negotiations .
What is the use of the IGC under these conditions ?
Is this method the right one ?
Finally , past experience of enlargement shows that , if it is to be successful , it must be accompanied by a long transition , when this is necessary in economic terms .
These precautions are all the more necessary in that the ' acquis communautaire ' is now much more substantial than it was before the previous enlargements .
Today , the European Union is in no condition to say ' yes ' to the candidate countries , and , unfortunately , the reasons for that are not entirely budgetary .
It is a matter of urgency to deal with the preliminaries .
That is a historic responsibility .
As someone who enthusiastically supports enlargement of the EU to the east , I find it obscene that the debate focuses primarily on the cost of it .
If this had been the preoccupation in the past then countries like Ireland , Greece , Spain and Portugal might not have been admitted .
These countries have benefited handsomely from their membership of the EU .
The monies they have received have greatly assisted them to improve their economies and infrastructure .
However , it should also be said that they have given much to the EU in return .
They all have made sacrifices and significant contributions to assist the process of European integration .
However , a debate on enlargement should not simply be about finance .
It must be about philosophy , responsibility and above all a vision about the eventual shape of the European architecture .
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe are fledgling democracies .
We have responsibility to assist them in making a full transition .
Furthermore , if the European vision is about creating peace and reconciliation in Europe , what better way to achieve that than by enlarging to the east , thus ending the legacy of the Cold War and creating a larger Europe at peace with itself and contributing to a peaceful world order .
The Christodoulou report contains clear explanations of the realistic consequences of enlargement , something which has been so far lacking in the debate on the issue of enlargement to the East .
Enlargement will not be possible unless the EU reforms its agricultural and structural fund policies .
Continuing along the same old path is impossible for several reasons , partly the unwillingness to raise contributions from Members , and partly the current and future commitments which have been made during the WTO discussions .
A weakness in the report is the strict requirement for applicant countries to adapt to a capitalist or new liberal society .
The Union should not demand unilateral adaptation of the applicant countries ' economic and social policies .
The Union has a responsibility to accept a country 's freedom of choice to select their own model for society .
The Union must , on the other hand , be clear in its requirement that applicant countries respect democratic freedom and rights .
The report describes the problems involved in enlargement .
The demand for adaptation to the EMU and privatisation is much too general .
The analysis of financial and other problems which will arise with the CAP , with joint agricultural policy and with the structural funds is good however .
The report states that it will not be possible to finance enlargement without reducing agricultural and regional political support given to Sweden and other EU countries .
This is important information , both for the applicant countries and for the present members and one which has been raised far too infrequently in the debate on enlargement .
This means that I will vote for the report .
Let me make it clear from the outset that our Group had serious doubts about voting for this report .
The report is dominated by the fears of the southern countries which regard eastward expansion as a threat to the continuing social and economic cohesion of the EU .
There is no doubt , unfortunately , that the conditions under which that eastward expansion is to take place do justify such fears .
But the primacy of economic and monetary union and the subordination of all political tasks and objectives to so-called economic imperatives are undermining - but not for the first time and not just because of the eastward enlargement of the EU - one of the Union 's most important political aims , which is the principle of economic and social cohesion .
The rapporteur , then , is under the spell of figures , balance sheets and cost estimates , and loses sight of the unique and historical opportunity of eastward expansion , and its importance in terms of peace policy .
Behind this attitude , of course , there also lurks the desire to procrastinate over this enlargement , and so pander to the governments of those Member States that are unwilling to contain and share the social consequences of the enlargement of the single market .
I believe it is not yet too late to ensure that , through a fundamental reform of the Structural Funds towards greater flexibility and efficiency , the new Member States , too , can participate in the principle of social and economic cohesion , thus giving full play to the political advantages of a pan-European Union .
The creation of a pan-European order , guaranteeing peace and sustainable development for all the inhabitants of this region of the world , is the central challenge confronting European politics , a challenge that existed before the collapse of the ' true socialist ' systems in central and eastern Europe .
European politics have to accept their share of responsibility for the failure of perestroika , which is just as much cause for a self-critical stocktake as the collapse of the neo-liberal illusions of the period when things changed in Germany , the kind of illusions on which , for example , the Bonn Declaration of the CSCE of April 1990 was based .
The destruction of existing economic order structures , the opening of markets and direct foreign investment have absolutely not shown us the royal road to efficiency , prosperity and planning for the future .
The UN Economic Commission for Europe recently sounded a warning against similar illusions regarding the eastward expansion of the EU .
In this situation , however , Mr Christodoulou 's call for a rational approach strikes the wrong note , or perhaps fails to go far enough : the main problem is not the effects on the existing Union but the effects on the candidate states ( and the indirect effects on relationships with other neighbouring states which are not candidates for accession to the EU ) .
That applies both to the east and to the south .
If Mr Christodoulou 's report represents the beginning of a new reflectiveness , that is a good thing .
It would not be a good thing , however , if this were to be the start of an inward withdrawal by the EU .
Cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs
The next item is the annual debate , based on oral questions by Mrs Lindeperg , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , to the Council ( B4-1227 / 96-0-0217 / 96 ) and the Commission ( B4-1228 / 96-0-0218 / 96 ) on progress made in implementing cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs ( Title VI of the Treaty on European Union ) .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this third annual meeting to debate the functioning of the third pillar is a particularly important one , and that is why I think it rather a shame to hold the debate in these circumstances , but that is by the way .
The third pillar has now been organized , and its failings can no longer be attributed to teething problems .
On the other hand , today 's debate comes a few days before a major deadline for the IGC .
This year , we can strike a more positive balance as regards the number of decisions taken and the legal instruments used .
Important matters have been brought to a conclusion , even if not always in the way we hoped .
In particular , I should mention the competence of the Court of Justice for three conventions , including Europol : the ' extradition ' Convention , the joint action on ' racism and xenophobia ' , and the measures to combat the drugs trade , the traffic in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children .
This summary clearly proves that Title VI had potential that had not been fully exploited - something we said in previous years ; it proves that when the political will exists it is possible to find resources to exploit within the present institutional structures , and it proves that the presidencies in question had that political will .
As the Member responsible for monitoring these problems , I can testify to the cooperative way in which my requests for meetings and information were received , and I must especially thank the Italian presidency for the speed with which it supplied me with all the documents I needed for my work .
But all this cooperation increases my pessimism about the overall record of Title VI , since the goodwill of the presidencies is not in doubt .
That means that the irregularities we still complain of are related to the actual structure of the third pillar .
Let me recall the main problems .
First , the lack of clear political objectives .
The working programme cannot do duty for them , being a list that was drawn up without the consultation of Parliament and identifies no priorities .
The interesting priority put forward last year by the Spanish presidency of moving towards a European legal area has been slow to get off the ground .
Secondly , the damaging effects of unanimous voting have again had an impact this year . For reasons unrelated to the third pillar , the United Kingdom blocked all the decisions of the June Council .
Although the decisions were finally adopted , this opportunity for blackmail which is open to the Member States is unhealthy and unacceptable and , even when it takes a less violent form , it has disastrous adverse effects .
The decisions , having run the gauntlet of demands and refusals for each Member State , are eventually adopted a minima , and often bear much more resemblance to a list of common practices and provisions rather than dynamic , positive advances towards a common legislative apparatus with respect for human rights .
Thirdly , the conventions provided for in Article K.3 are desperately cumbersome .
One may well ask when the ' extradition ' Convention , adopted this year , will enter into force , bearing in mind that the Dublin Convention is still not being applied .
Fourthly , the dubious and ambiguous distribution of powers between the first and third pillars was seen again this year with the presidency 's move to present a joint action on freedom of movement at the time when Parliament was studying the three so-called Monti proposals , in the context of the first pillar .
Fifthly , regarding the democratic failings of which so much has been said in previous years , they are still glaring : a lack of transparency , even though progress has been made with the publicizing of acts relating to asylum and immigration ; projects prepared in secret by working groups of national civil servants with no right of inspection for the European Parliament or members of the national parliaments .
No consultation of the European Parliament on essential matters and , as a general rule , a very restrictive interpretation of Article K.6.
In this context , one can only regret the refusal of the chairman of the K4 Committee to accept the invitation of the Committee on Civil Liberties after the Dublin summit .
Finally , my last observation is addressed to the Commission , though it is inherent in the functioning of the third pillar .
The Commission has the right of initiative in certain areas only , and then not exclusively .
This legal problem , combined with the shortage of manpower , no doubt partly explains the self-effacing performance of the Commission .
The main measures announced by Mrs Gradin last year have still not seen the light of day - the initiative on combining the texts relating to immigration and asylum , or temporary protection .
It is , therefore , the institutional structure of the third pillar that needs to be modified in the course of the IGC .
Let me remind you of the hopes expressed in this connection by Parliament in March 1996 .
We pay tribute to the efforts of the Irish presidency and to its determination to communitize parts of the third pillar .
Even so , despite those efforts , the document preparing the European Council seems to be preparing a number of withdrawals .
It gives only incidental coverage to the problem of democratic control , and the reservations expressed by some Member States are an ill omen for the results .
Those States , in the name of the defence of illusory national sovereignties , are going to operate the unanimity lever again to force the mountain to labour and bring forth mouse when the time for decisions arrives .
If that were to be the case , Madam President , our forthcoming annual meetings on progress in justice and home affairs will be in grave danger of becoming a ritual funeral ceremony , with no specific benefit to the everyday life of the European citizen , although the field is one that concerns him very closely .
Madam President , I am glad that like two of my predecessors I have been invited to the annual debate of the European Parliament provided for in Article K.6 of the Treaty on European Union on the progress achieved in implementing cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs .
Like the Italian presidency before it , the Irish presidency has attached and continues to attach great importance to relations with the European Parliament and welcomes the fact that the draft resolution submitted by Mrs Lindeperg on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs recognizes that the presidency has cooperated with Parliament during the course of 1996 and that it is noted that the opinion of the European Parliament has been requested in several cases .
I also welcome the fact that the European Parliament notes that progress has been made in 1996 towards the decision-making procedures foreseen under Article K.3 and that progress has been made in cooperation with the US , with the CCEES , with the Mediterranean countries and with Russia . However , I also note that the European Parliament , as in previous years , is critical in its proposed resolution of a number of features connected with the third pillar .
This criticism is partly due to the provisions in the Treaty regarding the operation of the third pillar .
This criticism relates to the decision-making rules of unanimity , structures and other matters . Those who claim that the third pillar is not working do not take into account ( a ) the real achievements that have already been made ; and , ( b ) the fact that the third pillar has been in operation for only three years - the environment in which the third pillar works .
I believe that those who criticize the third pillar have an unrealistic view of what can be done and how quickly we can do it .
It is wrong to compare the third pillar with the first pillar .
Justice and home affairs issues are genuinely distinguishable from many of the matters that are dealt with within the first pillar .
Third pillar matters have a sensitivity which fully justifies a somewhat different approach .
When we are dealing with police and judicial cooperation we are also at the very heart of state sovereignty .
Fundamentally governments wish to see that these matters are being dealt with in a manner which is consistent with their constitutional values and legal traditions .
This does not rule out very intensive cooperation which can and must be carried out between the Members of the European Union , in particular in areas which relate to the core issues close to the citizens .
I am thinking here in particular of the fight against drugs and organized crime and of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in general .
Here citizens have a legitimate interest in expecting their governments to take effective measures to protect them from the scourge of crime and we as politicians have a responsibility to meet these demands .
In these areas the Union has made substantial progress during the Italian and Irish presidencies and I wish to recognize the tremendous work of my predecessor during the first half of 1996 .
At its meeting in Madrid on 15 and 16 December 1995 the European Council asked that future activities in the field of justice and home affairs be focused on a programme of priority areas .
On 14 October 1996 the Council adopted a resolution laying down the priorities for cooperation for the period from 1 July 1996 to 30 June 1998 .
The work carried out in 1996 was organized around these priorities .
1996 was marked by the resolution of a number of institutional questions of a fundamental nature such as the determination of the powers of the Court of Justice of the European Communities to apply and interpret three conventions and the setting up of multiannual financing programmes accompanied by a specific decision-making procedure .
The Council , concerned to ensure the transparency of its proceedings , also took a decision to publish in the Official Journal acts and other texts adopted on asylum and immigration matters .
More progress needs to be made in this area .
I recognize that the Council has adopted some legal instruments which are not specifically mentioned in Article K , such as some resolutions or recommendations .
Nevertheless , the Council has this year adopted several conventions of vital importance to the citizen and the Union and a number of joint actions relating to issues concerning the fight against serious crime such as drug trafficking , trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children , and other forms of organized crime .
During the last twelve months 23 legal instruments were formally adopted , among them five conventions , eleven joint actions , two decisions , two common positions and three resolutions .
Among the most significant achievements was the formal adoption of the convention relating to extradition between the Member States of the European Union , the protocol on the interpretation by way of preliminary rulings by the Court of Justice of the European Communities of the convention on the establishment of a European police office and the protocol to the convention on the protection of European Communities financial interests and the convention on the use of information technology for customs purposes .
Without dwelling on all the achievements in the field of justice and home affairs during 1996 , I would like to mention a few .
Drugs : in 1996 an important part of the activities in Title VI has been devoted to actions on the fight against drugs .
This was part of an integrated approach covering all three pillars .
The increased importance reflects the increased problem throughout the Community and the accepted seriousness of the drugs problem as demonstrated only too clearly by the continued emphasis placed on it by successive European Councils .
During the course of 1996 competent bodies have started active implementation of the 66 measures that are mentioned in the report of the Group of Experts on Drugs approved by the European Council in Madrid .
Substantial progress has been made , especially in the Title VI - related activities .
Drugs have been a priority item of importance for the Irish presidency .
An ambitious programme was launched in July 1996 .
This built on initiatives of the Italian presidency on liaison officers and money laundering and the project on Turkish criminal organizations , which were all taken stock of at the Florence European Council .
The main focus of the plan was several actions in the field of law enforcement : a joint action on cooperation between customs and business organizations for the protection of external frontiers against the importation of drugs , as well as a resolution on drawing up police customs agreements in the field of combating drug-trafficking were decided on ; a joint action on curbing drug trafficking on the Balkan routes will be adopted shortly .
In terms of intra-EU actions , progress was achieved through the resolution and report on the prevention and detection of illicit cultivation and production of drugs and through a resolution and report on drugs tourism .
Operational cooperation was also enhanced .
The fight against drugs also leads to measures in the fields of judicial cooperation , including in particular the resolution on the sentencing of serious drug-trafficking .
The joint actions agreed on also include : chemical-profiling and the exchange of information and a framework for initiative concerning liaison officers .
The Justice and Home Affairs Council reached broad , political agreement on a joint action relation to such issues as a commitment to enhance our cooperation in the fight against drug addiction and a commitment to align our laws and the lawenforcement practices to the extent necessary to combat illegal drug-trafficking .
A report is being made to the European Council in Dublin which inter alia will address the extent to which harmonization of legislation could contribute to a reduction in consumption and trafficking of illicit drugs and the mandate in respect of Latin America and the Caribbean on improving cooperation in the fight against drugs .
At its meeting on 19 and 20 March 1996 , the JHA Council recorded the agreement of all delegations , with the exception of one delegation which entered a parliamentary reservation , on the draft declaration on organized crime .
In addition to the convention relating to extradition , to which I have already referred , the Council adopted on 22 April 1996 , a joint action concerning a framework for the exchange of liaison magistrates to improve judicial cooperation between the Member States of the EU .
The JHA Council on 28 November 1996 had an in-depth discussion on ways and means to intensify the fight against organized crime .
The presidency is presenting a discussion document to the European Council in Dublin on enhancing the Union 's capacity to tackle organized crime .
I turn to trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of children .
When we made the issue of trafficking in persons a priority for our presidency , we could not have foreseen the tragic events which were to occur in Belgium in August last .
We have , however , responded to those events by making our focus on this subject all the sharper and all the more determined .
We reached political agreement on a number of measures .
The first measure was an Irish presidency proposal to extend the mandate of the European Drugs Unit to cover trafficking in human beings .
This instrument will confer immediately on the EDU responsibilities in relation to trafficking in human beings and will facilitate cooperation and an exchange of information between police forces and allow the EDU to provide any assistance it can in relation to these odious crimes .
Also , at the Justice and Home Affairs Council in November , we agreed on a common approach to the definition of sexual exploitation of children and trafficking offences .
I would like to stress that this is a very significant achievement made under the Irish presidency and I would like here publicly to salute the work of my Belgian colleague , Justice Minister De Clerck , who has made great efforts to reach a political agreement on this very important action .
To a great extent this joint action has also been inspired by the resolution of the European Parliament on the same topic and I want to pay tribute to the Members of the European Parliament who have so forcefully highlighted this area of crime and pressed so effectively to have action taken .
Joint action will mean a major review of the law in the area .
This review will entail that all Member States will make trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children criminal offences and will punish these offences accordingly .
Of major importance is the agreement of Member States to make the exploitative use of children in pornography a criminal offence .
That offence is comprehensive and will extend to possession of child pornography , as well as its production , distribution , sale or other forms of trafficking .
Also of importance is the commitment by the Member States to punish these offences , no matter where they occur .
This will ensure a uniform approach to so-called child sex tourism .
Member States also undertake to enhance cooperation and to give appropriate support to the victims of these crimes .
We have also established on a joint Belgian presidency initiative , a directory of competences and specializations in the fight against particular crimes of this nature and against drug-trafficking , to which I have already referred .
These proposals will significantly assist international cooperation between operational police forces .
The joint action on racism and xenophobia was adopted in July 1996 .
The Council will assess the fulfilment by Members of their obligations under the joint action by the end of June 1998 .
The first protocol to the Convention on the protection of the European Communities ' financial interests was drawn up by the Council and signed by the representatives of the Member States on 27 September 1996 .
The convention is targeted more specifically against fraud that damages the European Communities ' financial interests .
The protocol marks a second stage in this development .
It is directed in particular against corruption which damages , or is likely to damage , those interests , whether it involves Community or national officials , officials of other Member States , Members of the Commission , Members of the European Parliament , Members of the Court of Justice or Members of the Court of Auditors .
The Working Party on Criminal and Community Law is currently examining a second draft protocol to the convention .
This draft deals in particular with the responsibility of legal persons regarding fraud and corruption committed on their behalf , confiscation and laundering in respect of the proceeds of fraud and mutual assistance , all in the context of the protection of the European Communities ' financial interests .
The draft convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of the Member States of the European Union was transmitted to the Council by the Italian presidency in January 1996 .
The draft was drawn up on the basis of the above-mentioned first protocol to the convention on the protection of the European Community 's financial interests .
The draft convention is , however , wider in scope than the protocol as it covers active and passive corruption also in cases where the European Community 's financial interests are not involved .
The only outstanding question regarding the draft is if , and to what extent , jurisdiction shall be attributed to the Court of Justice in respect of the convention .
Concerning free movement of persons , the picture of the activities carried out within the third pillar in 1996 would be incomplete if I did not mention , at least the most important achievements in the field of external frontiers , visas , asylum and immigration .
An important step for the better integration of third country nationals residing legally in a Member State has been realized in March through a resolution on the status of those persons .
On the other hand , in order to better control illegal immigration , a joint action on airport transit arrangements was adopted at the March Council .
In June the Council adopted the recommendation on combating illegal employment of third country nationals .
Of particular importance is the political agreement the Council achieved on the joint action on a uniform residence permit .
As to asylum and refugees I should mention , in particular , the joint position on the harmonized application of the definition of the term of refugee under Article 1 ( A ) of the Geneva Convention , which will increase the legal security in this difficult field .
Furthermore , work on a convention concerning the establishment of a system for the collection , storage , exchange and comparison of fingerprints of applicants for asylum , EURODAC started under the Italian presidency and has considerably advanced under the Irish presidency .
As you know , such an instrument will significantly facilitate the implementation of the Dublin Convention which should be ratified by the last Member State in the near future .
Finally , I would like to bring to your attention the Council decision on an alert and emergency procedure for burdensharing with regard to the admission and residence of displaced persons on a temporary basis , adopted in March .
Let me just quickly say a word on the financing of Title VI activities in 1996 .
In order to respond to the criticism voiced by your institution during the vote on the 1996 budget that the appropriations available in 1995 were scattered over too large a number of projects of very variable importance , which lacked consistency and very clear political direction , the Council has agreed that the appropriations be concentrated on a limited number of multiannual cooperation programmes corresponding to the political priorities of JHA cooperation , each forming the subject of a specific joint action defining the proper procedures for its implementation .
The Council has adopted three programmes : GROTIUS , which provides for the exchange of magistrates , SHERLOCK , which provides for training in false document identification , and STOP , which provides a programme to combat trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children .
A fourth , OISIN , will be adopted before the end of the year .
This last programme provides for the training and exchange of law enforcement officers .
If one compares the new system with the previous one , one finds that all the criticisms of your institution have been addressed .
The meeting tomorrow of the European Council will address issues such as the fight against drugs and organized crime , which are crucial to the European citizen , with a view to practical and workable solutions for the future , in cooperation with the Commission and the European Parliament .
It will discuss the way forward , including the creation of an area of freedom , security and justice , on which the Irish presidency has made proposals .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if something is going badly , no amount of fine speeches by a variety of Council presidencies can make it go well .
There is something wrong with the construction of the third pillar in the Maastricht Treaty and I accept that even the Council itself and the Commission cannot extract themselves from the dilemma which Mrs Owen has accurately described as long as the national governments within the European Union sit mesmerized like rabbits before the snake , or rather the sacred cow , of national sovereignty , and are unwilling to concede so much as a millimetre of that national sovereignty in order to solve Europe 's problems .
While that continues , these problems are not going to be solved .
So what about progress in the implementation of cooperation in justice and police matters ?
That , after all , is the subject of our debate .
What about progress with freedom of movement in the European Union ?
Nothing doing , there 's been no progress .
What about the agreement on the external frontiers ?
Nothing doing , it hasn 't been ratified .
What about the harmonization of asylum regulations to the lowest common denominator ?
Nothing doing , no such thing .
What about the harmonization of drugs policy in the European Union ?
Well , the less said the better about this tragedy of drugs policy in the European Union , where the train of renationalization has been put back on the rails .
What about cooperation on matters of justice in the European Union ?
There isn 't any , there hasn 't even been a start made .
What is actually happening with Europol ?
At every summit , including Dublin , we hear more talk , which costs nothing , about how important Europol is in the combating of organized crime .
Quite right .
The setting-up of a European police agency , an agency that works efficiently to support the national police forces operating in the field , is certainly necessary .
So why isn 't there one ?
Why , when we 've been talking about it for five years now , is nothing happening , except that a couple of officials are sitting up there in The Hague in front of computers which they aren 't allowed to use ?
I can tell you why : because of the unwillingness of the European Union governments to surrender an ounce of national sovereignty in the interests of combating crime throughout Europe .
As my colleague Leoluca Orlando rightly puts it , ' There is a European union of crime , but there is no European union of crime prevention . ' And why isn 't there ?
Because of reservations about national sovereignty .
So let me tell you something : if we go on like this , we are never going to be able to bring the European Union properly to grips with what this third pillar is actually supposed to be .
I have nothing more to say about the involvement of the European Parliament , about which Mrs Lindeperg has already said enough .
The way outsiders see us is very vividly portrayed in Recital H. The Council 's programme for the next two years has not even been notified to Parliament .
That is the way things are .
But if we want to make any progress , at least at intergovernmental level , then we must do away with the unanimity principle , and then there is one thing that really has to be achieved : governments really have to want to put an end to the practice of preaching European unity and harmonization on Sundays and practising the very opposite on Mondays - parading national sovereignty like a monstrance .
If we can 't change that , we shall not make any progress with cooperation in police and judicial matters .
Madam President , the situation in the field of justice is indefensible .
Our people are demanding that the Union be an area with free movement , an area characterised by freedom , security , justice and constitutional regulations .
Matters of justice are placed high on the European agenda , particularly thanks to Minister Owen .
But the Third Pillar is not functioning satisfactorily .
There is a vacuum here which forms a breeding ground for crime .
Our people expect to see proposals but the right of veto in the Council makes our tools less effective and prevents action and development .
Formal communication with elected representatives are often lacking and the area of justice is cloaked in darkness .
Legal security , transparency and efficiency is lacking .
Bureaucracy flourishes , along with crime , illegal immigration and the traffic in people .
The Council must reorganise itself with less bureaucracy , more openness and transparency .
The democratic process must not be allowed to fall short in the fight against terror and crime .
It is disturbing that the Member States have not yet ratified the Europol Convention .
We won 't know whether to laugh or cry when the country least sympathetic to integration turns out to be the winner when it comes to anchoring policing issues within the national framework .
The Intergovernmental Conference must clarify goals and give the Council the legal tools .
The Commission needs to organise itself better internally in order to give more resources to justice issues , even personnel if they are required for greater efficiency .
The President of the Commission must take on the role of political leader , and take this role seriously in order to give a totally different kind of support to Third Pillar issues and the fight against drug trafficking .
International drug crime is not a children 's playground debating society for eager Commissioners of varying political hues .
It is vital that the Commission continue to urge IGC development by illustrating the impossible nature of Article K.9.
The Commission and the presidency 's contribution to a new trend in the Intergovernmental Conference on joint actions for some of the Third Pillar activities is a commendable success , but is it enough ?
Transparency in internal matters can be increased even with the inadequate instruments that we have .
This has been demonstrated by the Irish presidency .
Exchange of information between the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizen 's Rights and the Commission has been strengthened .
Today 's debate is in itself a demonstration of this .
We in the PPE tried to compromise and to balance our views before this debate .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur has proved to be incapable of presenting new amendments , not considered by the committee , in the House .
This unparliamentary behaviour must be stopped if we want Parliament to have greater democratic powers .
This is why we have a narrower view of these proposals when voting than we would otherwise have done if the proposal had been forthcoming in committee .
As someone who is well aware of the difficulties , I would like to conclude , before the new year starts , by saying thank you for all that has already been achieved during 1996 , and by urging the Commission and the Council to maintain the highest level of expectation in the fight against crime and drug abuse so that we can achieve the required level of security in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true , as Mrs Lindeperg has said , that a few small steps forward have been taken as regards the third pillar , but , as the previous speakers have so rightly said , there has been a marked lack of political objectives - a lack that has led national egoisms to eat away at the very heart of state sovereignty , as the President-in-Office of the Council has said .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the political objectives are clear : freedom , security , justice and law and order within the European Union .
But although this may be clear and although it may be clear that the Maastricht Treaty cannot solve all our problems , it is nonetheless a fact that , up to now , the ' bridge ' has been used for a purpose diametrically opposed to the one proposed by the Maastricht Treaty : it has been used as a bridge not from the third pillar to the first , but from the first pillar to the third .
It is also a fact that the unanimity rule has simply served to maintain the illusion of national sovereignty because , of course , as has already been said , organized crime has long been transnational and international , spreading well beyond our obsolete internal borders ; and it is also a fact that there is still a clear lack of democratic and legal guarantees for citizens , as is evidenced by the fact that the European Court of Justice still has no real function in this respect and that parliamentary powers , both of the European Parliament and of national parliaments , are wholly inadequate .
All the power remains in the hands of petty civil servants , who obviously do not have the necessary competence and whom we cannot , in any case , expect to ensure that steps are taken towards cooperation .
In my opinion , not even communitization would lead to any real progress , except at the risk of judicial chaos , which is something we must avoid as we move towards a European area of justice - a real European area of justice .
Madam President , notwithstanding everything the Council of Ministers and the European Commission have said , the inescapable fact is that in this area the European Union is hidebound by bureaucracy .
There is no openness , the instruments of policy are ineffective , what we have are recommendations , resolutions , as we have just seen .
Things over which a popularly elected body such as ourselves cannot exercise any scrutiny .
Of course we realize , Madam President , that the reason for this is the structure of the third pillar as enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty , the structure of decision-making .
But for my own part I must say that a whole lot of policy areas are not getting started early enough and fast enough .
Why do all the groups need to act ?
They need to act to show that the vast majority of this House , right across the political spectrum , is unhappy with the way things are going .
Moves towards a common policy on asylum are far too slow and lacking in substance .
The question of policing our external borders has been left in abeyance for years .
Measures to combat fraud are proceeding far too slowly and we need to harmonize our measures against drug addiction and trafficking . Speaking as a member of the Dutch parliament too , I hope that collective action will be agreed over the next few days in Dublin .
Madam President , the European Commission claims to have insufficient staff .
I find that no excuse at all .
The European Commission needs to revise its priorities and I can honestly say that I endorse the text of the resolution we have before us here : a great deal needs to be done in this area if we are to retain any credibility in the eyes of the people .
Madam President , as Michèle Lindeperg has emphasized in her report , there is no doubt that we must turn to the Intergovernmental Conference to eliminate the inconsistencies and distortions in matters relating to the crossing of borders , the control of immigration flows and the right of asylum .
But that Conference needs to bear it clearly in mind that it is the very young , the poor and the underprivileged who have to pay the heavy price of this inconsistency .
All this , clearly , relates to communitization .
Of course , the unanimity requirement and the proliferation of legal instruments which are not part of the Treaty on Union , especially when those instruments are prepared by the scullions of the intergovernmental kitchen , are major obstacles to any advance as far as consistency is concerned .
Finally , the participants in the Conference must understand clearly that these matters are subject to the will of the people , that the will of the people is expressed by parliaments , and that they alone are its repositories .
Madam President , I would just like to take a minute to highlight an especially important part of a law abiding society which has not , I think been mentioned by many here today and that is openness and public accessibility .
Corruption in itself is an abomination but organised crime always finds life easier in a corrupt society .
Increased openness and public accessibility is not just a general democratic requirement but something which makes corruption in society more difficult .
It becomes an operational action to achieve a more honest society .
Looking back over the past year , I do not really know whether it is possible to say that openness and public accessibility has increased in the Union or in its Member States but , at least , I have great hopes for the Intergovernmental Conference in this respect .
That was only 50 seconds , Madam President .
Madam President , in view of the threat posed by organized crime , the European Union 's citizens ultimately measure the Union in terms of whether , and to what extent , it can develop efficient machinery to counter international organized crime .
So the kind of constructive criticism contained in the Lindeperg report should prompt us to draw the necessary conclusions which can then be implemented by the Council and Commission .
In principle , we see two possible approaches here . The first is actually to take advantages of the possibilities of the third pillar , in accordance with Article K.1 , to create European policy and relegate national interests to a secondary position .
The second possibility is that Parliament 's urgings should be heeded , so that communitization replaces national legislation where necessary , as for example in the case of asylum policy and the control of the external borders .
I should like to single out three key areas from the many measures proposed . First , the harmonization of the legal position .
This is absolutely essential to allow the efficient deployment of the European drugs unit really to take place in matters such as combating sexual abuse , the exploitation of children and the traffic in human beings , because at present that possibility does not exist .
The second is that greater efforts should be made to regulate at Community level the influx of labour from third countries , and the asylum policy , because the kind of uncontrolled and unlimited influx and mass migrations we are experiencing at present stir up fears , make people worry about their jobs , and so might ultimately result in job losses and xenophobia .
The third point is that we should aim at more intensive contacts with the countries in which organized crime originates - I am thinking here particularly of the eastern countries - and organize police cooperation between Europol and those countries to enable us to achieve greater security in the interests of the Union .
Madam President , there is a lack of movement in the area of justice and home affairs .
But , this is the area which covers customs , police , civil criminal law , border controls , drugs , asylum and immigration issues .
These are sensitive areas which go to the heart of every nation , affecting their sovereignty and control over their own country .
They are political areas which can sometimes be decisive in determining whether a State is considered to be a State or not .
In my opinion , it is more important in these areas to ensure that cooperation is primarily transnational and that decisions are taken unanimously .
There is nothing which says , as far as I can see , that the fight against crime and fraud will automatically be better as long as the decision is taken with a qualified majority .
There must be a more equitable allocation of refugees , a more effective fight against crime and tougher measures must be taken against the traffic in drugs and people .
At the same time , all this must take place together with the Member States , within the framework of the effective working programme which Commissioner Gradin has just mentioned .
I should like to thank honourable Members for their contribution to the debate , and also to thank the President-in-Office and Mrs Gradin for having accepted Parliament 's invitation at what seemed an unsuitable time for a debate of this importance .
I hope you will allow me , Madam President , to call your attention to that point .
I shall not be involved next year , because after preparing this resolution for three consecutive years I am now passing it on to a colleague .
Should we not take steps to ensure , in the December part-session , when this report is due to be considered , that this very important debate should no longer be scheduled at the same time and place as it has been for the last three years , to prevent its being treated in a necessarily somewhat inattentive manner ?
If you could call the attention of the presidency to this point for next year , I should be grateful .
Madam President , I just want to intervene to thank the Members who have participated in this debate for their comments .
May I also thank Mrs Gradin , the Commissioner , who has worked so closely with the presidency in this very difficult area .
It is true what Members have said - there are great frustrations in getting actions in the third pillar - but it was the great scientist Marie Curie who said nobody notices what has been done , only what remains to be done .
So , let us at least notice what has been done in the third pillar issues during the last year .
Great progress has been made .
It is possible to make it work , even as it exists now , but it is also necessary , I believe , under the IGC to examine the mechanisms that are there and that is why the presidency has submitted proposals in the IGC debate .
The European Council this week in Dublin will be discussing those .
Could I finish by saying that one of the things I have discovered in this role , and as a Minister for Justice , is that if we are to have cooperation in the fields of justice and home affairs between countries we must also work individually in our own countries to make sure that there is cooperation between the different institutions that work in those countries .
I have to tell you from my experience that is not the case .
We cannot expect cooperation to work from country to country if internally individual police forces and customs officials , etc . , are not working closely together .
Let me therefore remind Members that is also an objective , and an onus on all of us .
I thank you all for your attendance here today and for your attention .
Thank you , Minister .
If honourable Members are agreeable , that will not be the very last word of this debate , because Mr Elliott has made great efforts to be with us at this late hour , so I am going to give him the floor .

Madam President , I am very grateful for that .
I happened to be chairing another meeting in another part of the building .
I watched the screen , but I was not quick enough .
Can I just say that I would like to congratulate Mrs Lindeperg on what is a very good and comprehensive report .
There is a great deal in it which ought to be strongly supported by this Parliament .
I have to say that it will be very difficult for us , the British Labour Members , to support this and we will probably have to abstain because of the very firm commitment in three of the paragraphs , Nos 19 to 21 , on communitization of third pillar matters .
It goes far further than we could support .
I would just remind people of what the Irish presidency has said in introduction : this is not something which the majority of governments could support to the extent that this report calls for at the present time , though I would say to the presidency that I hope very much indeed that even if it cannot agree to complete communitization of the third pillar , it would agree to greater openness in this in the way that these matters are dealt with within the third pillar and to a proper role for Parliament .
Thank you once again to the interpreters .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place this evening at 6 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mrs Colombo Svevo , you have the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I should like to speak simply to raise the case of Joseph O 'Dell , who is under sentence of death and whose case is being followed not only by the Italian Parliament but also by many human-rights organizations .
Mr President , this is neither the time nor the place to launch a debate on the death penalty , on which we may all have very different opinions ; it is simply a question of calling for the sentence to be reviewed in this particular case .
New facts have emerged , one of the witnesses has withdrawn and , most important of all , some of the expert evidence , such as the results of DNA tests , has not been taken into account .
We are calling for all these facts to be taken into consideration and for the case to be re-examined .
We are calling for this on humanitarian grounds and we would ask you , Mr President , on behalf of this Parliament , to do everything in your power to ensure that the proceedings are reviewed .
Thank you , Mrs Colombo Svevo .
That was not a point of order , but as it is a humanitarian point it will be noted and referred to the President so that he can write a letter on the subject , if he sees fit .
Ladies and gentlemen , Parliament has decided to hold this morning 's votes at 6 p.m. , after the vote on the urgent and topical debate .
I therefore propose to extend this evening 's sitting to 9 p.m. , so that we can make progress .
Are there any comments ?
There do not seem to be any .
So I take it the proposal is approved and the sitting this evening will be extended to 9 p.m.
Topical and Urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1354 / 96 by Mr Hallam and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Sunday employment ; -B4-1368 / 96 by Mr Andrews and others , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on Sunday work and the 48 hour week ; -B4-1395 / 96 by Mrs Elmalan and others , on behalf the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on Sunday work ; -B4-1413 / 96 by Mr Gillis and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on Sunday employment ; -B4-1433 / 96 by Mr Wolf and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the Working Time Directive .
Mr President , four weeks ago we heard the news that the European Court of Justice had said in answer to a British Government case that Sunday was not to be a special day for health and safety reasons .
Four weeks ago I felt strongly that we should have an urgent debate on this very subject .
Four weeks ago very few of my colleagues said that this debate would take place .
The fact that it is taking place today shows the concern from all political groups and all nations in this Parliament at the way in which our deregulated Sunday has affected the life of many ordinary people .
It may have brought profits to a lot of people but to many others it has brought a great deal of pain .
Families are unable to be together on a Sunday .
Low-paid workers are often forced to work long hours at very low wages without any enhanced supplement for working on a Sunday .
There is an additional impact on our environment and there is an additional stress on our citizens .
We pay millions of pounds for relaxation therapies and yet one of the best relaxation therapies of all is simply to take a day 's rest each week .
This resolution reminds the people of Europe that Sunday has a special place .
It acknowledges that some people do not wish to work on a Sunday for reasons of conscience and it also acknowledges the special position of some of our minority communities .
I have not spoken about the religious aspects of Sunday .
As I read my Bible each day one of the things I have found out is that so much of what appears in the Bible coincides with common sense .
It seems incredible to me that a British Government should go to the European Court of Justice and try to put Sunday into the same category as every other day .
Let us have a rest , a good rest , at least once a week on a Sunday .
Mr President , I contest the European Court of Justice decision to annul the second sentence of Article 5 of the working time directive , which specifies Sunday as a rest day .
Technically the identification of a specific day is not connected with health and safety at work .
However , in practice Sunday is the only day of the week when the majority of people in our society are not in the workplace or at school or otherwise occupied .
In the EPP we have put the family at the centre of our thinking .
To remove Sunday as a day of rest puts yet another obstacle in the way of successful family life .
Sunday as a weekly day of rest is a tradition to which the vast majority of the people of Europe are attached , and it adds to the social and cultural aspects of our life for most of the people of the European Union .
In addition to being a day set aside for religious observance , Sunday is also a day dedicated to family responsibilities and to recreation .
It is a day when parents like to be with their children , when grown up children visit their parents ; and in closely knit communities it is the day when people can find time to visit the sick , the aged and the lonely .
Take away Sunday as the day of rest and we will lose much of the richness of community life as it has been experienced by Europeans throughout the centuries .
There is something special about Sunday as the day of rest which is common to all occupations and all locations in the western world .
My resolution has been incorporated into the joint resolution and I would ask the House to give it its full support .
Many thanks , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is certainly no dispute about the fact that the day of rest has nothing to do with safety at work .
What is far less certain is whether the same is true of health .
At any rate , a working world without one complete day of rest is inhumane .
The entitlement to a day of rest must be a legal entitlement and must be one that can be enforced .
The second point is this : where that free day falls is a question of the calendar , the basic structure of our culture or cultures .
We must always be mindful of that .
We share a common system for calculating time , but we have many different calendars : the Church year , the Jewish and Islamic and other formal calendars are completely different and have to be able to coexist .
The freedom of coexistence of these calendars is just as important to safeguard as the right to a day of rest between working weeks .
To make both these points clear , and stand by them , is the only reasonable reaction to the situation created by the decision of the European Court of Justice .
On that basis , I believe that this House can be recommended to adopt the compromise text .
Mr President , I do not think we need waste two minutes this evening defending this joint resolution .
I come from a country where Sunday is enshrined in the culture as a day of rest after the working week and there are other cultures and religions which also prefer Sunday as the day of rest . That is why we feel the House can accept this resolution unanimously .
So , to be brief , I urge all colleagues to vote in favour of this joint resolution .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party regrets the judgment .
We Christian Democrats specifically established the point , during the debate on the Directive , that Sunday should be enshrined as the general day of rest .
The Group of the European People 's Party now calls upon the Member States , when transposing the Directive into national law , to recognize Sunday as , in principle , a day of rest .
The intention is not just to sanctify Sunday as a matter of religious tradition - in a flexible working world , it is often the only cultural and social space where the family can meet for rest and recreation .
To that extent , it does indeed have some connection with workers ' health .
Sunday is one of the wellsprings of Europe .
To abandon the principle of Sunday as a day of rest would be to destroy one of the foundations of European culture .

Mr President , I am extremely grateful to Mr Hallam and Mr Pronk for their swift reaction to the Court 's ruling about Sundays .
To Christians Sunday is especially significant as the day of rest ordained by God , going back to the day of Christ 's resurrection .
As such this day is deeply rooted in European culture .
And the special nature of this day has always been publicly acknowledged by officialdom throughout European history .
But Sunday is important not only for religious reasons ; for social reasons too it is of incalculable value .
If we lose it this will have profound social repercussions .
A varyingly timed rest day is not an acceptable alternative .
There will be a rest day , but it will be part of a pattern of variable working times within the family and society .
That may fit nicely with a 24-hour economy , but it is socially destructive and leaves less and less room for social living .
It will foster the individualization of society and is thus ultimately an asocial phenomenon .
There is more to life than work and production .
For all these reasons I think we should keep Sunday as the public day of rest .
In that way we shall be obeying the commandment and upholding the best traditions of European culture and history .
Mr President , today 's topical and urgent debate on working hours is about much more than the innocuous title suggests .
It is about an attempt to challenge our right to one of the achievements of our civilization and our culture .
Sunday rest is not just an essential , quantifiable factor in the lives of a high percentage of our population , but also an important element of our working and family lives .
I should also like to note that , as far as I know , the last time any serious consideration was given to changing the pattern and effects of Sunday in Europe was by the Nazi leaders under the Third Reich .
That is hardly a tradition in which we want the European Union to follow .
But Sunday simply must retain its religious associations , as well as its family and social ones .
That is why we should make allowance for the customs of other established religions in Europe , as far as we can .
Finally , may I say that I too , as a Catholic , should like to be free to go about my religious duties unhindered next Sunday .
Mr President , naturally I fully endorse the position expressed here on behalf of my Group .
I would merely add one point , namely that Sunday should be a day of rest not only for employees but also for the self-employed and their families .
They too need time for their families and things other than purely professional activities .
Hence our plea in Amendment No 1 that account should be taken of this in setting shop opening hours .
The most liberal thinking is that they should be entirely free to decide when they open .
But we think that is a restricted freedom .
Many self-employed business people are obliged to open on Sundays because of the competition they face , possibly from across a border .
Competition may be a cornerstone of our single market , but cornerstones have limits too .
If the labour laws and shop opening hours can be aligned better in the matter of Sunday as a rest day , employees and employers can all have Sunday off and go back to work with renewed vigour on Monday .
Mr President , I fear that I may be a black sheep within the PPE Group as far as this matter is concerned , as there are two aspects to it .
Let me take the issue of principle first .
I should like to recall something which Klaus Hänsch said earlier today : the European Parliament and national parliaments have different roles to play .
One must bear this in mind when taking decisions on practical matters .
If the Union has any respect at all for the subsidiarity principle which is referred to in the Treaty , it must leave decisions on working hours - including the determination of rest days - to national level .
It is not up to the Union to dictate to Finland , for example , when the shops can be open .
Next , there is the practical aspect to be considered .
In my view it is hypocritical to maintain that approving the principle that work may be done on Sundays will damage people 's health and social life .
Let us rather talk about the freedom of the individual to decide when to work and when to have a day off .
Students , for example , can really only work at weekends .
At a time of such unemployment , every job is important , and one way in which jobs are created is by means of Sunday opening .
The idea of imposing a uniform weekly pattern on people 's life is outdated .
Let everybody choose their day off for themselves ; no decision is needed from this Parliament on the matter .
I cannot endorse the resolution , and I would urge my colleagues , whatever they think about the subject itself , to display respect for the subsidiarity principle when considering how to vote .
Thank you , Mrs Piha .
If the Presidency is not misinformed , that was your first speech and I would like to congratulate you , and have Parliament 's congratulations on your first speech minuted .
Mr President , all of these draft resolutions refer to the recent judgement of the European Court of Justice in which the Court rejected the United Kingdom challenge to the working time directive .
Members will recall that the Court annulled the provision that the minimum weekly rest period to which workers are entitled under the directive shall in principle include Sunday .
I would like to explain briefly that the inclusion or annulment of this provision in the text of the directive makes no practical difference .
That is because the provision itself was essentially declaratory , so employees still have the right under the working time directive to a minimum uninterrupted rest period of 24 hours per seven-day period , in addition to the 11 hours daily rest .
But just as the directive does not require Member States to make special provision for Sunday rest , it does not prevent them from doing so either .
However , following the Court judgement it is now absolutely clear that decisions on whether or not to legislate on this matter are for each Member State to make in the light of the circumstances prevailing in that particular Member State .
I note that all the draft resolutions call upon Member States to take appropriate action and that no action is called for on the part of the Commission .
The Commission will , nevertheless , take very careful note of the resolutions which you decide to adopt in the formulation of its future policies , and I would like to join too in congratulating you on your maiden speech .
Mr President , the Liberal Group has not taken part in this debate , precisely for the reasons which Commissioner Flynn describes .
We are urging the Member States to act and there is thus no call for this to be the subject of an urgent debate .
I would far rather have seen the matter discussed properly in the appropriate committee , and we shall not be taking part in the vote either .
Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , that is not a point of order ; you expressed a political position and you cannot do so in this way .
Your group could have asked for the floor at the appropriate time instead of using that procedure .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1347 / 96 by Mr Cars and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-1360 / 96 by Mrs Hoff and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-1410 / 96 by Mr von Habsburg and Mr Cassidy , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-1435 / 96 by Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Belarus .
Mr President , after Sunday as a day of rest we come to the ongoing unrest in Belarus .
The referendum there is a farce and President Lukaschenko has been declared the winner .
But his victory leaves people everywhere in the world with a nasty taste in their mouths .
Suppression of the free media , muzzling of the opposition and cheating during the referendum itself meant that this fearful outcome was inevitable .
The dismissal of the chairman of the electoral commission and Lukaschenko 's unilateral declaration that the result was binding have made the picture worse .
The prospects for democracy in Belarus have seriously worsened with the President 's enormous widening of his powers .
President Lukaschenko will have to understand that we in Europe will not condone such extremes of undemocratic and authoritarian behaviour .
The violation of democratic principles means that we must necessarily put our partnership agreement with Belarus on hold and freeze its funds from TACIS , apart from those intended for democracy programmes .
For the rest we must continue to foster democratization and we , the European Parliament , urge the EU ambassadors in Belarus to act unanimously in forging links with the opposition .
Mr President , may I strike what may be a mitigating note in this debate , certainly not to condone in any way the actions of the dictatorial President in Belarus .
The Socialist Group fully supports the condemnatory nature of the remarks made .
However there is more than a hint of heavy-handedness in this debate with regard to a country which is small enough not to have to be appeased because it is neither politically nor economically important to the European Union .
We would like to see some consistency .
The powers that the President has are not that much different from the powers enjoyed by President Yeltsin , yet Yeltsin is the person so often to be appeased .
Once again this morning , this House voted for appropriations for Turkey , a country with a decades-old record of poor human rights .
I would argue , as my group would argue , for consistency when it comes to the application of moral disapproval .
Yesterday 's television news showed pictures of thousands of Belarussians queuing outside a newly-open MacDonalds restaurant in Minsk , in freezing cold .
The first 1 , 000 entrants were given a free meal .
When interviewed , a young man said he was not queuing up because he was impressed with Western democracy or the Western lifestyle , he was queuing up because he was hungry .
Belarus was more damaged by the Chernobyl accident than any other country .
We are talking about a very poor , a very damaged country .
We would argue strongly for consistency .
We join in the condemnation of dictatorship wherever it may be found .
But we hope that the Commission 's attitude towards this country is also motivated by encouragement and is not simply based on punishment .
Mr President , I was one of those who was selected at very short notice to go as a member of the European Parliament 's ad hoc delegation to observe the referendum and the partial by-elections which were taking place at the same time for the Belarus Parliament .
I went with Mrs Schroedter from the Green Group and Mr Bösch from the Socialist Group .
We found the experience a profoundly depressing one , first of all because it was perfectly apparent that the referendum had not been organized in a particularly democratic way .
I would add , to underline that , that the polling stations for the referendum had been opened for at least two weeks before 24 November , which was when the voting took place .
Secondly and unusually , because it is the third time I have been to Eastern Europe to observe elections , we were not permitted to witness the opening of the ballot boxes and the all-important process whereby a check takes place to see whether the number of ballot papers in the box matches the number of people who have voted .
It is a guarantee against what we call in English ' stuffing ' .
The third thing which struck us is that , though President Lukaschenko seems to be determined to reunite his country with Russia , the question of reunification with Russia did not feature in any of the questions in the referendum as it is uncertain whether or not the population of Belarus will be invited to pass their comment on whether or not they wish to be reunited with Russia .
I entirely agree with what Mr Hindley said .
Belarus is a very poor country .
It is unfortunately positioned , if you like , between East and West .
It has been directly on the route of various invaders between Western Europe and Russia .
Indeed , in the last war over one third of the population of Belarus lost their lives .
I think it is up to us in the European Parliament to extend every sympathy to the people of Belarus for the condition in which they find themselves .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to stress that the European Commission is seriously concerned about the grave deterioration in the political situation in Belarus and we agree with the general analysis of the facts that has been presented .
And although the isolation of Belarus is undesirable , questions can legitimately be asked about the type of measures that can influence the development of this country .
We have to recognize that internal opposition is limited to a small political elite and President Lukaschenko continues to enjoy great popularity . He has also succeeded in gaining control over a large number of members of the Belarus parliament .
In this difficult and complicated context , the Commission has already taken steps that lie within its powers .
I would remind you that payment of the second tranche of a loan of ECU 25 million for the balance of payments has been suspended .
In addition all the programming missions under the TACIS programme have been cancelled .
At the same time , Commissioner van den Broek asked for effective priority for projects geared progress to consolidating democracy and projects of a social nature .
With the support of the Commission , the Presidency-in-Office - the Irish presidency - has taken the initiative of sending a fact-finding mission to Belarus .
The actual terms of reference for this mission will be defined shortly and the Commission 's view is that this mission should involve both sides in high level political meetings .
In addition , the Commission was recently involved in a meeting of the troika with President Lukaschenko , which he himself requested , during the recent OSCE Summit in Lisbon .
As you can imagine , advantage was taken of this opportunity to deliver a very clear and very critical message about the current internal situation in Belarus .
Thank you very much , Mr Marín .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , for nearly three years now President Reina of Honduras has been pursuing a policy aimed at greater democracy , reduction of the role of the military and economic development .
He has incontrovertibly had some success , but the gulf between rich and poor persists and crime is increasing very fast .
The military amongst others are pressing for the death penalty to be reinstated and for criminal sentences to be made more severe .
Many NGOs are quite properly protesting at the fact that minors are held in adult prisons .
Despite the law these practices continue .
The Honduran Government - all credit to it - must be supported in its efforts to end these practices .
Joint programmes by the Commission and the Honduran Government must be implemented quickly to put an end to these abominations .
The battle against crime and the drugs barons must be waged using democratic means .
Otherwise the seed will be sown for the resurgence of more crime , undemocratic attitudes and the vices of the bad old days - revolution , civil war and human rights violations .
Mr President , we are certainly all aware of the human-rights situation and , in particular , the conditions suffered by juvenile detainees in Honduras .
We must acknowledge that the Honduran Government has in fact tried to make improvements , not least as a result of its agreement with the Commission .
Some considerable changes have been made , but we need to see yet more concrete signals from the Honduran Government .
In particular , our current concern , which has also been expressed by the World Organization against Torture and Amnesty International , is for the children who are still being held in prison .
We need to know what has been done for them , what is going to be done for them in the future , whether they have been released and , in any event , whether every possible effort is being made to protect their physical and psychological well-being , by , for example , setting up special juvenile prisons .
Our group , Union for Europe , has expressed this view on several occasions .
During the last part-session in October , Mrs Colli tabled a motion for a resolution , which was not accepted ; we note that the political groups have now combined to produce a joint motion for a resolution .
We hope that what has been promised on several occasions by the Honduran Government will actually come about .
We are sure that , as we celebrate the 50th anniversary of UNICEF and stand on the threshold of the year 2000 , major attention will be focused on young people , and that this will also be so for a poor , developing country such as Honduras .
Mr President , for some time a number of us have been receiving information from the NGO Casa Alianza , which is concerned with street children in Honduras , which has drawn our attention to the jailing , ill-treatment and torture of young people in adult prisons .
I , for one , have taken this up in the past with the Honduran authorities .
This resolution is an indication of our continuing concern but it is clear that President Reina and the government have already made some progress in dealing with problem and this has , in fact , been recognized by Casa Alianza .
The Honduran Congress has approved a code of conduct and the law authorizing the imprisonment of minors has been annulled .
In addition , progress has been made between the European Commission and the Honduran authorities in a project which will assist young people at risk in Honduras .
In October one of the judges , Vianey Cruz , who was responsible for the illicit jailing of minors , was charged , and the director of the Humberto Dominguez Penal Centre , where drugs and alcohol and corruption have been found , was dismissed .
This is all evidence that the Honduran authorities are seeking to end abuses in prison and to safeguard the position of children and juveniles , but it is very important that that pressure is maintained .
Fundamentally , the problems arise from the extreme poverty which exists in some sectors of the population in Honduras and in other developing countries , including numerous Latin American states .
Children are at risk in many of these states and this all underlines the very pressing need for economic policies to be pursued which will alleviate poverty and will not increase it .
Mr President , the various resolutions presented on the incarceration of children with adults in Honduras make reference to the United Nations conventions promoting the welfare of children .
We have all heard recently that those who are supposed to take care of them are violating them , and that , according to ILO reports , child labour across the world involves 200 million children .
I believe that the juveniles detained in Honduras under inhuman conditions are yet another expression of the poverty and marginalization that applies all over the world .
We must welcome the fact that the Honduras Government has repealed the law which allowed children to be detained along with adults .
We must also welcome the Commission 's agreement with the Honduras Government on special treatment for these children .
But even so , as Mr Newens said , unless there is a change in economic policy to allow these children to be raised in a normal family environment , we expect there will continue to be cases for us to denounce here .
So I believe we should take advantage of this occasion to condemn , yet again , the havoc wrought by poverty , marginalization and inequality in the world .
Mr President , in a world where there is no lack of abuse of minors , with the recent condemnation by UNICEF of the appalling statistic that , at this very moment , 250 million children across the world are forced to work , or , far worse , the ugly escalation of sexual abuse of minors , thorough analysis of the funding agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Honduras relating to the programme on care for delinquent juveniles and social precariousness in that Central American country is a source of satisfaction .
Why ?
Because one of the specific objectives is to strengthen the public institutions directly involved in caring for children at risk ; because it aims to promote the application of the principles of integrated childcare by , amongst other things , implementing the childhood code , with special emphasis on delinquent juveniles ; and because it is intended to train judges , staff of institutions , police and teachers in areas like integrated child protection .
It also aims - and I emphasize ' aim ' because we would prefer this to have been done already - to promote flexibility in administrative procedures concerning children , and extend the scope of the non-governmental organizations involved in preventive work with children , as well as increasing their capacity to provide shelter for children at risk .
Because of all this , and to express our hope that this problem - still a burning issue in Honduras - will soon be resolved , we support this joint motion for a resolution .
Mr President , quite apart from the generally unsatisfactory situation in Honduras , the treatment of minors in prisons is a particular cause of concern .
The personnel of Casa Alianza , which has denounced this practice of holding children and young people in prisons , have already been repeatedly threatened with bomb attacks .
The resolution before us is , as I see it , simply too weak and toothless , because it makes no reference to the connections between the distribution of wealth in Honduras and a form of crime that inevitably results from it , the same treatment then being meted out to the people , and especially to children and the young .
Nothing is said here about genuine resocialization , there is no call for a change in social conditions , but ultimately it 's just the same old story , even if there are signs of more praiseworthy efforts : we do nothing to change economic policy , and we still deal with the oligarchies in these countries .
Today we have had a fine example in the case of Turkey .
Economic aid is being adopted here , despite our votes to the contrary , while children and young people are actually being tortured there .
It 's not much use standing up for the Sabbath , going to church and praying if we don 't play by the rules of the church for the other six days of the week .
Mr President , this Christmas it will be seven years since the overthrow of President Ceausescu in Romania .
Since the heady days of revolution there has certainly been progress in Romania but it has been painfully slow .
One of the cruellest legacies of Ceausescu 's regime has been the appalling orphanages , which still scar the face of Romania , and the thousands of street children who are to be seen in the streets of Romania 's towns and cities .
Ceausescu is responsible for many appalling acts , but nothing was worse than his pronatalist population policy .
With the election of a new government is Romania , there is now greater hope for radical change .
The inhibiting tentacles of Ceausescu 's state apparatus need to be swept away and replaced with modern support structures which will help the most needy in Romanian society .
But today we should not delude ourselves that the social problems of Romania can be solved overnight .
They simply cannot .
By Western European standards Romania is a very , very poor country .
To bring about real change , the people of Romania need our help and the young people of Romania need it especially .
Under the PHARE programme the European Union is indeed providing modest help for the development of a childhood protection programme .
Despite the very real barriers which still prevent the effective use of resources , my recent visit to Romania showed me very clearly that such programmes are extremely worthwhile and beneficial .
This debate today is very timely because of the recent political changes in Romania .
I would hope that today this Parliament will send a clear message of solidarity with the young people and the children of Romania .
I would hope , too , that the European Commission will find some way of increasing the support to the programmes which will help children and young people as Romania begins in earnest its progress towards a closer relationship with the European Union .
Mr President , I shall follow on immediately from what was said earlier .
We are now dealing with the terrible legacy of the Ceausescu and Iliescu regimes , which treated children with extreme cruelty .
But this may be the right moment for us to express the hope that this is the last time we shall have to deal with this problem .
There is a new government , and Romania today offers new hope for the future .
I can only express this Parliament 's hope that Romania will now steer a course towards a humane and social regime , and a regime that will treat its minorities with justice .
Then we really can open the doors of Europe to Romania with a clear conscience .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although we are seeing the decline of democracy in Slovakia , we can give the warmest welcome to the political changes in Romania .
The new cabinet represents precisely what this House has been calling for over all these years .
For the first time , there is a representative of the Hungarian minority in the government ; that bears witness to the resolve to scale down the conflicts between Romania and its Hungarian minority .
I am absolutely delighted that my friend the artist Ion Caramitru is to become Minister of Culture .
I can promise honourable Members that Mr Caramitru , who has been so outstandingly successful over the years in setting up projects for orphan children , will be our most important ally in implementing the programme for the protection of children .
Let us do everything we possibly can to help him , and I would ask Commissioner Marin to tell Mr van den Broek that I hope we will show somewhat more consistency in this case than we have in the case of Turkey .
Mr President , I think Parliament let slip an opportunity this morning when we voted on the budget and those on the right of the House voted against an amendment seeking to halt funding to Turkey under the MEDA programme if Turkey failed to meet our demands in respect of human rights and freedom of expression .
A missed opportunity , Mr President , because that is what we are looking at again today .
Visitors from European countries who end up in prison because of a black list and who are kicked out of the country .
I have this list which includes members of the Danish parliament .
I can show you this black list .
And then there is the curtailment of press freedom .
I won 't go into all that here because the resolution tells us how press freedom , a fundamental democratic right , is curtailed .
A majority of this House will declare its outrage here this afternoon .
To my mind it would have carried more conviction if we had taken the opportunity this morning of expressing our outrage in more than just words .
Mr President , unfortunately I too feel obliged to follow up the thoughts of Mrs d 'Ancona , because this is one of the few times when , speaking about human rights in the European Parliament , I feel a sense of shame .
As a Member of this Parliament , I am ashamed to speak about human rights in Turkey , because I regard it as hypocritical and to some extent a deception of European public opinion , to come here this afternoon and yet again pass a resolution severely condemning the Turkish government for its violation of human rights , and specifically the rights to freedom of speech and freedom of the press , while this morning , just a few hours ago , we voted against the very mechanism that would have constituted pressure on Turkey to implement human rights .
I too am very sorry that we were pushed into doing that and compelled to move according to the position adopted by the Group of the European People 's Party and the Union for Europe Group , whereas of course I recognise and see here colleagues from those groups who are known to be fighting on behalf of human rights .
Unfortunately , at second reading we have retrogressed a long way from first reading , granted that not only is there no freezing and transfer to the reserves of the MEDA funding for Turkey , but the issue is not even mentioned , as it was in the first reading of the budget .
From that standpoint , the European Parliament is acting like a cold shower , I could say , towards democrats , journalists and those who fight for human rights in Turkey , who are either imprisoned , or facing an official and statutory framework of censorship , or suffering a series of persecutions .
Mr President , no week passes without my office receiving fresh news from Turkey about infringements of human or civic rights in that country .
It is a sad and disturbing feature of our political life which we have learned to live with .
Therefore , however much the government of Turkey may resent it , a resolution of the kind we are debating here today is quite unavoidable .
It would not have been so a few years ago , but today , with the spread of television and instant communication , we are living in a new world .
The way in which a government treats its citizens is a matter of legitimate public and international concern .
I take the point made by other speakers about the outcome of the earlier vote , and I have to say in a strictly personal capacity that it is a matter of personal regret to me , but there we are .
Mr President , I am beginning to get fed up with this .
Every month , Turkey appears high on the list of subjects for topical and urgent debate , and every month we hear about more violations by Turkey of human rights and its international commitments , violations which stir up our indignation , though that never produces any results .
The time is surely coming to call a halt , and seriously question our relations with Turkey , especially the institutionalized and contractual character of those relations .
After all , there is no escaping the fact that our regular displays of indignation in recent months and the more or less drastic sanctions we impose have virtually no effect on the behaviour of the Turkish authorities .
The deterrent effect of our declarations and measures being what it is , and Turkey clearly showing no inclination to behave in a civilized manner , there is a real problem here .
We need to change gear and toughen our response , which calls for a much more resolute and consistent political will than has been shown by most of our governments to date .
What is at stake here is our credibility and the credibility of our commitment to the cause of human rights .
Mr President , people are taking to the streets in their hundreds of thousands not only in Serbia but in Croatia too .
November the 23rd saw the biggest demonstration since independence .
Hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets to demand press freedom and Radio 101 .
Tudjman 's reaction is reminiscent of the former communist era .
He denounces critics as traitors to their country and fifth columnists influenced by secret and villainous powers in the West .
We must keep up the pressure which this Union is exerting in the name of universal human rights and application of the Council of Europe 's conventions on plurality of the media .
The temporary extension of Radio 101 's licence to broadcast must be made permanent .
Croatia has an obligation to do this vis à vis its own people and the European organizations of which it is a member or with which it has ties .
If Croatia claims to be a democracy it must honour the results of the communal elections and appoint a mayor for Zagreb .
The parallels between developments in Serbia and Croatia are indeed striking .
We are dealing here not with democracies but with systems which show clear characteristics of dictatorship .
At best they are somewhere in between .
And so I think that what we are now seeing with Radio 101 is very much a textbook case .
If the people had not taken to the streets in huge numbers , they would not have got any broadcasting time and so it is of course extremely important for Europe to make its voice heard loud and clear with the Croatian authorities .
The Council of Europe admitted Croatia as a member , but on condition that its demands for pluralism were met .
It now remains to be seen what action the Council of Europe will take to ensure effective compliance with its demand for a pluralist media and I will end by calling for the continuing suspension of European financial aid to Croatia .
Mr President , I don 't believe I ever drew any comparison between the regimes in Belgrade and Zagreb .
I think these are two entirely different situations .
There is no denying that there is today , in Zagreb , a dialectic between the opposition and the administration .
Having said that , I should add that I have never been one of those who close their eyes to the shortcomings and mistakes of the government in power in Zagreb , even less so today when there is no longer any direct threat to Croatia .
It is for these reasons that we call upon the Commission and the Council to demonstrate the utmost rigour and determination in dealings with Croatia , to ensure that that country respects freedom of expression and renews the broadcasting permit for Radio 101 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the decision against Radio 101 was revoked partly because those to whom that frequency was promised withdrew , but undoubtedly also because of the powerful solidarity with 101 that was apparent among the population , because the opposition parties , parts of the governing party and parts of the government itself declared in favour of it .
I absolutely failed to understand why so much fuss was made about these frequencies , because various frequencies could have been awarded in Zagreb !
They could operate 101 and others as well .
Why aren 't they doing that ?
I hope the situation will change before long .
The composition of the Telecommunications Council which awards this frequency is certainly no guarantee of the representation of civil society in Croatia .
Unfortunately , the opposition votes meant that the Croatian parliament adopted this proposal by the government .
It was probably assumed , out of ignorance , that those that were proposed were all represented there , in other words only the proposed groups are represented , not the groups that are socially relevant in Croatia .
I think this happened out of ignorance , and I think we can make a major contribution to improving the situation .
Regarding the situation of the media in Croatia itself , I should simply like to say that there is wide variety of printed media but that I am very seriously concerned -and this is where my criticism is aimed - that the bias of Croatian television in favour of the government is simply unacceptable .
Although there are 11 small TV transmitters in the country , only HTV - the Croatian state television service - is able to transmit nationwide .
For that reason , I believe , the broadcaster should finally provide a guarantee of pluralism and at the same time comply with the democratic duty to provide information .
There is a programme committee at HTV , on which the opposition is also represented , though it only has as many representatives as the Sabor has , in other words a very small number proportionately .
So , as I see it , we should work towards ensuring that representatives of the social groups in Croatia are also represented on that programme committee , so that pluralism really can be guaranteed and the European Union can provide great assistance by means of the know-how transfer under the PHARE democracy programme .
Mr President , the delegation of Alleanza Nazionale intends to vote in favour of the joint resolution on freedom of the media in Croatia and would like to express its solidarity with the journalists and employees of the radio station ' Radio 101 ' , who have had to suffer the prevarications and arrogance of a power system that uses the very same methods as were fashionable in Tito 's Yugoslavia .
It is sad to have to admit that fundamental rights , such as the dissemination and receipt of information , which , in our countries , are taken for granted as essential if a society is to be able to define itself as free and civil , are still being denied in a state that lies on the borders of the European Union , with which we have close economic links and which is an actual member of the Council of Europe .
A state bureaucracy and government apparatus , those of Croatia , have clearly believed that a quick face-lift , a few fine words and official recognition of the role of the opposition are enough for a government and a power system to be defined as democratic .
Well , Mr Tudjman , it just is not enough , and you know it .
The opposition and its role have to be recognized not only formally but also , and above all , in practice , so that elections can be a real and fair confrontation of positions that may be conflicting , with opposition parties being allowed to disseminate and publicize their own ideas .
Closing down a radio station and a newspaper , prohibiting ethnic and linguistic minorities from asserting their rights and expressing their identities , and falsifying the rules of the electoral game all indicate that the Croatian Government still has a long way to go before it can truly call itself democratic .
I should like to note , in particular , the difficulties being faced by representatives of the legislative assembly of Istria , where there is a large Italian minority , who are under constant threat and pressure which prevent them from doing their duty of defending the interests and identity they were elected to defend .
Mr President , the delegation of Alleanza Nazionale hopes that the trust Europe has placed in Croatia , and in Slovenia , will not be betrayed by dishonest behaviour that is quite unacceptable of countries that want to call themselves European and hope to become a part of the European Union .
Mr President , I should like to thank honourable Members for ensuring that we have the opportunity to discuss this point today , as an act of solidarity with an elected Member of the Slovakian Parliament whom the authorities quite simply wish to deprive of his mandate for reasons of power politics .
Unlike Mr von Habsburg , I am of the opinion that we cannot just gloss over things .
We must take note and acknowledge that such cases are increasing in number .
Serbia is a blatant case .
We have another spectacular instance in Croatia , with the Mayor of Zagreb , while the situation in Slovakia is one with which the European Parliament has repeatedly had to concern itself .
I simply regard it as intolerable that we should accept a situation where the normal democratic process of exchanging power through the ballot box is trampled underfoot in this way .
So I hope that , with this resolution , we shall add power to the arm of those democratic forces in Slovakia that are fighting for their completely normal constitutional rights , in the interests of the democratic future of Europe .
Mr President , unlike Mr Frischenschlager I shall not be lumping everything together but dealing with the specific question of Slovakia .
The problem in Slovakia is that the chairs of the parliamentary committees and the entire membership of the investigative committees are monopolized by the governing party , which is not the case in Croatia - quite the reverse .
The effect of this monopoly situation in Slovakia is , for example , that the investigatory committee for the secret services has been totally manipulated by the government - in other words the government has been investigating itself in the affair of President Kovac 's son .
One member of the governing party , Mr Gaulieder , has very courageously departed from the government line and spoken the truth .
He has been punished for that by being unlawfully deprived of his mandate , although he previously stated in writing that he knew that forgery was going to perpetrated and he would not withdraw .
This is a blatant violation of civil and constitutional law and obviously casts the most enormous doubt on the future association of Slovakia with the European Union .
I am one of those in this House who , like Mr Bösch and others , constantly make distinctions when arguing on the subject of Slovakia .
It has been and still is my opinion that Slovakia is in the front line of candidates for access , but the chances are dwindling from day to day , and Mr Meciar is in the process of frittering them away for good .
When you consider what happened yesterday in the Slovakian parliament , when the governing party left the chamber because the state president spoke , and his speech was interrupted by a bomb threat , just as a bomb exploded outside Mr Gaulieder 's house , then it is clear that the undignified charade is continuing .
Slovakia is not going to join the European Union like this , and any real friend of the Slovakian people must clearly say as much .
I am of course impressed by this impassioned testimony , but I do not think it is right to deal with this matter in a resolution .
Why not ?
It is true that irregularities were identified in the removal of Mr Gaulieder from parliament following his dismissal from the governing party .
There has been talk of non-existent or forged letters .
And I have heard that Mr Gaulieder received anonymous threats .
All these things are very nasty and unpleasant .
And consequently Mr Bösch , chairman of the Delegation to the EU-Slovak Republic Joint Parliamentary Committee , sent a letter to his Slovak colleagues deploring these facts .
And for this reason we think that the way in which the issue is generally being addressed here is not right and consequently we shall abstain in the vote .
Mr President , we are seriously concerned by the latest events in the Slovak Republic .
Despite all assurances from the Government that it will seriously address the question of further democratization we are repeatedly faced with evidence that it is doing anything but that .
And what happened in parliament in Slovakia to our colleague Mr Gaulieder is of course not acceptable .
More serious still , as was mentioned just now , is the bombing of his home .
That point is made in our resolution which Parliament will no doubt be adopting .
But there are persistent rumours that the governing party intends to get rid of more parliamentarians who refuse to toe the party line .
Only a prompt reaction now to the Gaulieder affair will stop this .
And I can assure Mrs d 'Ancona that it is a good thing that the chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee has reacted in this way , but Parliament needs to react as a body and we must urge the Commission and Council to bring this matter to the notice of the Slovak authorities without further ado .
Mr President , like Mr Eisma I am a member of the Delegation of the EU to Slovakia , the Joint Parliamentary Committee , and I have just received a copy of the letter from our chairman Mr Bösch to his opposite number , Mr Huska , expressing grave concern about the developments which have taken place .

I do not think anybody in this House would see it otherwise .
The question is whether we support Mrs d 'Ancona 's position and say : yes , let us investigate and let us express the strength of opinion , but let us not prejudge .
For example , Mr Posselt - who was quite right in saying that we should not mix up apples and pears - nevertheless made allegations about all the committees in the Slovak Parliament being controlled by the government , with no opposition members .
That is a change which we have already managed to achieve : the opposition is now on all these committees .
So it is sometimes counterproductive to tar everybody with the same brush , because then there is resentment in Bratislava , rightly , of the ignorance on which some of these assertions are based .
I do not want Parliament to adopt resolutions based on either ignorance or unsubstantiated assertions .
That is why , I understand , the Socialist Group will abstain on this matter , and so will we .
We want to have a proper , positive dialogue with Slovakia , because we want them in the European Union , and we do not want them to be cast out as pariahs .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have the impression that I heard a disturbance from the visitors ' gallery .
If that was the case , may I advise them that our Rules of Procedure strictly prohibit any demonstration in the visitors ' gallery .
So I ask them to maintain silence because otherwise I shall find myself obliged to ask Parliament 's ushers to clear the visitors ' gallery .
Having said that , ladies and gentlemen , I must inform you that , with Mr Macartney 's speech , we have used up all the speaking time allocated to these sixteen motions for resolutions on human rights .
I therefore invite Commissioner Marín to take the floor .
Mr President , I shall reply to the various resolutions on human rights in the order that Parliament has debated them .
First , the resolution on Honduras .
Naturally the Commission congratulates Parliament on this resolution which highlights the effort that is being made by the Honduran authorities to ensure that juvenile detainees are separated from adults in the country 's prisons . We think the incarceration of children along with adults constitutes a real problem for that country .
But the Honduran government is conscious of the problem and has asked the Commission for assistance in resolving the situation .
The expert mission that visited Honduras at the beginning of 1996 to study the aid options was able to assure itself of the Government 's determination to take appropriate measures to separate children from adults in the prisons and to provide specialized institutions so that these children will be safe from physical abuse .
Once these guarantees had been obtained , naturally , the Commission approved a project specific to this issue , with a global approach which involves strengthening the official bodies responsible for the problems of minors in Honduras as well as the NGOs which protect children .
The Commission is confident that President Reina 's government will continue to seek solutions to the situation and adopt the measures necessary to prevent any repetition of minors being locked up with adults .
In addition , the Commission will go on supporting those efforts and the legislation to achieve that aim .
At this point I would like to mention that the Honduran Government recently approved a children 's code and our project will also directly facilitate awareness and application of this code of child protection .
As regards Romania , the Commission is fully aware of the problems Romanian street children have recently been facing .
The situation is relatively new , dating from the last four or five years , but of course it is not exclusive to Romania as the last UNICEF report so clearly highlighted .
In response , the Commission has already included this problem of street children in the indicative multi-annual programme for Romania and , of course , a decision was taken to provide aid specifically for this purpose .
We will continue to provide support for the improvement and reform of the child protection system in Romania through counterpart funds , to which ECU 21 million has been assigned , arising from the sale of food aid between 1990 and 1996 .
Obviously the Commission has urged the Romanian authorities to continue committing counterpart funds to this purpose .
On Turkey , as Members are aware , the Commission 's report of 9 October , on the progress of relations with Turkey since the entry into force of the Customs Union , already highlighted the deterioration in the human rights situation in Turkey throughout 1996 .
The report ended with a clear call to the Turkish government to start taking positive measures again , with a view to improving the human rights situation and deepening the democratic process .
At his recent meeting with Mrs Çiller , Commissioner van den Broek again reiterated the need for Turkey to move forward in that direction .
Specifically on the adoption of a law on the press , it is important to point out that the Government is still discussing a bill , so it has not yet gone to the Turkish Parliament .
Apparently some of the provisions of this bill have been leaked , and they have aroused strong protest in Turkey , as has already been mentioned .
Another specific problem is the recent expulsion from Turkey of the Danish subject , Mr Søndergaard , a member of the Folketing .
In principle , the information the Commission has been able to glean indicates that the official reason for the expulsion - as put forward by the Turkish government - was that his papers were not in order : Mr Søndergaard 's passport had expired and he did not have a Turkish entry visa .
However , this formal position , which of course relies on the information supplied by the Turkish Government , should not cause us to overlook the reason we think led to Mr Søndergaard 's expulsion from Turkey .
We suspect the ban was due to the Danish MP 's idea of making contact with the leader of the PKK , Mr Ocanan .
Although the Commission has always condemned the PKK , in line with the policy of the European Union and several Member States which have also banned the activities of that organization on their territory , we nevertheless deplore the fact that Turkey opposes entry into its territory by Member States ' MPs on such grounds .
As regards the resolution on Croatia , I would like to reiterate what was said at the recent conference on promoting the peace process in former Yugoslavia through the communications media .
Radio 101 was represented at that conference , held in Brussels on 29 November , in fact it was represented by its director .
Over the last two years the Commission has contributed a total of ECU 9 million to various projects benefitting communications media .
In 1996 ECU 200 , 000 was allocated to Radio 101 to purchase new equipment .
This assistance to the independent communications media in former Yugoslavia will continue in 1997 with an allocation of ECU 10 million .
A legal framework was drafted in Croatia with the cooperation of the Council of Europe , but the changes that have occurred recently in relation to Radio 101 demonstrate that there is still much to be done .
We think Croatia must comply with the terms of its membership of the Council of Europe .
The establishment of future relations between Croatia and the Union will be linked , among other things , to respect for the freedom of communications media , and now that the European Union is working to establish relations with the countries of the south east of Europe in the context of the regional focus , the position of the communications media in those countries will need to be taken very much into account .
Freedom of communications media , freedom of expression , is one of the fundamental factors for developing these relations further .
And in this respect confirmation of this broadcaster 's temporary licence is awaited from the Croat government , and in our view that means the station should be granted a permanent licence .
I end with the resolution on Slovakia .
The Commission supports the European Parliament 's initiative to debate the current democratic deficiencies in the Slovak Republic , in particular condemning the expulsion of Mr Gaulieder from the Slovak Parliament and calling for his immediate reinstatement .
I want to inform the European Parliament that during the meeting of the European Union-Slovakia Association Committee , just yesterday , a statement was made on this case on behalf of the European Union .
The statement says that the European Union has noted the events of 4 December in the National Council of the Slovak Republic , culminating in the expulsion of a Member of the Council against his will .
This action appears to be contrary to the Slovak constitution and would be in contradiction with the parliaments of the associate members .
The association committee recalls , once again , the criteria of association established in the Copenhagen statement and in the European agreement between the Union and the Slovak Republic , and hopes that the National Council of the Slovak Republic will take note of the concern of the European Union .
The Commission has also been informed that the case has been referred to the Slovak Constitutional Court , which will have to rule on whether the decision of the Slovak Parliament was constitutional .
The Commission takes the view that - while awaiting the decision of the Constitutional Court , which will rule on the matter in a sovereign and independent manner - an immediate decision should be taken to reinstate Mr Gaulieder as an MP .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1375 / 96 by Mr Dary and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in Algeria ; -B4-1385 / 96 by Mrs André-Léonard and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Algeria ; -B4-1393 / 96 by Mr Colajanni and Mr Pons Grau , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Algeria ; -B4-1404 / 96 by Mrs Sierra González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Algeria ; -B4-1421 / 96 by Mr Cohn-Bendit , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the political situation in Algeria .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , I condemn in the strongest possible terms the form of terrorism being practised in and exported from Algeria , especially when it is exported to my own country , as we have once again had occasion to deplore in recent days .
Let us be quite clear about this : nothing , absolutely nothing , can justify or even explain this blind terror and the violence directed against human bodies and minds .
Having said that , I am not sure that it would be fair to dismiss , as our joint motion for a resolution does , both this barbarous terrorism and the Algerian government .
Certainly we deplore the democratic shortcomings , the restrictions on various freedoms and on the organization of an appropriate referendum , but I personally do not believe there can be any favourable outcome to this tragedy in the vicious circle of Algeria .
The humanitarian values on which our international law is founded are routinely violated in Algeria .
I should like to see Europeans , and all those interested in the future of Algeria , establishing a presence through the press , through the NGOs , or even , as far as the European Union is concerned , on the occasion of the negotiation of the agreement with Algeria , a physical presence in that country and intervening between terrorism and its inevitable repression .
Mr President , as we all know , the Algerian situation is giving serious cause for concern .
In the cities and in the countryside , violence is ever-present , with an endless sequence of acts of revenge and terrorism .
In recent months , atrocities have taken the lives of hundreds of civilians , including women , children and intellectuals .
The bombing of the RER in Paris was undoubtedly the work of the GIA and bears witness to an escalation of the most loathsome savagery , a savagery which is both inexcusable and despicable .
The incitement to intolerance practised by many fundamentalist leaders is responsible for the terrorism in Algeria .
The Algerian government must not confine itself to eliminating acts of violence by the security forces .
The result of the referendum is not going to solve the problem , even if the ' yes ' vote was as high as 85 % .
Because how was that result obtained ?
Nor will the banning of Islamic and regionalist parties , a total gag on Parliament and the laying down of conditions for winning over the nomenklatura offer any hope of improvement .
With a turn-out of less than 30 % - a long way short of 85 % - and a ' no ' vote registering 70 % the Kabylie is certainly the most flagrant example of an ethnic split , though not alas the only one .
The institutional dictatorship established by Amin Zéroual is most likely to bring about general disenchantment and despair , and so inevitably worsen the spiral of violence .
Mr President , I want to express the Socialist Group 's support for this joint resolution on the very complex issue of Algeria .
The Algerian question is causing us all anguish and concern , because radical fundamentalism is destroying the social fabric and co-existence in that country , with a degree of intolerance that is hurling it into a black abyss .
But at the same time we are concerned about the measures the authorities are adopting to eradicate this terrorism .
We know that the fight against this blind terrorism is tremendously complicated and difficult , but that does not mean we can forget that methods utterly and completely alien to respect for the most elementary human rights , not only do not eradicate terrorism , but give it wings to survive and grow .
We are also concerned about the terms in which the last referendum held in that country was approved .
There are aspects which have a decisive impact on democracy and human rights .
The imposition of Arabic as the only official language when there is a sizeable minority of Berbers , and the sweeping presidential powers , prompt fears of the establishment of a dictatorship by pseudo-democratic means .
We know that Algeria 's problems have to be solved by the Algerians themselves , but in maintaining relations between the European Union and Algeria and in the new framework for those relations , Europe must not forget that its own essence is based on democracy and respect for human rights , and it cannot turn a blind eye to a situation which flouts the most elementary standards of universal democracy .
Mr President , I have the impression that Parliament views the situation in Algeria rather differently from the European Commission .
One Dutch quality newspaper reports our Commissioner Marin , during a visit to Algeria , as not only pledging a lot of money to improve the country 's economic structures but also as saying that the referendum provided a moment of hope and that the people had given a clear answer .
I wonder , Commissioner , if you are aware that the turnout at the referendum was probably only 30 to 35 % , or so it is said by some Western European news agencies ?
I wonder if you are aware that not a single copy of the new constitution in Algeria on which the citizen was required to vote in this referendum was previously available to him ?
I wonder , Commissioner , if you are aware of the fact that opposition parties had no chance at all to put their case via the media in Algeria prior to this referendum ?
I think it is most important that we should not just condemn the terrorism of the FIS , which is of course totally unacceptable , but that we should also emphasize that this referendum merely places Zéroual more firmly in the saddle and brings democracy no closer .
I think that Europe and the European Commission must make sure in its Euro-Mediterranean association agreement that the human rights clause is enforced and does not remain a dead letter .
Because we know that dialogue in Algeria is sorely needed , and I think we must give a lot of effort to it , but you have to expect when that dialogue comes about and when fundamentalists are part of the government that the first thing to be sacrificed will be women 's rights .
I think that we as the Union must make sure that this does not happen .
Almost five years ago in January 1992 the first democratic parliamentary elections in Algeria were overturned in the name of democracy by a military coup d 'état .
Since then the country has been trapped in a spiral of reciprocal terror .
The outlawing of religiously motivated parties and the terror waged against the Berber peoples will not improve things , I think , quite the contrary .
And I fear that the approval of a woolly resolution in the European Parliament will do nothing to resolve the problems in Algeria .
And I would just like , without the slightest illusion , to take this opportunity of making two observations .
After colonial rule ended the socialist FLN dictatorship in Algeria was flooded with French and European aid .
Notwithstanding that aid Algeria has changed over a 30-year period from a relatively wealthy and prosperous country to an almost backward developing country .
And European feelings of guilt after the end of colonial rule have done great damage in other places as well as Algeria .
Zaire and Rwanda bear witness to the responsibility of my own country in this respect .
Secondly , those who gave the Europeans a choice in the early 60s between la valise ou le cercueil , pack your bags or go home in a coffin , are the very people who are now seeking asylum in Europe on a massive scale and the reality now is that the Algerian war is being imported into mainland Europe .
But the bombs in France remain small beer compared with the enormous demographic , cultural and political time bomb which the millions of nonEuropean aliens on our continent represent .
The European Parliament cannot stop the war in Algeria with a resolution .
But we ought perhaps to do our best to help defuse the time bomb of immigration in Europe whilst we still can .
Mr President , naturally the Commission , like the European Parliament , is following the development of the political situation in Algeria with close attention .
Since the presidential elections in November 1995 , the European Union has been urging the Algerian Government to bring politics back to normal , through dialogue between all the parties opposed to violence .
That aim of peaceful dialogue continues to be our main priority .
The five resolutions Parliament has tabled demonstrate the importance you attach to respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in Algeria .
We share your concern , in terms of both the general framework of the new Mediterranean policy and the association agreement we are negotiating with Algeria .
Let me make three comments in this regard .
At the multilateral level , the political commitments made at the Barcelona Conference include , in particular , the willingness to develop a state of law and democracy , and to respect human rights and fundamental freedoms .
At the bilateral level , when we begin the coming negotiations with the Algerian government with a view to signing a new association agreement on the basis of the mandate from the Council of Ministers , the Commission will also have to speak of respect for democratic principles and human rights , because that is central to the new EuroMediterranean policy .
I want you to know that we shall be facing a very difficult task because , as the majority of Members of Parliament have pointed out , the situation in Algeria is complicated and difficult , and our position - I am confirming what some Members who spoke earlier have said - after the referendum and regardless of any judgement that may be expressed on its value , after the presidential elections and before the general elections to the national parliament in the first half of the year and the local elections in the second half , is that national dialogue can actually make the coming year a time of hope for a normal situation to be at last restored in Algeria .
I understand from the remarks you have made that in the view of the European Parliament voting should be perfect , open , participatory , clear and transparent in each and every corner of the planet .
But as I have said , the situation in Algeria is highly complex and difficult .
At this moment democratic rights are subject to permanent threat from terrorism , so I think we must retain a certain degree of understanding and allow national dialogue to become possible and to develop , leading to a situation next year in which the general elections can be held and can offer hope to Algeria .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1346 / 96 by Mrs André-Léonard and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the crisis in eastern Zaïre ; -B4-1367 / 96 by Mrs Baldi and others , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the situation in Zaïre ; -B4-1392 / 96 by Mrs Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Mr Pons Grau , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the peace process between Rwanda and Zaïre ; -B4-1405 / 96 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left on the situation in eastern Zaïre ; -B4-1417 / 96 by Mrs Gunther and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in eastern Zaïre ; -B4-1428 / 96 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in eastern Zaïre .
Mr President , the crisis in eastern Zaire is far from over .
The entire world is trying to convince itself that the return of some five hundred thousand Rwandan refugees to their native country will put an end to the conflict , but that is just not so .
The fighting taking place in and around the Kivu is such a source of anarchy that it could have repercussions throughout the Great Lakes region .
Just one month ago , in this very House , we were stressing the inability of the international community to prevent the terrible tragedy of the refugees and displaced persons .
That inability to act demonstrates the deep-seated crisis affecting the United Nations .
Since only the Security Council can decide to send a peace-keeping force , the European Council must continue to use its influence to ensure that that is done without delay , because any delay is likely to aggravate what is already an explosive situation .
In that powder keg of a region , there is still hope : efforts must continue to reintegrate the refugees , to reestablish and rehabilitate the legal systems , making them independent and just , and , finally , to intensify the efforts to achieve a dialogue which will give the peace process chances of success .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the tragic events and intensified fighting in eastern Zaire , the stage of continuing , violent encounters between rebels and soldiers , show no sign of easing .
The whole international community must take coordinated , coherent action , involving everyone who has a particular interest in the Great Lakes region and wishes to set a peace process in motion .
The multinational force requested by the Organization of African Unity must find in the European Union an active partner enabling this terrible crisis to be resolved using appropriate means and actions .
Only coordinated action by the EU , the UN and the OAU will lead to a solution .
Humanitarian aid must reach those who need it , in every part of the region , without discrimination and without interruption ; immediate action is needed , especially to repatriate Rwandan refugees , whose number will soon be around one million .
It is a huge problem : we also have to bear in mind that the process of reconciliation in Rwanda is very difficult , because of the obvious implications of Hutu and Tutsi living together ; both have been traumatized by the tragedy they have lived through over the past few years , and both are living in a very tense climate .
It is vital that those responsible both for the genocide of 1994 and for the current massacres are found and tried as soon as possible .
The Union must step up its financial and technical efforts , particularly by sending out European observers , to promote the restoration and reform of the Rwandan legal system .
The trials are likely to start soon , and yet there is a shortage both of judges and of legally trained staff who are able to work with and apply the new penal law that was passed on 30 August 1996 by the transitional National Assembly , which introduces various principles that should , we hope , guarantee first of all respect of human rights and justice .
It is important that the 83 000 detainees currently being held in Rwanda 's overcrowded jails have a fair trial .
If they do not , there is a risk that a climate of hatred and revenge will be established , which could make this conflict neverending .
The International Tribunal in Arusha must also be able to perform its functions so that the authors of crimes against humanity can be brought to justice .
If there is to be stability in the country , the homes destroyed during the war must be rebuilt as soon as possible ; the health system must be made efficient and functional , since there is a shortage of medical staff and paramedics , and hospitals need immediate repair work , with logistical support .
Epidemics and AIDS are on the increase in this part of the world .
Even basic infrastructures require immediate action .
This situation , that I saw with my own eyes just last week , calls for immediate targeted and coordinated action to restore peace and stability in the country .
I call on my fellow Members to make a serious commitment to solving this crisis , including by promoting an international conference in the Great Lakes region - a conference involving all the countries concerned .
We must commit ourselves resolutely and deeply to finding a real solution to this problem .
Mr President , in the story of the mountain giving birth , between deathrattles and earthquakes it brings forth a mouse .
Something like this has happened to the international community in the Great Lakes conflict .
We find ourselves with a mouse of 300 soldiers , useless to the refugees , after obtaining authorization from the Security Council to launch a humanitarian intervention , after obtaining a common position from the Council of Ministers supporting that intervention , and after achieving , for the first time in history , coordination between ECHO and the CFSP to bring in the necessary resources - specifically the release of ECU 10 million on the same day as the common position was adopted .
I congratulate Commissioner Bonino on that .
But I also want to inform her of my concern , because the decision to contribute ECU 2.5 million to the special United Nations fund to finance the participation of African states in the multinational force has not been implemented .
The situation continues to deteriorate with the spread of the war inside Zaïre , the expulsion of refugees from Tanzania and Uganda , the slaughter of refugees lost on the battlefields and the waves of displaced Zaïrians fleeing from the war .
Against of this backdrop Mr Spring , the Council 's representative , seemed like Alice in Wonderland yesterday , talking about the voluntary return of the refugees , their peaceful resettlement , and the democratization of Zaïre , when it seems that none of the states have any intention of dealing with this issue at the Dublin Summit .
Reality is different .
Reality calls for two types of measures to be implemented .
First , humanitarian measures to put an end to the human crisis - we have the necessary resources for that - involving getting the aid to the civilian population and drawing up reconstruction and rehabilitation plans for those returning to their homes .
Later , development projects should be set up .
The NGOs are willing to do all that ; the role of the Council and the Commission is to facilitate their task .
Secondly , the Council of Ministers needs to take political measures : promoting a regional peace conference , supporting democratic processes in those states which still have an anti-democratic regime ...
( The President interrupted the speaker )
Mrs Sauquillo , I am not going to stop you speaking , but I do ask you not to rush .
You have used up your time , but if you rush you threaten the health of the interpreters who could die of breathlessness .
Finish , Mrs Sauquillo , but finish calmly .
Mr President , I hope you will give me the time you just used up so that I can continue .
I repeat , political measures by the Council of Ministers should include promoting a regional peace conference , supporting democratic processes in all the countries in the area - and that means withdrawing support from the anti-democratic regimes which have been propped up for years by our own countries .
It is also necessary to lay the foundations for a balanced distribution of power between the various ethnic groups , with a system to protect minorities , and control of arms sales in the region , with European Union cooperation to make the controls effective .
And , finally , I want to ask the President of the Commission and the President of Parliament to raise this matter in their speeches at the Dublin European Council at the end of this week .
Thank you , but let me give you one more piece of advice : after asking for so much , ask your group to give you more time as well .
Mr President , unlike previous speakers I am going to resist the temptation to go through the whole catalogue of demands .
Apart from anything else , it 's often rather unsatisfactory to do so in the subjunctive .
We are , let 's face it , confronting a somewhat unusual situation in Zaire where the ultimate effect of humanitarian aid has been to produce a humanitarian disaster .
We have allowed vast numbers of people to congregate , donated as much as a million dollars a day for food , but the end result was not what we were calling for - rapid progress with disarming the militias and troops in those areas .
We pointed out as far back as a year ago that the government in Zaire seemed unwilling to proceed with demilitarization , and that then led to this catastrophe , the more so since the military leaders have not even concealed their intention of regaining power by force in Rwanda and Burundi .
On the other hand - and this , too , was heard in this House - we may not have given sufficiently thorough consideration , Commissioner , to the fact that there may be other alternatives somewhere between absolutely voluntary repatriation and the view you accused me of holding last month when you asked me if I was in favour of starving out the camps - some way of increasing pressure to decentralize these mass gatherings of refugees .
That might perhaps be an indicator for the future .
Now , once again , the danger exists that all we do is supply these enormous numbers of people with the absolute essentials .
But the critical question is this : how are we going to induce Hutus and Tutsis to live together in peace ?
We must find an answer to this , now , if we are to solve the problem for the future rather than just postponing it .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today 's resolution is a rehash and rather than speaking for one minute I am requesting one minute 's silence in memory of the thousands who have perished in Kivu as a result of criminal negligence , in the first place by the United States and in the second place by the Union .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
Mr President , I think we have several pieces of evidence before us .
The first is the weakness of the European Union 's preventive policy .
If I am not mistaken , we have adopted 23 urgent resolutions in the course of this year , predicting and condemning what was going to happen in Rwanda and the Great Lakes area .
All of it could be foreseen .
Anyone supposed to know anything about the situation should have known that .
The fact is the measures that have been taken have had no effect .
But the strangest thing is that we are also seeing weakness in something we have always been quite good at : implementation .
We have the material resources , we have the institutions , but we are incapable of solving the problem .
So reform of the institutions is clearly necessary .
Nothing is more costly than lack of policy .
And something has to make up for lack of policy .
Another thing that needs resolving , and other speakers have already referred to it , is the sense of impunity .
If we do not get rid of this sense of impunity , the same problem will continue to crop up year after year .
There is the International Court of Arusha .
That court should be given the resources it needs to be able to act .
We have a United Nations resolution but we are incapable of deploying the 10 , 000 soldiers that resolution authorized .
Instead we dump responsibility for fulfilling the humanitarian and military role on the voluntary agencies .
I do not think they can be expected to do more for the same money .
So a plan for the area is needed .
We must recognize that the majority of the refugees are now in Rwanda . Rwanda has a government , and we have to talk to that government and work in coordination with it .
Finally , Mr President , we are now right in the middle of another problem , the civil war in Zaïre .
I am very much afraid someone may be tempted to reintroduce neo-colonial policies .
The strict vigilance of this Parliament must prevent that happening .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true and it has been said that we have been warning of this for months and have been speaking out so that Commission and Council would hear us .
We have said that following the genocide in Rwanda new and very serious armed conflicts were brewing in Central Africa .
Unfortunately , so far our pow-wows here , our interventions , have produced little by way of results .
But last month we approved an excellent text .
A month ago , and in diplomatic circles it was regarded as the best thing published so far .
But today we feel ourselves obliged to intervene once again , because what is going on now , the war , the persecution of refugees in Eastern Kivu which is now moving into the interior of Zaire forces us to speak out again .
This war is taking on the aspect of an imperialist venture and figures from the Cold War era are emerging .
We thought such figures had passed into history .
I think that we in Europe accepted an excellent principle when we approved the Helsinki Final Act in 1975 : no altering of borders by force of arms ; no acceptance of armed force as a means of altering or violating borders or invading other territories .
This is a sacrosanct principle which we as the European Union should uphold worldwide .
But we are seeing invasions and alterations of borders .
I thus call on all those who still retain some belief in preventive diplomacy at this time to work to secure an all-in programme ; there must be no extension of the conflict in Kivu in Zaire ; a cease-fire must be declared ; the occupied areas should be evacuated ; an international multinational force should be assembled and moved to the area ; we should do everything possible to get the countries in the Great Lakes region to accept the peacekeepers and call a conference of the Great Lakes countries , to establish the responsibility of all the parties , including the Arusha court , and to ensure that the United States and Europe - and I am calling on the Member States of the Union - do everything possible to secure peace , tolerance and perhaps a little more prosperity for the dark continent of Africa .
It is not primarily you I am addressing , Commissioner , but rather the Council and Member States , because it is they who must take the decisions .
I am glad to see you here , Commissioner .
We have no complaints about you , quite the opposite , you have shown courage and insight in recent months .
You and the European Parliament were of one mind .
It was not just dangerous , but laughable too to think that things would come right of their own accord in Rwanda , and in Burundi and Eastern Zaire too .
Of course international intervention was an absolute must , an obligation , and we did not do what was necessary .
So I am glad to see the European Parliament once again calling for some form of international troops to be sent .
We really must try to do something to resolve the humanitarian problems in Eastern Zaire and to smooth the way for the refugees to return .
The international court in Arusha must also be strengthened , as Mr Pons Grau has already said , to ensure that justice prevails in the Great Lakes region on a lasting basis .
For more than two years this House has been calling for preventive diplomacy .
This has become such a strange term that we need to check the dictionary to be sure of what we mean by it .
Preventive diplomacy and humanitarian intervention in the Great Lakes region .
At the moment we purport to be good organizers on paper but in reality this Parliament , still thwarted at every turn by the Council , is still struggling .
I hope to goodness and I pray that around Christmas time we may again get a true saviour in the form of an international intervention force to prevent further trouble in the Great Lakes region .
Mr President , first of all , I should like to welcome the patience that has been shown to speakers - a patience I hope will inform the second half of this session .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to share in expressing this Parliament 's delight at the presence in the House of Commissioner Bonino , whose courage , perseverance and determination have endowed the European Union with a position and presence that other institutions have been sadly lacking in this crisis .
So , I am very happy that it is you , Madam Commissioner , who is here today to discuss such a distressing and politically delicate issue .
It is a month since a policy decision was finally taken by Parliament , with great difficulty and thanks to the efforts of the Commission and its representative , Mrs Bonino . That decision has not been acted upon .
Which is why our Group has tabled an amendment that I ask Members to examine and , if possible , vote on as a matter of urgency . Our amendment simply asks that , tomorrow , at the European Council in Dublin , Heads of State and Government take the time to discuss the situation in Zaire at the highest level , including the political aspects .
I truly hope our amendment complements and completes this excellent resolution , for which I shall certainly vote later .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a debate like today 's it is very difficult to find something to say , because , basically , the arguments on both sides have already been put forward .
I hope you will understand , therefore , if I add two points which are not directly connected with the motion for a resolution .
First , several speakers have expressed their thanks to Mrs Bonino .
I shall add my own thanks , and even go a little further .
I believe , Mrs Bonino , that the way in which you have handled this business provides great encouragement , to think that there are still people in this world who do not capitulate when confronted with hopeless political situations , and who do not capitulate in the face of the kind of diplomatic tactics that prevail in the world 's capitals and sometimes in international organizations , too .
The staleness of the debate is , indeed , apparent from the fact that tactical elements alone now dictate events even in supranational institutions such as the United Nations Security Council - basic political considerations are a thing of the past .
But anyone who , instead of pursuing preventive diplomacy , resorts to delaying tactics is sinking into the swamps of routine politics , and really lacks the visionary power one needs in order to supply solutions to the problems of an increasingly complex world .
That , I believe , is one of the great problems that regrettably affect both the United Nations Security Council and the Council of the European Union .
There is a second point I should like to make .
We can debate at great length in this House , but we Europeans , and many of the Member States of the European Union , must bear in mind that the causes of the situation we are deploring here today can be found close to home .
The African tragedy , not just that of the Great Lakes but the tragedy of many other parts of Africa , has its origin in the policy pursued by some Member States of the European Union .
So we bear a special responsibility , and this Parliament has expressed that responsibility more than once in the past and has called more than once for that responsibility to be accepted .
The Commission , represented by Commissioner Bonino , is accepting its responsibility .
The fact that the Council of Ministers is not doing so really does show how lamentable the attitude of the European Union governments has now become .
I believe therefore that this Parliament must never weary of pointing the finger , as we are doing in this motion for a resolution , and saying that the governments of our Member States bear some of the guilt for what is happening in Africa .
Ladies and gentlemen , that speech from Mr Schulz brings speaking time to an end and I am going to invite Mrs Bonino to take the floor , but first I want to thank her for the effort I know she has made to be here with us today .
Mr President , honourable Members , first of all , without in any way wanting to cast doubt on the value of this debate , I should point out that it is a repeat of the debates we held a few weeks ago .
I don 't recall whether it was on the 8th or the 10th or the 12th of November , but I admit that nothing has happened since .
By which I mean that nothing has happened here .
I am sorry to say , however , that a great deal has happened out there .
Although it is true that hundreds of thousands of refugees have been able to return to Rwanda - and it goes without saying that we are going to help them , that we are going to be there and indeed have been there for two years - I must point out to you that there are also , lost in the Kivu , several hundred thousand more refugees whom we cannot help .
I get the impression that the press , and even the speeches made here , make us forget certain things .
I should like to see articles on the difficulties of this repatriation , which is hardly surprising when you think that , in the space of 24 hours , 400 , 000 or 500 , 000 people went back - not that anyone counted them - and that a decision has just been taken to bring back another 500 , 000 who were in Tanzania .
In this connection , I have just been informed that several thousands of these refugees who were regarded as having returned to Rwanda are in fact fleeing into the interior of Tanzania .
I should also like to recognize that the fact that no one is permitted to return to the Kivu - not the aid workers , not the journalists - raises a problem because , as is common knowledge , no pictures means no news and no news means no headlines , which is how public opinion gradually slides into indifference .
So the spotlights are trained on Rwanda .
And that is as it should be .
The point at which I cease to agree is the point at which we , the aid workers , are accused of inflating the figures .
In this connection , I should point out that there is in fact a reverse trend , a trend towards minimizing the figures for the sake of a clear conscience when the numbers add up .
But who is it that minimizes them ?
People who know what they 're talking about .
Because it is understood that we don 't know what we 're talking about - we 've only been out there for two years .
No , those who put forward these views were not out there to verify them .
And suddenly they say to us , ' After all , you know , there are barely 200 , 000 people lost in the Kivu . '
So is there some new rule , some new criterion for humanitarian conventions which lays down that the tolerance threshold is now set at 200 , 000 or 300 , 000 or 400 , 000 ?
This is a situation that worries me .
I worry about the fact that no one is really talking seriously but , as I have just learned , there is to be another meeting , tomorrow , Friday , of 14 countries which are supposed to be participating in a multinational force , 14 countries which are spending their time wondering about exactly how they should participate and have still made no move .
After so much careful thought , they are eventually going to be in a position to mount an expedition which is perfect in every respect , theoretical and practical .
I just have this feeling , personally , that they may be a little late .
Secondly , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has no doubt about the need for a multinational force , without which no aid can be provided .
I am also glad to hear a debate on the humanitarian aspect , which is very valuable in itself , because it may help to improve our actions and our effectiveness .
For two years we have constantly been emphasizing how complex this crisis is .
Well , a complex crisis calls for a complex response in terms of protagonists and political will .
Nevertheless , there is no escaping the fact that the only protagonists out there were , in fact , the aid workers .
Honourable Members can rest assured : it wasn 't us that created the crisis because the crisis was already there .
Admittedly , aid workers cannot solve crises of political origin .
But , Mrs Günther , saving lives is never a waste of time .
Another factor that should be borne in mind is that efforts were made to save lives in order to enable others to find political solutions .
Well , what has happened ?
Lives have indeed been saved , but no one has had the courage to look for political solutions .
Bearing in mind everything I have said , I am frankly amazed that the Community should be accused a ) of having stayed where it was and b ) of having saved people and created the crisis .
For that is an argument about values and not about political realities .
What ingratitude to the NGOs which , for all their faults , have at least been sincere enough to be there whereas others - who would no doubt have done better - unfortunately were not there , and as I understand it still aren 't .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino , and I think you know that when I say that it is not just a formality .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe there has been a misunderstanding here .
I did not reproach you for staying out there to help with the humanitarian activities , but - and you will find the same thing in an OXFAM briefing - I asked you whether , for example , the UN and others who should have taken action here neglected to encourage disarmament .
That has nothing to do with what you have been doing , but the reason we have slid into this disaster is partly because those stocks of weapons existed in the camps .
Mr President , there may be a different problem here , but obviously we share the same view .
In any case , I believe it is true to say that we have been denouncing this state of affairs for two years and have indeed stressed the need for disarmament , separation , etc .
But it is no part of the aid workers ' function to separate or arrest people .
Regarding what has been said about the absence of punishment , you must realize that the real problem of the ad hoc court - whose mandate is in any case valid only for 1994 and therefore does not cover the latest massacres - is not lack of resources or funds .
Its real problem is that 21 arrest warrants have been issued and that no one can be found to arrest the alleged criminals or to extradite them .
And you must agree , surely , that it is very difficult for a court to function in the absence of any defendants .
Thank you , Madam Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 5.30 p.m.
As there are six minutes left before 5.30 p.m. and we have concluded our debates , I propose that we suspend the sitting for six minutes .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.24 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would remind the House that the time for resolutions on matters which are topical , urgent and especially important must be used for questions which are truly urgent and we have many of them .
Today 's debate has shown , predictably , that the urgent resolution on Sunday as a day of rest hardly qualifies and our Group will not be voting for this resolution .
Votes
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that we in this House spend more time on voting than we do on debating is sufficiently well known , but what has happened here in the last fifteen minutes is , in my view , incompatible with the efficiency of Parliament .
So I should like to make a proposal which we might perhaps take to heart in the second half of our electoral period .
If we state in Thursday 's agenda that the votes we have been unable to complete at midday will be taken immediately following the votes on the topical and urgent debate , then every Member will know that voting will take place immediately afterwards .
Then we should not waste as much time as we are at present .
Mr Schulz , I think that is a really excellent suggestion .
My embarrassment really arose from the fact that today 's agenda quite clearly says ' votes ' at 6.00 p.m.
In the circumstances , clearly , a Member would have been entitled to complain if the votes had resumed earlier .
I think you are absolutely right , Mr Schulz , and we shall adopt your suggestion .
Next time the agenda will say ' continuation of morning votes after the votes on the topical and urgent debate ' .
That will ensure that we do not waste time .
Thank you for your constructive suggestion .
Ladies and gentlemen , I was going to say , to ensure that everything is completely clear , that as soon as we have finished voting we shall move straight on to the debates on Mr Megahy 's and Mrs Banotti 's reports , without any need to suspend the sitting .
Madam President , I would like to refer to this morning 's sitting , and I do not really want to describe it as chaotic , but it did seem pretty chaotic to us , mainly because of the translations .
The President 's papers were in German .
It is incredible that the President should be forced to use a language she is not fluent in .
This must not happen again .
And there must be no repetition of the failure to distribute all the translations of all the reports in all the official languages of this House , because of lack of translators or lack of time .
Having said that , and given that the vote on this report was postponed because the translation was not available in Finnish and Swedish , I want to ask the President if the vote on this report this morning is valid .
And if it is not valid , what rule is that based on ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I am bound to concede that today has been rather disorganized .
That being so , I see no point in making matters worse , and I feel we should move on very quickly to continue this morning 's votes .
As far as I am concerned I admit that the situation was unexpected , but I was very glad to have the opportunity to familiarize myself with the German language thanks to the vote on this report .
Please accept my assurances that I fully understood what I was doing .
Madam President , in accordance with the initiative taken on the first day of this sitting of the European Parliament , when we asked for this report to be removed from the agenda , we now ask that it be referred back to committee for the same reasons - reasons that have been strengthened by the tone of the debate that has taken place .
We said that , because of an excess of zeal on the part of the rapporteur , and certainly not because of any lack of goodwill , the report has created such confusion that it fails to indicate the appropriate way of integrating the CCEES into the European Union .
This means there are dangers concerning protection of the Community preference , correct application of the principle of subsidiarity and even the criteria , which the report anticipates , governing an overall reform of the CAP , which we cannot consider here .
In accordance with that proposal , therefore , we request that the report be referred back to the Committee on Agriculture for further research .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I suppose the confusion of recent months may explain why Mr Santini was unable to find his way to the committee , where we could have talked this over .
We have spent nearly a year discussing it , very openly and cooperatively and in a spirit of compromise .
I can see no possible reason why we should not form an opinion on it now , and I therefore propose that we should continue with our work and be creative .

Madam President , with all due respect to Mr Santini , I take a completely different view in this case .
We have discussed this sufficiently , we have had a thorough debate in the House , and now we have to take a decision so that we can exert an influence on the Commission .
The plans for the accession of the central and eastern European states must be worked out well in advance .
They must be worked out now !
I assume Mr Santini fears that what was rejected in the voting in committee will now be restored , but as I see it that is actually a reason to take the vote now , because those articles that were dropped at the committee stage are very important to me .
I hope that we may now be able to succeed in the House where we failed in committee .
( Parliament rejected the request for referral back to committee )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to express my sincere thanks - starting with you , Madam President , who seem to have a much clearer view of things than I could possibly have imagined .
That was a compliment , don 't read anything else into it .
Anyway , I should like to thank honourable Members as well : we have launched something substantial here .
For a start , we have demonstrated that we don 't want a zero rate of progress with the continuation of the structural policy in rural areas .
It does us all credit , even though some of us may detect a hint of wormwood in the cup .
At the same time -and this I see as particularly important - we have given our new partners in central and eastern Europe a signal , through this resolution , as to what they can do jointly with us .
I believe this is a splendid Christmas present for us all , and I thank you once again .
Madam President , a point of order .
No 425 which is empty has just voted in that vote .
The vote is closed ...
But , Madam President , I insist , No 425 has just voted .
The light went on .
There is something wrong with our electronic voting system .
We shall have it checked .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , you very kindly said that you would check the allegation of the abuse of the principle of one person one vote .
I assume that you have had time to check this .
Can you report now ?
If not , could you let us know how quickly you are going to report because the card that was in the voting machine whose number was mentioned was actually removed by Mr Pasty about two minutes ago .
I would like you to know exactly when you are going to report to the House on this because it is a very serious abuse of the Rules of Procedure and can lead to the expulsion of Members for a number of days .
I am sure you would want to report as a matter of some urgency .
Mr McGowan , I can tell you that all presidencies of the European Parliament have banned this practice .
I want to make myself completely clear !
We are currently carrying out the necessary checks with the technicians and you will be informed of the outcome before the end of the votes .
Madam President , one of the successes of the Hänsch presidency has been the elimination of this abuse of certain Members voting more than once in a procedure that has been described to me as ' playing the piano ' .
You have agreed that there will be an investigation .
It is no good having this investigation and then reporting back in January or February of next year .
The culprit is sitting in his seat now and I should like to know what you are going to do about it .
The check must be carried out by the technical services .
Furthermore , I say again to Mr McGowan that the results of the check that is now being carried out will be known before this evening .
Madam President , I am really sorry but there is an abuse going on .
I personally watched Mr Pasty put a card in seat 493 behind him one minute ago .
I witnessed that and I put it on the record now .
Madam President , I am very sorry but there is no card there .
It seems that Mr Pasty has taken up conjuring !
I can assure you that we are checking this .
Madam President , it might help the dignity of the House if the Member nearby could explain what happened .
We are entitled to more than an attempt at a three-card trick .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are able to carry out a technical check to see whether there is a card that managed to vote all on its own , because that seems to be what happened .
I promise you that you will have the results of this technical check before the end of this evening , and I would ask you please to continue with the voting , because we have not yet finished .
Madam President , we saw an example of a mysteriously jumping card which has now jumped again into the hand of our colleague , Mr Andrews .
I am not quite sure where it has gone from there , but it would be interesting to know .
I shall soon be able to give you the results of the technical check .
Madam President , I should like a check to be carried out .
There is nobody sitting to the right of Mrs Hardstaff , but the machine voted .
But she is present , there she is .
Madam President , we are all getting tired of this , but can you just instruct the services to actually identify the card which is lying on top of the voting machine on seat 555 , which is now in the left hand of Mr Andrews ?
We have seen that handed from Mr Pasty to Mr Andrews .

Can we just check the identity of that card right now and then your investigations can be completed ?
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , before we begin voting I should like to say what I think about all the amendments proposed by Mr Caccavale on behalf of the UPE Group .
If these amendments had been proposed prior to the vote in committee , I could have incorporated a number of them , in fact all those which do nothing to change the ideas behind the text , and I could have integrated them into the compromise amendments which I proposed in committee .
Today , however , it is extremely difficult for me to do the same , which is why I shall propose that all Mr Caccavale 's amendments be rejected , so as not to disrupt the balance established in committee with the other groups .
Madam President , I am looking forward to your report because the occupant of 424 is involved in the implications of your report .
Could you request that he does not leave the Chamber before we have this report ?
I think I have just seen him make a dash for the door .
Madam President , I would be very obliged if you would read the name of the card I was accused of voting for twice and have the services check if votes were cast on that card .
If you read the name to the House , then I trust and hope that the people who are accusing me of voting twice will apologize and withdraw .
The card that has been handed to me bears the name of Mr Hyland .
That may not be the right pronunciation .
Be that as it may , there really was a problem .
After this vote I shall give the results of the technical check .
There really was a problem , but I am going to keep you in suspense for a little longer .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
We will vote for this report if Mr Rehder 's amendment goes through .
In truth , we think that the CAP , the Common Agricultural Policy ought to be reformed more rapidly than the proposed text states .
But Mr Rehder is absolutely right in his amendment when he says that it is no longer acceptable that 80 percent of the funds from the EADF ( the European Agricultural Development Fund ) is directed towards 20 percent of the Union 's producers .
Mr Rehder 's report is at least a small step in the right direction when it comes to reforming the CAP .
The reform which was carried out in 1992 must be continued and built upon as soon as possible .
Radical reform of the CAP must take place now that the European Union is to be enlarged .
My main proposal is that agricultural policy ( and regional policy ) should be reintroduced at national level .
The Common Agricultural policy is much too wasteful and bureaucratic .
I will vote for Mr Rehder 's report as it details , analytically , the problems associated with enlargement of the EU to the East , especially those to do with agriculture and the Structural Funds .
It is important that these aspects are included in the discussions on enlargement to the East , as long as the discussion is managed seriously without any propaganda .
The report underlines the fact that current agricultural and structural fund policies must be altered if the countries of Eastern and Central Europe join the EU and I agree with this view .
The report also emphasises important environmental and employment aspects , to which I attach great value .
But I would like to underline my own attitude , which is that each nation in Central and Eastern Europe must decide for themselves whether their own country will join the EU .
Referenda can play an important role in this respect .
Mr Rehder 's report makes a number of general proposals for reforming the CAP , leaving to one side the establishment of a proper strategy and policy on pre-accession and future membership for the CCEES .
No account is taken of the agricultural , economic and social differences that exist between the various CCEES , nor between them and the EU Member States , yet these differences need to be assessed in reforming the CAP .
The report does not deal with the economic and social impact , either at the regional or the global level , which will result from the integration of the CCEES and the reform of the CAP , together with the additional effects of the free trade area with the Maghreb and Mercosur .
It is not enough to grant aid to the CCEES for the restructuring , modernization and diversification of their agricultural production ; the incidence on the European Union 's internal agriculture must also be considered because the integration of those countries will mean relative impoverishment for the EU , thus affecting current access to Community development funds .
Recognizing the work done by Mr Rehder , and in view of the amendments approved , we support the content of the report .
My colleagues and I agree with Mr Rehder 's detailed report with the following reservations :
the renationalization of the CAP intervention and support mechanisms-and the renationalization of the prices and incomes policycan in my view not be comprehensively and categorically rejected .
I plead in favour of renationalization subject to the condition that , at the same time , the national membership contributions should be reduced in order to bring about the possibility of operating a prices and incomes policy and modifying or extending support and intervention mechanisms locally and in the appropriate regions , having due regard to all underlying natural circumstances and the aspects of sustainability and efficiency .
I should also like it to be added that this approach would make it possible to provide better supervision , and hence also better prevention , of many incidents of fraud and other unsatisfactory aspects .
Berès report ( A4-0389 / 96 )
I shall be very brief .
I had requested an explanation of vote for the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party on two reports .
On Mrs Beres ' report on universal service for telecommunications : the Liberal Group abstained on this because the definition of universal service was too loose and too broad and references to uncosted funding requirements for such services were too vague .
On the de Brémond d 'Ars report , we voted against that report because it is , in effect , going to hinder completely the possibility of liberalizing the postal service , which is not in the interests of the consumer and not in the interests of the internal market .
In the interests of saving time I will not insist on giving any fuller explanation .
In its vote on the excellent report by my colleague Pervenche Berès , Parliament has sent a clear signal to the European Commission on the definition of universal service , more especially in the telecommunications sector .
I shall not dwell on the technical points which were so well brought out by my colleague .
Sharing her own concern for fair and equitable delimitation of the content of the universal service , I condemn the Commission 's inactivity .
We need the broadest definition possible that can validly reflect a model of society for every European citizen ; that is becoming more than a necessity at a time when the Commission is presenting its communication on general interest services , the starting point for thoughts about the future of public services .
Through a strong concept of universal service we shall succeed in maintaining certain principles that are dear to us , such as tariff equalization and universal access to the service .
In conclusion , I strongly support the rapporteur 's proposal for the establishment of a universal service fund , which is the fairest way of financing the activities of the universal service .
The planned liberalization of telecommunications on 1 January 1998 will , like all such liberalizations , give rise to fears regarding universal access to the networks and a demand for guaranteed justice in the use of the service , the universal service .
Mrs Berès , to whom I must pay tribute , makes one essential recommendation here : if there must be liberalization , then let there at the same time be an improvement to the universal service and a guarantee that it will be financed .
After all , the Union must do everything possible to ensure , in the telecommunications sector as in all others , that in tomorrow 's liberalized market every individual , wherever he may be and whatever his standard of equipment may be , will be able to benefit from access to the telecommunications service on fair terms and at a reasonable purchase price even if this means it has to be regulated .
That is the price of progress .
We cannot , at the dawn of the information society , sacrifice equal treatment with regard to telecommunications .
There is a real risk - everyone knows that .
It is essential that Parliament should clearly express its commitment to political regulation of the forces of the competitive , liberalized market .
It is essential that the Commission should take due account of these comments and , in the future , draft proposals for directives whose primary interest will be not the industrialists or promoters but the consumers .
This applies to the telecommunications sector , and to many other sectors too .
This report on telecommunications forcefully reasserts the need to improve the European public service at the same time as telecommunications are liberalized in our information society .
I may add that this measure will give rise to the most argument about the financing of the universal service !
We call for the setting-up of a fund to be contributed to by all suppliers of mobile , voice and interconnected telephony services .
This should cause a stir in plenty of European capitals and bring another trial of strength with the Commission and the Council !
' There 's more to telecommunications than the telephone . '
When he 's right , he is right ... but my old friend Mr Bangemann is overlooking something critical : telecommunications is not just an economic factor but also a cultural and democratic factor of prime importance - in other words , it is always concerned as well with the production of public goods and services .
For that reason , this sector requires clear regulation which in all cases will bindingly commit it to objectives such as equality , freedom and solidarity .
I am not denying that private operators can , and should , join in the fun .
But there has to be room for public operators , too , which are able to produce efficiently and competitively subject to these binding objectives .
The guarantee of universal service must not be reduced to an insignificant remnant .
Accordingly , not just its concept but its financing , too , needs to be described by dynamic , continuously developing concepts !
The counterpart to the public service , efficiency and flexibility , which have been mentioned several times in this debate , is in any case based on nothing more than a doctrinaire a priori .
The days when we made it easy for ourselves to adopt a position here are gone : real policy has to be based on historical reality - and that reality cannot be identified sufficiently for the purposes of practical politics by reference to any a priori , which can be translated into English as ' pre-judgment ' !
de Brémond d 'Ars report ( A4-0388 / 96 )
We completely share the view that the Commission ought to retract its proposal .
In respect of point 2 , we also think that it ought to be possible to stress what has been written in Amendment No 10 , i.e. that the EEC Courts have stated that companies may be exempted from the competition laws in the Treaty if this is in the public economic interest .
As usual , it is our view that the advantages of deregulation are being grossly exaggerated .
The Commission 's draft communication on the application of the competition rules in the postal sector mean that every country in the EU must open up its postal sector to competition .
This is good .
The current situation where only some countries have a competitive postal sector is unsatisfactory .
The best solution would be to revert to the Council 's earlier position , which included a timescale within which the postal sector must be opened up for competition .
Following Parliament 's remarks during the first discussion and the failure in the Council to agree on a new joint position , it would appear that such a solution will be difficult to achieve .
In view of the situation which has arisen and as we are in favour of every Member State opening up their postal sector for competition , we have decided to abstain from voting .
I venture to hope that Parliament will take the opportunity presented by Georges de Brémond d 'Ars 's report to oppose the European Commission 's attempt to employ Article 90 ( 3 ) of the Treaty in a field as sensitive as postal operations .
What a perfect example of the Commission 's double standards !
On the one hand we have a proposal for a directive on which we adopted amendments by a large majority last May , forcing the Council to adopt a balanced common position , and on the other we have blackmail by the Commission with this ' notice ' authorizing it to take unilateral action .
What solution are we to choose , as between acting in concert and acting alone ?
The postal operators , workers in the postal sector , the European public - none of them can be satisfied with this method .
For my part , I think this approach is nothing less than a declaration of war .
Surely respect for the rights of an elected assembly is central to democracy ?
This notice is no good to anyone , not even to the European Commission , since it contradicts the terms of the proposal for a directive .
There is not escaping the fact that the postal sector must enjoy the benefits of liberalization , and that must be done by concerted action .
A codecision procedure has been instituted - let it run its course .
This notice must not be allowed to become a sword of Damocles hanging over the European Parliament .
National postal companies have operated in a monopoly situation for a long time .
But even within this sector there is currently a entrepreneurial spirit and it is important to develop this .
There are few things more important today than opening up businesses for competition .
Experience has shown , in every field , that this is the best way to increase efficiency , create new jobs and reduce prices .
These are the results that have been achieved in the areas which have been deregulated and liberalised .
This has also been the case in those countries where competition has been encouraged within the postal sector .
It is important that these developments are allowed to continue and spread to all the EU 's Member States .
The report now under discussion in the European Parliament runs contrary to this view and there is a risk that it will mean that competition will not be encouraged .
The report by Mr Brémond D 'Ars deserves to be supported because it highlights Parliament 's opposition to the high-handed attitude taken by the Commission with regard to the postal services and in particular , the continuation of the universal postal service .
Parliament has given its opinion on several occasions , upon which it has sought to show the difference between the public utility and others , in particular the social and economic impact that post offices have in peripheral , rural , suburban or urban areas .
It seems ludicrous to me that , at a time when the EU and the Commission are targeting resources towards rural and urban development , bringing forward ' pacts for employment ' and other initiatives , that they are also pursuing proposals that will lead to the closure of basic services for communities and lead to significant job losses - all in the name of competition and the single market .
Another game of arm wrestling is under way , the players being the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council , and the stake the defence of the postal services .
Remember what we did on 9 May 1996 .
We radically amended the proposed directive , allowing mail-shots and cross-border mail to remain under a post office monopoly .
The postal services that undertake public sector duties must retain lucrative sectors of business to offset their loss-making activities .
We also put back the idea of opening up the post to competition until after 2003 , after the adoption of a new directive .
But these decisions have caused problems for most of our governments !
So here we are today , confronted with a second proposal , a ' notice ' which seems to us incompatible with our earlier vote !
We call on the Commission to withdraw its text .
Privatization at European level is appropriate when the services concerned can be taken on equally well by private operators .
However , the mails are far from being just another branch of industry : they provide specific services , whose benefits must be available to all citizens , whether those services are profitable or not .
I am not at all surprised , therefore , that the EU Council previously broke down over the arrangements for the liberalization of the mails .
The texts put forward by the Commission are , in fact , so extreme that the Council could not produce a qualified majority in favour of accepting them .
The smaller states , in particular , are ( rightly ! ) on their guard against any tendency to blanket liberalization , which would expose small enterprises to competition from large and financially powerful ones .
After all , privatization must not be allowed to lead to a situation where lucrative activities pass into private hands while the national postal authorities are allowed to retain the expensive basic service outside the conurbations .
In this connection , the question also arises of whether the profitable direct mail sector is to be opened up or not .
Another important point for small states is how far cross-border postal services are to be deregulated .
In this case , the Irish compromise proposal in the Council suggested that if a Member State had a total volume of cross-border mail exceeding 20 % , that sector should not immediately be opened up to competition ( a rule which would affect , among others , Luxembourg , Ireland and Greece ) .
So there are still many problems to be solved before liberalization can be addressed .
Any attempt to set binding dates at this early stage ( as the Commission , the Netherlands , Finland and Sweden want to do ) would be premature .
I therefore see no reason whatever to regret the fact that the legislative procedure has been put on ice for the time being .
This is no disaster , but an opportunity for carefully considered solutions which take into account the problems of small nations .
Lalumière report ( A4-0400 / 96 )
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the Lalumière report .
We share the rapporteur 's concern about the massive violations of human rights which continue to take place around the world .
We also share the rapporteur 's frustration over the fact that the EU still fails to provide a good enough example in this area .
The question of human rights is relevant to any dealings with countries outside the Union .
These should be brought up and satisfactorily dealt with on each occasion .
The MEDA grants to Turkey are the latest example of Parliament acting as the Community 's guilty conscience .
We are glad to do this .
That is why we also vote in favour of this report which is wholly in line with the progressive attitude the European Parliament usually adopts in connection with human rights .
We must however distance ourselves from that part of the report which makes a decent human rights policy dependent on a massive further development of the common external and security policy in the EU .
The powers the EU already has are a sufficient basis for taking the necessary action .
In this report , which is central to Parliament 's work , the Commission 's activities are reviewed to determine what importance it attaches to human rights .
This comes down to the question of whether , in the CFSP , the Commission makes economic ties conditional on recognition of and respect for human rights .
Mrs Lalumière 's report is very comprehensive regarding the events of the past year , but the amendment to conclusion No 12 deprives the report of its critical impact , making it less deserving of universal support than it was previously .
The primacy of the safeguarding of human rights is subordinated to other important considerations .
This formula of evasion can now easily be exploited to include economic and trade agreements even with countries which can be very seriously criticized for human rights violations .
This is precisely what the Commission needs for the high-speed build-up of the free trade area involving all the CIS States , although there are a great many human rights violations in certain countries that argue against this economic preference .
The way is now open for the PCA to be ratified in Parliament for the trans-Caucasian states , although we know that Armenia and Azerbaijan are in a state of war , even though there is an armistice at present .
In many situations , we have seen that postponing the conclusion of economic agreements has an effect on internal policy , including , in occasional cases , stimulating progress as far as the human rights situation is concerned .
By adopting this amendment we have now landed ourselves in an unclear situation and abandoned these opportunities to control events , because the draft protocol on the implementation of the human rights clause has been lying for a year at the back of a drawer somewhere in the Commission , untouched by anyone .
It is still just an illusion that we can make a decisive contribution to improving the human rights situation in the former communist states of the east or in the Mediterranean states through economic agreements while the Commission still fights shy of the possibility of postponing those agreements .
Zimmermann report ( A4-0393 / 96 )
The Commission of the European Union bears a heavy responsibility for the Union 's inertness over the issue of protection for minors , because until only a few months ago it was answering questions from Members of the European Parliament , by saying that the problem fell outside the scope of its competences .
The Zimmermann report , after the dramatic events in Belgium which are probably the tip of the iceberg , provides for a series of important actions .
Among other things , it is necessary :
for children 's rights to be incorporated in the revised Treaty , -for the Commission to propose special action to deal with sex tourism involving children and child pornography , -for the problem of protecting children from information technologies to be addressed , -for the European Union to contribute to the creation of a European Centre for neglected children , -for special action and care on behalf of children who come from third countries , -for a bundle of measures to be adopted to support the family , -in the case of children who have gone astray , for education and rehabilitation to be offered instead of imprisonment , which changes them into antisocial elements , -and for discrimination to be eliminated , whatever countries it may exist in , against children born out of wedlock , who should be made equal to other children in the eyes of the law .
Recent events in Belgium , and in France too , have given new force to a debate that has too often been conducted very timidly in the European Union - the debate on paedophilia .
The resurgence of transnational paedophile networks , facilitated today by the development of the new information technologies , represents a genuine threat to our societies .
All too often , the appalling outrages we hear of show the inability to establish any real judicial cooperation to combat paedophilia .
By calling upon the Council to propose arrangements for judicial cooperation and to set up a European Centre for missing children , the report is on the right lines .
The violation of children 's rights is the greatest possible affront to human dignity .
Let us make sure we remember that today , because they will not forgive us tomorrow !
Talking about children is easy enough , but dealing with them is much more difficult in the present social environment .
This is particularly the case because there has been a fundamental change in the relationship between adults and children . The automatic respect shown for adults has been weakened , while the permissive society has made inroads into the barriers of decency and morality .
There are no social guidelines on which adults and minors can base their attitudes , and as a result we have all kinds of deviant behaviour ( violence by young people , paedophilia among adults , etc . ) .
Can these problems be dealt with by political activism - by endeavouring to instrumentalize children and by proposing all kinds of technical instruments ( such as children 's parliaments and hotlines ) as proposed in the Zimmermann report ?
I think not !
Very little can be achieved through political activism if the essential thing is missing , and the essential thing here ( hardly mentioned in the Zimmermann report ) is children 's right to parents , to a family environment , providing them with warmth , love , understanding and security .
Like all living creatures , human children need a secure family base for the harmonious development of their personalities .
It follows that any policy to benefit children must comprise measures at national level to create and preserve that home base .
Helping parents in their difficult task of bringing up children , enabling them to provide understanding and affection - especially in those many cases where the cohesion of the family is at risk or has been destroyed - this is the right kind of policy on children !
Unfortunately , the Zimmermann report offers an indigestible mass of trivia and inconsistencies .
Surely children 's parliaments and children 's officers are more likely to calm the public and divert its attention from essentials ( which , in most cases , are more difficult ) .
As for combating crime against children , although general analyses are presented they are backed up by very few specific proposals .
The suggestion that an independent European centre should be set up to coordinate searches for missing children is certainly a good idea .
In addition , though , it is essential :
when dealing with the subjects of child sex tourism , pornography and paedophilia , to attach greater importance to the dignity of children than to the freedom of opinion and the sexuality of adults ; -to fight crime against children with new instruments for effective policing and judicial activities throughout Europe.As these brief remarks will indicate , I find the Zimmermann report very disappointing .
But , since rejecting it will do nothing to help children either , I shall unenthusiastically vote in favour .
Mr President , we cannot just resign ourselves to the deteriorating physical , affective and moral condition of many children in Europe , as if it was an inevitable result of social change .
In particular , the recklessness or egotism of the adult world is causing children in the various countries of Europe to live in more and more precarious family situations , giving rise to suffering , pain and lack of confidence in life when a child is deprived of the loving , educational presence of its parents .
On the other hand , surely children have the right to be protected from premature - and therefore traumatic - familiarity with the tragedies and violence of the adult world , and adults no right to inflict upon children the burden of problems they should be settling for themselves ?
Among children 's rights , the one most frequently violated in Europe today is certainly the right to be born . Might not the second be , quite simply , the right to a childhood ?
When we vote today for homosexuals to have the right to be considered acceptable as adoptive parents , in the same way and on the same terms as heterosexuals , we do so after much deep thought .
The so called ' traditional nuclear family ' - mother , father and children - is no older than the industrial society .
In peasant society , extended families were the normal family structure .
The nuclear family today is split up by the increasing number of divorces and also by the increase in commuting between work and home .
Our society permanently includes many ' atypical ' families .
This means that a new family pattern , a homosexual couple with adoptive children for example , is no longer subject to the same type of social exclusion as in the past .
Such a child is not at risk of bullying because of its family situation .
This has been demonstrated in studies presented at the Psychological Institute in Gothenburg .
It is not the case either that these children are more likely than other children to be homosexual .
We are convinced that it is the nature of the person as an individual which makes them a good or a bad parent , not their sexual preference .
We have no reason to believe that two parents of the same sex would damage a child 's psychological development .
Iceland 's Parliament also takes this view as , in contrast to other Scandinavian countries , it has allowed its Law on registered partnerships to include joint custody of children .
Discrimination is wicked .
We must work to eliminate it in every way .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the social changes brought about by ' modernism ' , such as artificial procreation and the increase in the numbers of single-parent families , compel us to rethink legislation on the adoption of children .
The new framework for this legislation needs to restore the position of the child at the very heart of the adoption principle .
While hundreds of thousands of children are waiting to be adopted , bureaucratic problems are making the process ineffective .
Furthermore , many couples and single people cannot adopt these children .
The Casini report on improving the law and cooperation between the Member States on the adoption of minors recommends simplifying the adoption procedures .
We should , indeed , adapt the legal framework to the upheavals through which our society is living , in order to enable children to have a home and to ensure they are protected .
It is naturally important and proper to ensure the best for the child in cases of adoption .
This is why this report is important as it forms a link in the chain of discussions and cooperation concerning improvements in the adoption of minors .
However , it is our view that there should not be any EU legislation in this respect .
These issues can be decided by the Member States themselves , although this does not exclude international cooperation on the issue .
The EU is not , however , the appropriate body for it .
We wholeheartedly support the proposal that single people and cohabiting partners should have the right to adopt and Amendment No 1 which raises the issue of giving homosexuals the right to adopt children .
That is not say that a homosexual couple would be worse parents than any others .
The important thing for the child is that they are able to grow up in a secure and caring home .
This can be with a single person , a cohabiting couple or in a heterosexual or a homosexual home .
There are many positive points in the report on adoption , particularly the fact that it is the child 's situation and future which is fundamental in cases of adoption .
I still cannot support the report , as many of its clauses advocate harmonisation and I consider that the Member States should decide on their own rules for adoption .
The Casini report is a compact report , whose central aim is to improve the law and cooperation amongst Member States on the adoption of minors .
Recital A rightly says that the interest of the child being adopted must be paramount .
This means that the rules drawn up must concentrate primarily on the interest of the children and only secondarily on the rights of the would-be adoptive parents .
Thus the aspiring parents must be subjected to careful vetting and the child must wherever possible be placed with a family in its own country of origin .
The task we see here for the Union is only a limited one .
Inter-country adoption happens , of course , internationally and within Europe .
Since there is freedom of movement for individuals within the Union it is important that Member States should cooperate in this area of policy .
A measure of coordination is needed .
National laws must be aligned where necessary .
Policy at Union level is not necessary and there is no basis for it in the Treaty .
Happily the report does not ask for this .
It calls for Member States to cooperate and coordinate their laws where freedom of movement makes this necessary .
We can go along with that .
A much-discussed point is whether adoption should be open only to families or also to single parents , persons living together in communes or homosexuals .
In effect this is something in which the European Parliament has no say ; the national legislator decides here .
This issue is still the subject of in-depth debate in the Member States and it would be extremely premature for the European Parliament to pronounce on it .
But we wish to give our view on this , since the point is very important to us .
Our view is determined by the Biblical norm which describes the family , made up of a man and a woman , joined in marriage , as the proper norm .
So this is the proper norm for adoptive children too , because that family can offer them the stability and love they so desperately need and the framework in which they can grow into responsible adults .
As stated earlier , we share the view that adoption has to be in the interests of the child .
The interest of the child demands a stable family , in which man and woman willingly take on the task of parenting in order to give these children a new future .
Consequently we voted for the Casini Amendment No 10 .
After weighing the above considerations , and in the light of the vote on the various amendments , we voted in favour of this report .
Kokkola report ( A4-0238 / 96 )
Mr President , the wetlands are quite obviously one of the richest and most diverse parts of the European Union 's heritage .
They perform many important ecological functions , such as the large-scale production of natural resources ( flora and fauna ) and plant biomass traditionally consumed by domestic animals .
Wetlands have greatly receded within the Union , partly because of drainage and increased land use for intensive farming .
There are many conflicts between agriculture and the environment , and it is high time to put these behind us .
I am still convinced that the proper conservation of the wetlands goes hand in hand with their ecological and agricultural use , retaining their fundamental features .
The wise use of the wetlands can be assured , to the mutual benefit of the environment and extensive farming ( land or aquatic ) , on the basis of the dominant consumption of their plant production .
In the present context of the BSE crisis , it is high time to replan the exploitation of wetlands by farmers , enabling them to provide an agricultural benefit , maintaining the quality of animal production and ensuring the ecological management of the wetlands - all activities favourable to the global policy of sustainable development of the less favoured rural areas .
As a member from one of Europe 's biggest wetlands , the Aveiro estuary , on the Portuguese coast , I welcome the Commission communication which is both timely and important .
This is a huge and especially sensitive area , from the landscape and ecological points of view , subjected for many years to various pressures , from fishing to building , to leisure activities , to salt production , and the effects of more and more industrial and agricultural pollution .
I support the idea contained in the report of defining a legal status for these areas , considered to be of international interest and , therefore , of European interest .
Proceeding to a European approach to these areas and defining programmes for their preservation and enhancement is also a way of building Europe and looking after its heritage .
Mrs Kokkola 's report has incorporated many of the conclusions adopted in my report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I should emphasize that the Committee on Fisheries , through my colleague Dominique Souchet , also adopted the same conclusions .
The wetlands were indeed created by man for him to exploit , enhance and inhabit .
They are part of our rural heritage .
The wetlands need to be protected and preserved .
The Commission communication offers an excellent analysis of the problems facing these ' sensitive ' zones .
On the other hand , no specific proposal has been made .
The need is to create a ' wetlands ' status , to serve as a basis for a genuine policy adapted to the specific constraints of wetlands .
In Mrs Kokkola 's report , I voted against point 7 , which integrates the wetlands into controversial directives such as the Habitat and Natura 2000 directives .
I naturally voted against Amendment No 1 , tabled by my colleagues of the UPE Group , since it takes this integration further even though Natura 2000 is rejected by farmers , fishermen , fish farmers , local authorities , landowners and hunters - in other words , all the economic operators who exploit the wetlands .
The proposals we have produced , rather than dividing up these ' sensitive ' areas , are designed to allow their harmonized development .
They are very often sparsely populated ( except , of course , in areas such as the Netherlands , Flanders , etc . ) and the only type of ' sustainable ' economy that can be contemplated there is one comprising agricultural and aquacultural activities and rural tourism , combined of course with such leisure activities as fishing and hunting .
Let us stop treating economic activity and the environment as if they were incompatible .
The wetlands will not survive unless they are inhabited .
Failure to maintain them would result in their returning to their natural , state , thus depriving us of part of our rural heritage .
I congratulate the author of this report on the exhaustive analysis of the Commission 's communication on the protection of the wetlands .
The study stresses the importance of protecting the wetlands as part of a global water policy .
We believe this policy should be implemented in a consistent way and , above all , real results must be possible .
It cannot be successful if we only operate in the area of the recommendations .
Only by drawing up a directive which deals with each and every one of the many aspects and spheres that the wetlands represent will it be possible to speak of effectiveness .
The progressive and rapid deterioration of the wetlands is due as much to lack of information and ignorance about their environmental importance as to established interests , mainly in coastal tourist areas .
It is the duty of the Member States to establish a register of wetlands following the principles set out in the Ramsar convention .
It is the responsibility of the governments as well as the European Union , which must monitor fulfilment of its own provisions , to ensure that this is done objectively and that only environmental criteria are applied .
Having put the above considerations on record , I shall vote in favour of the Kokkola report .
I voted in favour of the report presented by Mrs Kokkola , with the exception of point 7 concerning Natura 2000 , a point taken even further by the UPE Group 's Amendment No 1 , against which I naturally voted .
As the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , I was very satisfied to note that my main conclusions had been incorporated both in the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , drafted by my colleague Edouard des Places , and in the report by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
What does the Committee on Fisheries want to see ?
First , since there is a joint interest at stake , it is necessary for the Commission to propose a genuine Community wetlands policy , rather than an accumulation of measures culled from various directives and various existing European programmes . This attitude on the part of the Commission falls short of requirements .
The wetlands are manmade and therefore fragile , and they need to be preserved and populated .
Agricultural , fish farming and aquacultural activities and rural tourism must make it possible for viable economic activity to be sustained in these ' sensitive ' areas .
The geographical boundaries of the wetlands have nothing to do with any administrative boundaries .
It is necessary , therefore , to provide a specific policy for the wetlands , based on their geographical areas .
The Committee on Fisheries has proposed the creation of a wetlands section under the PESCA programme .
The constraints associated with the conservation of the wetlands are , indeed , such as to make it necessary to compensate for them by means of a proactive policy .
Together with my colleague Edouard des Places , I tabled an amendment ( Amendment No 3 ) which recapitulates some of the conclusions of the Agriculture and Fisheries Committees .
It is necessary to set up a wetlands liaison committee , comprising representatives of farmers , fish farmers , landowners and all users , to serve as a compulsory consultation body in order to draw up and implement the most realistic policy possible , which will have to bring together all the economic , touristic and environmental interests and those of the population living and working in these areas which it is so important to preserve .
They will only be preserved if they are inhabited .
And they will not be inhabited unless we stop drawing an artificial distinction between agricultural interests and Community interests .
Indeed , it is with a view to harmonizing those interests that we have drawn up these proposals .
Lindeperg resolution ( B4-1333 / 96 )
Never has it been so apparent as it was this morning how the demand that the intergovernmental matters of justice and policing ( third pillar ) should be integrated into the purely Community mechanisms ( first pillar ) threatened not to improve but , indeed , to destabilize our defences , especially against immigration .
This approach seems all the more dangerous in that it is camouflaged behind a screen of making a better contribution to the integration of Europe .
The resolution just adopted by Parliament once again criticizes the unanimity procedure for Council decisions , which is accused of promoting deadlock , and consequently calls - in the alleged interests of efficiency - for the great majority of the third pillar to be transferred to the first , with majority voting , a supervisory role for the European Parliament and jurisdiction for the Court of Justice .
The Commission , obviously , is in complete agreement .
Unfortunately , the actual text of the resolution gives the lie to the pessimistic finding on which its logic is based , since two full pages are devoted to a list of decisions taken by the Council , in 1996 , regarding cooperation in police and judicial matters .
It is abundantly clear from this that when the Council believes there is a real need all the governments concur , and sometimes concur very quickly , as demonstrated by the signing of the convention on extradition .
Governments are all the less likely to block such legislation just for the sake of it because they are generally conscious of the sharp spur of public opinion , which is always very sensitive to security matters .
In actual fact , when a unanimous decision cannot be reached the reason is that not all governments feel the matter is urgent , so that a political problem arises .
Is it reasonable , for example , to maintain that when governments fail to agree on a draft text proclaiming freedom of movement within the Union for third country nationals this deadlock proves that the third pillar is not working properly ?
I say no - it proves that it is working properly !
Well , the resolution that the European Parliament has just adopted lays itself open to this precise criticism , because one can detect in it , underneath the desire to communitize everything , the desire to use this future power in the most latitudinarian manner .
In point 20 , for example , we read that this House favours the communitization of ' policy towards third-country nationals ' , then in another place we find that it wants to apply the principle of freedom of movement ' to citizens of third countries lawfully residing within the territory of the Union ' .
The combination of these two approaches very clearly demonstrates the course which the Commission and the European Parliament would like to steer if they were given additional powers .
In principle , we agreed with Mrs Lindeperg 's motion for a resolution and its criticism of the inadequacies in the area of the third pillar .
However , my colleagues and I reject the resolution in areas in which the author attributes the lack of progress to the principle of the unanimous vote .
The reasons for the problems of the third pillar have nothing to do with the unanimity requirement - they relate to the lack of substantive proposals .
This attempt to find a justification for doing away with the unanimous vote must be categorically rejected .
I welcome the criticism in the resolution on the lack of openness in the Council of Minister 's informal meetings .
However , this report is about raising justice and home affairs up to Community level .
I cannot support this .
When Sweden decided to join the EU it joined a transnational cooperation .
I consider that Sweden 's proposal for a multiannual working programme to combat crime and the Swedish contribution to the EU programme of action against drugs are excellent examples with which to demonstrate that it is possible to achieve cooperation in justice and home affairs at transnational level .
I cannot support an increased element of supranationality which is why I am voting against this resolution .
That concludes this evening 's voting .
Normally , my colleague Mr Avgerinos would now take over in the chair , but first I am going to tell you the results of the inquiry .
What I was told was that , during the voting on Amendment No 13 to Mrs Zimmermann 's report , a vote was cast in the unoccupied seat 425 , using card 0148 , in the name of Mrs Baldi .

According to the interpretation of Rule 117 , any such infringement would be considered as a serious case of disorder pursuant to Rule 110 ( 1 ) .
But as Christmas is just around the corner ... well , let me read you what comes next : ' ... the President may , after giving formal notice , move , either immediately or no later that the next sitting ' - having slept on it - ' that Parliament pass a vote of censure which shall automatically involve immediate exclusion from the chamber and suspension for two to five days .
Parliament shall decide , at a time to be decided by the President , which shall be either at the sitting during which the events in question occurred or at one of the three following sittings .
The Member concerned shall be entitled to be heard by Parliament before the vote .
An electronic vote shall be taken without debate .
A request to establish a quorum and a request for a roll call vote shall not be admissible . '
Madam President , you steered this afternoon 's sitting very safely through some difficult votes ...
... although , as I understood , there were several instances , not just one , of grave irregularities in this Chamber during voting .
I believe we should take these matters very seriously , applying Rule 110 and taking into account Rule 117 , both of which you quoted virtually verbatim .
We have Rules of Procedure to cover such cases .
We must not allow liberties to be taken with them , even when accompanied by references to the imminence of Christmas .
The results of the voting on the last four reports were very tight ; the difference was often no more than one or two votes .
I don 't want to look into this in detail .
Even so , my opinion is that we cannot adopt that sort of procedure here .
I would therefore ask that the matter be referred to our competent committee , meaning the Rules Committee , or to the Conference of Presidents or both , and that we should take up the matter again at the next part-session in January - there is no point in trying to do so earlier , because we know what tomorrow is going to be like here .
We should be doing this House a great discredit if we were simply to let things slide and laugh the matter off .
If we could reach an understanding on this , that would be a satisfactory solution .
Let 's have no misunderstanding , Mrs Hoff .
I didn 't say that it wasn 't important .
Let us say that I appealed to your clemency , reminding you that we are so close to Christmas .
Having said that , I do know that it is an important problem - we entirely agree on that .
Madam President , as I recall it the issue was not a roll call vote but an electronic vote .
There may in fact have been an error of operation , because we voted a lot today , an enormous amount , and our machines were having some trouble in keeping up .
I believed , quite simply , that I had not voted on the first occasion and so a double vote took place .
But there was no intent on my part to commit an offence because , once again , as you could see for yourself , our machines were taking time to operate and I really did think , in all good faith , that I had not voted .
The vote was , I say again , an electronic one and not a roll call one .
So the result of the vote is not affected .
Having said that , I plead guilty to incorrect operation .
Well , there we are .
Mr Pasty pleads guilty .
Madam President , I withdraw my request for a point of order .
I think you should refer the whole matter to the next Bureau as you wisely suggested and see what the Bureau suggest .
Perhaps we have to change the format of the hemicycle if it is so easy to simultaneously get your hands in two voting machines .
That is Mr Pasty 's explanation and I am not going to query it .
But it does stretch our credulity even at this time of the year .
Thank you , Mr Tomlinson .
At all events , I think it is just as well that the matter was raised , because we are all well aware of its importance .
Madam President , there was a vote on my report as well , which really was very close - and I have taken another careful look at it .
In the case of Amendment No 13 , the amendment concerned , a roll-call vote was requested .
So it is not the case , as Mr Pasty says , that it was just an electronic check .
It was a roll-call vote .
My records clearly shown that there was a roll-call vote on Amendment No 13 .
This was a very important report , as we all realized , and I can understand that there are wide variety of views about it as was clearly shown by yesterday 's debate .
But to indulge in trickery here at a time when we are discussing reports on children , and then to try to justify it by the argument that Christmas is just around the corner , I do have problems with that .
I have to say that , in all honesty !
I find it really sad that we should have to resort to trickery , in this area of all areas , where those who are most concerned cannot speak for themselves or make their own contribution !
I am sorry , I really do find it very , very sad .
Mrs Zimmermann , I have proposed that this matter should be referred to the Bureau next January .
It seems to me that that suggestion has the support of the House .
That is the impression I have formed .
There is nothing more I can do immediately .
Furthermore , we have heard Mr Pasty 's explanation .
The Bureau will thus be able to rule on this incident in full knowledge of the facts , and take steps to ensure that it cannot occur again .
That is what I propose .
Madam President , I do not want to go into the details of the incident but the matter has to be referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , possibly instead of the Bureau , but certainly as well as the Bureau .
This clearly is a Rules matter and not just a matter for the Bureau .
I formally move that it goes to the Rules Committee as well .
I think , actually , that it is the Bureau that can decide to refer the matter to the Rules Committee .
Madam President , I am sorry that the spirit of Christmas is not prevailing .
I refer to the way in which Mr Pasty is being treated .
I would like to ask the two people who accused me of voting on Mr Hyland 's card to withdraw and apologise .
They won 't .
I think that should be referred to the Bureau .
Madam President , you are aware that some of us take this European Parliament and its commitment to democratic values and practice very seriously indeed .
I know you do and I know the vast majority of people here do .
Democratic values include a commitment , as far as voting and elections are concerned , to the basic principle of one person one vote .
There has been an example this evening and I named the person - as I have been doing for ten years - who has abused this principle .
I agree with your recommendation to take this seriously and pursue it further .
I would also say that in the international community we are taken so seriously that we are invited to send observers to many parts of the world to observe elections .
Between now and the next part-session in January I , amongst others , have been invited to observe elections in part of Africa to make sure that the principle of democracy and one person one vote is respected .
That is why I support you very strongly indeed and , rather than being frivolous , we should follow up and stamp out once and for all the practice of ' playing the piano ' , which is a long-standing practice in this Parliament .
It has involved senior Members of this Parliament , including a former president .
Madam President , on a point of order . I find this discussion very distressing and it is a great shame that it has spoilt what has otherwise been an extremely good day in Parliament : everybody has been in good humour .
It would help though , when we investigate this matter , if it could be established when Mrs Baldi actually left Parliament so that we can be sure that every single vote in this Parliament today , bar the vote on Amendment No 13 , has been above-board .
Mr Hallam , the inquiry has been held and the results are clear .
We shall pass them on to the Bureau , as I suggested .
That is clear .
There is no reason to go back over it .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think we should continue with our work .
I am going to hand over the chair to Mr Avgerinos , with my thanks .
Parking card for the disabled - Rights of the disabled
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0227 / 96 by Mr Megahy , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the draft Council recommendation on a parking card for disabled persons ( COM ( 95 ) 0696 - C4-0082 / 96-95 / 0353 ( SYN ) ) ; -A4-0391 / 96 by Mrs Banotti , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the rights of disabled people .
Mr President , I have been in this Chamber a long time , in fact I have been waiting for about six months for this report to come before the plenary , and I do not want to miss it at this stage .
In presenting the report on parking cards for disabled people on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism I wish to declare a personal interest .
I am a holder of what is called the orange badge in the United Kingdom , and that will be affected by any changes that would be made as a result of this recommendation coming into being .
The aim of the recommendation is to achieve reciprocal recognition of parking cards for disabled people throughout the European Union .
Special parking cards exist already in Member States , but their lack of uniformity creates confusion and uncertainty , both for the user when travelling in other countries , and also for the local enforcement officials .
The proposal recommends a standardized card which would be instantly recognizable and eligible in all EU countries .
It should be noted , however , that this proposal is not concerned with any standardization of facilities on offer for disabled drivers , but concentrates instead on mutual recognition of the standards operating already in the various Member States .
This was the subject of a recommendation as long ago as 1977 by the European Conference of Ministers of Transport ; so that in itself the principle seems to carry a very wide agreement both inside and outside the Member States of the Union in Europe .
As in so many things , the devil is in the detail .
I can well imagine the response of a Brussels parking attendant to my view that all the Member States are recognizing each other 's parking cards .
I would not feel very confident about parking there .
So I very much welcome the proposals by the Commission which seek an effective scheme that would enable many disabled persons to travel freely across frontiers and avail themselves of parking facilities for disabled persons in Member States other than their own .
However , in my view and that of the Committee on Transport and Tourism there need to be some amendments to the proposals .
Firstly , in order to ensure that all Member States agree to the new card , the committee is suggesting that it is issued in addition to existing parking cards for disabled people already available in each country .
This is because some Member States may find it too costly to replace not only the cards but also signposts etc . , and could argue that it would be wasteful to throw out parking cards which have gradually become recognized and honoured .
The committee 's proposal is that the European card and existing national cards could be used in parallel .
This would have the additional advantage of easing the task of parking wardens who would only need to recognize the European card as well as their own national card , rather than having to grapple with a myriad of cards from all over the Union .
When it comes to the information to be included on the card , the committee sought to ensure that there is sufficient information about the user to avoid abuse , but at the same time , to leave out any unnecessary information which could lead to a disabled person being singled out for an attack or burglary .
For this reason we have suggested that a photograph be included for checking purposes , although not displayed in such a way that it could be seen by passers by .
Another change which we made in response to overwhelming criticism from disabled groups all over the EU is to remove the holder 's address from the document for security purposes .
We have also deleted the vehicle registration number from the card .
This is to ensure that the card is firmly with the holder and not a particular vehicle .
This is important for disabled persons who may be driven by different people in any number of different cars and is particularly important when in other countries : it is reasonably common to fly to a destination and then use a hired vehicle .
Finally , the Commission states that it intends to produce information on what special parking facilities are available , for display in each Member State .
In our amendments the committee suggested that this information is issued to users at the same time as the card .
In conclusion , although this comes in the form of a recommendation and not a directive , it is nevertheless an important proposal which , if enacted , will be another step towards enabling disabled people to take advantage of the freedom of movement enjoyed by other European citizens .
I hope the Commission can accept Parliament 's proposals for improving a welcome initiative and that the Member States for once will act quickly in agreeing and implementing this recommendation , which will be a very useful step in the development of a people 's Europe .
Mr President , as a long-standing member of the Committee on Petitions I was most honoured to be appointed rapporteur for this report .
For many years people with disabilities have petitioned Parliament and this report is based on such petitions .
It is also the direct result of a huge consultation effort with colleagues in Parliament , with NGOs working with and for people with disabilities , with disabled people themselves , with the Committee on Petitions , the Committee on Social Affairs , Employment and the Working Environment and the Intergroup for People with Disabilities .
In that sense , I cannot claim it to be my report .
I am simply a messenger .
In another departure from more regular procedures , this report will be available and in fact , is available - I have a copy here - in large print for those who have difficulty seeing , and also on diskette .
I would recommend that all Parliament reports be available in such a format .
Access is one of the main themes of the report : physical access which is denied to all too many people by the structures , buildings and public transport common in all our countries ; access to the world of work , to the world of political activity , to decent housing and to appropriate care .
Above all it is a clarion call for access to selfexpression , to freedom from discrimination and to basic human rights .
In order to achieve these perfectly legitimate aspirations these rights will have to be enshrined in the Treaty .
They will have to be given due Treaty recognition in the context of the IGC .
For too many years the huge budget , estimated to be about ECU 2.6 billion , which is focused on disability has resulted in a huge number of jobs for able-bodied people and a disgraceful lack of real access to these jobs for people with disabilities .
We discussed this in the context of the HELIOS report and the statistics which show that a pitiably low number of those who have implemented and had access to HELIOS have themselves been disabled people .
We know there is a commitment on the part of the Commission to improve this .
We wait with both hope and impatience , Commissioner .
There are approximately 37 million disabled people in the EU , about 10 % of the Union population .
Disabled people experience direct and indirect discrimination in all areas of their daily lives .
As I have said , many so-called public places are completely inaccessible to people with physical impairment .
This is despite the fact that access is sometimes guaranteed by law .
People with a visual impairment can rarely obtain printed material in a format they can access : that is , either braille or tape .
Deaf people often do not have the right to use and be served in their native language , which is sign language .
People with mental health problems are the one group of disabled people who can be deprived of their liberty , i.e. , hospitalized against their will or administered ECT therapy without the involvement of the courts .
People with learning disabilities often face exclusion from public places because members of the public object to seeing them , and some people are deprived of their right to vote .
Of course I realize that most of the responsibility for disability policy lies with the Member States .
However , the EU can add value through exchange programmes and has a role where the competence to legislate is at Union level .
Disabled people are , in theory , covered by the general citizenship provisions of the Treaty on European Union .
However , they do not enjoy full rights associated with Union citizenship .
This must be addressed , as I have said , by inclusion in the Treaty .
A non-discrimination clause would not transfer new competences to the European level but would mean that where competence to legislate is at European level the principle of non-discrimination on grounds of disability is fully respected .
At present , when discussing harmonization and standardization of legislation in the creation of the single market , we have no legal obligation to consider the needs of disabled people .
Increasingly , the process of liberalization fails to include disabled people .
This means that many draft directives in the area of single-market harmonization are initially published without due consideration to the access needs for disabled people .
Inaccessible product-design standards will , in the longer term , place the EU at a competitive disadvantage internationally with countries like the USA , whose products incorporate higher access standards because of legislative requirements .
Incorporating disability access at the product-design stage is cost-neutral or adds at most 2-5 % to overall costs , whereas creating a separate specialist product and market is expensive .
We saw that very clearly when the Windows 95 program was brought in : it was accessible to people with visual disability right from the start , and that was as a direct result of an extremely good campaign in most of our countries but particularly in the United States .
Article 8b of the Treaty on European Union defines EU citizens ' political and voting rights .
However , many disabled people report exclusion from the political process and are disenfranchised in the most fundamental aspect of a democratic society : the right to vote in person on the basis of common information .
In some Member States laws make it more difficult , or even impossible , for certain disabled people to vote .
Polling stations are frequently inaccessible and transport to polling stations is not available or inaccessible , the latter especially disenfranchises disabled people in rural areas .
Disabled people of working age experience unemployment rates at least three times higher than non-disabled people .
This is partly due to attitudinal discrimination but also to inability or unwillingness to adapt working practices and premises .
Interestingly , the approach taken in the American Disability Act , which requires employers to make reasonable accommodation for qualified disabled employees , has not been burdensome on employers : most accommodations are made at a very low cost .
The submissions I have received highlight abuse and violence against disabled people , including disabled children , particularly in institutional settings .
Institutionalization itself is an abuse of human rights .
Violence includes both physical and psychological abuse .
I hope my other colleagues will pick up the last few remaining points I wanted to make .
Mr President , if I may , I should like to begin on a very personal note .
Since my wife went blind in 1975 I have become all too familiar with the routine discrimination against the disabled .
This will give you some idea of how grateful I am to the European Parliament for including this matter on its agenda , and even more so for the way in which the rapporteur , Mrs Banotti , has dealt with it .
Nevertheless , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , I must call attention to two problems we face in this context .
The first is the problem of subsidiarity .
The rapporteur has already pointed out that non-discrimination against disabled people is primarily a matter of constitutional law and the simple legislation of the Member States .
It would certainly not be in the interests of the disabled to challenge that view .
But citizens of the Union , too , can be numbered among the disabled .
That makes it easy to understand why the Dublin II document contains a proposed new Article 6a for the Treaty on Union , laying down a general prohibition of discrimination which also extends to the disabled .
I should like to appeal to you , Commissioner , to support the European Parliament at the intergovernmental conference by standing up for the importance of this matter .
At the same time , the context of this proposal reveals the agonizing inadequacy of the provisions on fundamental civil rights contained in the Treaty on Union .
We urgently need a Union charter of basic rights , because only such a charter will enable us to define what discrimination is and why it must be eliminated .
Mr President , we are holding a joint debate on two reports from two different committees , because both deal with the rights of people suffering from disabilities , and for that reason this joint debate makes sense .
Incidentally , both reports were adopted unanimously in the committees concerned , and I should like to congratulate Mr Megahy and Mrs Banotti on their excellent work - both of them made inquiries of the disabled persons organizations when preparing their reports , got into contact with those organizations and incorporated the views and desires of those affected .
First , the report on the draft Council recommendation on a parking card for disabled persons , as it is entitled .
There is a German saying : ' If it takes long enough , it will be all right in the end . ' One cannot exactly apply that saying to these parking card recommendations .
As long ago as 1977 , twenty years ago now , the transport ministers declared themselves in favour of reciprocal recognition of parking cards .
But they did nothing about it .
The disabled people in the European Union are having to carry the can for that , because in the absence of any European regulation their freedom of movement is enormously impaired .
Twenty years later , the Commission has tabled a recommendation that has no binding effect on the Member States .
Not only that , but the only concession refers to the respective national or regional parking concessions of the Member State in which the disabled person would like to park .
Not to put too fine a point on it , I would say that the whole thing is a load of eyewash .
Perhaps I should put it more politely and describe it as a beginning , an initial step in the right direction .
If the Commission takes account of Parliament 's amendments , linking the issue of the parking card with the issue of a list of the individual states ' regulations , not linking the card to one vehicle , deleting the holder 's address and date of birth and having a photograph on the back instead , and also proposing to the Member States that the card be used in addition to the national one , the authorities will in due course become accustomed to the fact that we are all citizens of Europe and that equal rights of access must be allowed to everyone , everywhere .
Now for the Banotti report on the rights of disabled people .
The Committee on Petitions initiated this report because of numerous petitions received about the disregard of disabled people 's rights .
Evidently , the 37 million disabled people in the European Union are subjected to direct or indirect discrimination in every area of their everyday lives .
This is just as obvious from the petitions as it is from the case studies provided by the disabled people 's organizations .
Today , the German press offers us an example of a case where equal rights were denied : a child with Down 's Syndrome was not allowed to attend ordinary school , and the parents took legal action .
The court 's judgment was that the child was not entitled to attend normal school and should go to a special school , and that what the parents were asking would mean the reorganization of Bavaria 's education laws , which was just not on !
I think that fits in admirably with today 's debate .
We cannot adopt the attitude that it is a matter for the nation states to prevent discrimination - it is a matter for the nation states , but it is a matter for Europe , too .
The single market creates many problems for disabled people in Europe , problems that Mrs Banotti listed earlier , and my view is that the dialogue between the European institutions and the disabled people 's organizations must be continued or encouraged , particularly with a view to protecting the disabled and enabling them to enjoy freedom of movement .
We call upon the Commission and the Council to come up with active measures , pilot projects , studies , statistics and programmes designed to enhance the living and working conditions of the disabled , appropriate means and forms of consultation for representative European and national non-disabled organizations , legal frameworks for education , employment , technology , products , services , standards and public commission systems that are fair to disabled people , and due consideration for the needs of the disabled in the information society , too .
We call for obstacles to freedom of movement , mobility and access to public buildings to be eliminated as quickly as possible and , as a central point , a non-discrimination clause in the Maastricht Treaty .
The basis of this policy must be codecision for those concerned and the human rights approach , as it is also represented in the UN standards .
Disabled people need neither charity nor sympathy - they need rights !
Mr President , I think my colleagues have raised an important point here and put forward a number of proposals which merit consideration and more than a little consideration .
Mrs Banotti says that access is important .
Access to jobs , to the information society , to housing and to transport , and of course a parking permit is important here .
Many of these things of course are governed by subsidiarity .
Even so the European Commission can help with a number of them particularly when it comes to guaranteeing freedom of movement .
And I am thinking too of free movement of benefits .
Disabled people are often paid benefits .
Mrs Banotti mentioned the Americans with Disabilities Act .
I think this is a very important example of how legislation can be framed to help people with handicaps .
Colleagues have also pointed to the article on non-discrimination .
Naturally we all hope that an article of this kind will be adopted at the next IGC , though I think we must be careful not to categorize and label people on all fronts and at all times .
What we need is a general article which encompasses these people .
I will not go on any longer .
I think my colleagues have touched on very important points and I think too that when the Social Affairs Committee looks at Mrs Schmidbauer 's report it will need to refer back to these important reports and consider the matter in a kind of ongoing process .
My compliments to Mrs Banotti for the way in which she has got the process going .
Mr President , our group is totally in agreement with the reports by Mr Megahy and Mrs Banotti relating to people with disabilities .
It needs to be highlighted that the current socio-economic framework implies a serious increase in unemployment and also a reduction in the public funds available to meet the needs of these people .
In Spain , 24 % of the population is unemployed and this rises to 70 % for people with disabilities .
In the private sector only 0.2 % of jobs are held by people with disabilities , while in the public sector this is limited to 2 % .
So it is urgent to revise the Treaty of Maastricht and change the neo-liberal model which is creating this very serious situation , in order to meet the needs of the people .
Mr President , I believe the public is looking to the Intergovernmental Conference for a clear affirmation of the principle of European citizenship , not , of course , based solely on the hypothesis of constructing Europe in terms of the free movement of goods or the freedom of markets , but based mainly on the recognition of human rights .
This hypothesis of European citizenship , which has to be constructed to guarantee the European Union , should be based first and foremost on the hypothesis of guaranteeing people who are currently being discriminated against equal rights and the full possibility of exercising their European citizenship .
This is why , on behalf of the Green Group , I say there is a need for a non-discrimination clause , on the ground of disability , and for this clause to be included in the revision of the Treaty on European Union , so that it can become a legal base for social programmes and measures to combat discrimination .
For these reasons , on behalf of the Green Group , I express sincere congratulations for and satisfaction with Mrs Banotti 's report and complete satisfaction with the recommendation tabled by the Council concerning the issue of parking spaces , as well as with Mr Megahy 's report .
I believe that this combination of proposals could finally open up the prospect of , and I repeat , not only a trading Europe but also a Europe that puts its citizens and their rights first .
Mr President , disabled people experience difficulty in exercising their civil and political rights , both at Member State and European Union levels ; they are confronted with barriers and discrimination in all activities and facilities in every aspect of their lives .
Evidence from disabled people shows that they are denied the rights taken for granted by non-disabled citizens , such as free movement , access to goods and services and , in some cases , even the basic right to vote .
There are many examples of national laws which directly discriminate against disabled people .
For example , in the UK , the 1995 Disability Discrimination Act does not even give all disabled people a basic right to nondiscrimination in employment , transport or education .
The provisions that currently exist , in employment for example , start to look somewhat ineffectual when one realizes that they do not apply to 96 % of companies , that is those employing less than 20 staff .
The rights of disabled people are best served in the European context by the inclusion of an anti-discrimination clause in the next Treaty and by specifically addressing the issue of the rights of disabled people in all legislative deliberations and proposals .
Disable people should be fully consulted in the development of all proposals affecting them .
It is important that this is carried out primarily through organizations actually composed of , and run by , disabled people rather than just those organizations which purport to act on behalf of disabled people .
In conclusion , I wish to congratulate both Mr Megahy and Mrs Banotti , and to say that I am pleased that the Committee on Petitions has been able to be a useful vehicle for Parliament to express the views of many people - disabled and non-disabled - who have signed petitions on this issue and have resulted in the report of Mrs Banotti .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at present there is in fact no parking card for disabled people which is valid throughout the EU .
This considerably restricts their mobility .
Well , this is the point we have reached : just a few days after this year 's European Disabled People 's Day we are finally getting round to addressing a subject which is very serious in both senses of the word .
The introduction of a Community model of parking cards for disabled people has a very personal aspect , with direct effects on the quality of life for every individual concerned .
But it also has an indirect , economic side with regard to the encouragement of the highly employment-intensive tourist industry - one of the few surviving growth industries .
For both these reasons , the introduction of a parking card which will be valid throughout the EU must be welcomed in principle .
Unfortunately , the legal instrument chosen - the recommendation - has no binding effect on the Member States , meaning that the Community model will exist in parallel , as a supplement as it were , to the national parking cards that will remain in force .
We must not be under any illusions about this .
The present recommendation will lead , at best , to a quasi-standardized external form and structure , which is far from being the same thing as saying that holders of such cards will also be able to rely on equal rights throughout the EU .
To the contrary , Member States and even individual regions will be able to lay down their own specific regulations for parking concessions for cardholders .
Those regulations will , however , have to be published in an appropriate form .
Nor , sadly , does the recommendation harmonize the conditions for qualifying for one of these disabled persons ' parking cards .
Nevertheless , it is a limited step in the right direction , so that the Group of the European People 's Party votes in favour of the report with all its amendments .
Many thanks to Mr Megahy for his efforts .


Mr President , I want to congratulate Mr Megahy , Mrs Banotti , the Committee on Petitions and its chairman , Mr Newman , for their creative work .
Since the report also mentions persons with psychiatric problems , I should like to ask Mr Flynn something , because there is sometimes a kind of cooperation between states and the Commission to deny and deprive citizens of their rights .
There is a Community driving licence , and on its basis there have been cases when the driving licence has been revoked , for example in cases of epilepsy or when there are severe psychiatric problems .
As this directive is implemented in Greece , if someone is treated in a psychiatric clinic even for a single day , the clinic is obliged to inform the police and the police the Ministry for Traffic , with the consequence that the licence is revoked immediately .
I believe this is a kind of racism against persons with even temporary psychiatric problems , and that does not apply anywhere else at all within the Union .
I have tabled a question to the Commission , which fully covers this practice in Greece .
I would appreciate Mr Flynn 's comments on the matter .
Mr President , tonight 's report by the Committee on Petitions responds to nine separate petitions received by this Parliament , bearing 43 , 000 signatures , all calling for equal rights for disabled people .
What is now known as the disability movement is building across our continent to work for the day when the 37 million disabled Europeans are able to enjoy full rights of citizenship within our European Union .
Within the powers available to us , this Parliament is acting : creating new access facilities , supporting the code of conduct for employment of disabled people and campaigning for a new European disability programme which genuinely supports equal rights and integration .
But the truth is that neither this Parliament , nor the European Union , cannot today legislate for equal rights for disabled people , because we have no legal base from which to do so .
That is why the movement 's campaign for an anti-discrimination clause in the revised Maastricht Treaty and one with a right of appeal to the European Court is our most urgent demand and the most important duty over the next six months for all of us who support disabled people 's human rights .
Non-discrimination for disabled people has been described as the last great civil rights movement .
Tonight , we stand with you and we will continue to do so until your demands are justly met .
Mr President , I would like sincerely to thank all those who have stayed for the debate and for their contributions .
I would like to thank the rapporteur Mr Megahy for his report .
Experience has shown that despite the recommendation by the Council of Transport Ministers emanating from the European Conference of Ministers of Transport in December 1977 a number of problems still arise in practice .
These are caused mainly by the differing format of parking cards from one country to another - language-related difficulties and uncertainty amongst card-holders as to whether their cards are recognized and accepted in each Member State .
There is also a lack of awareness about the facilities granted by other Member States in relation to such cards and the aim of the draft recommendation is therefore to standardize the format of parking cards for people with disabilities and to have them recognized by the Member States on a reciprocal basis , thereby helping to improve road traffic safety and facilitating the free movement of disabled people by private car .
This is the main point Mr Megahy has made here this evening .
The Community model parking card for people with disabilities described in the recommendation takes account of the main features of existing national cards along the lines of the Community model driving licence .
As is the case with the driving licence , the parking card will remain a national or regional card but with the Community model design .
National rules for issuing parking cards for people with disabilities and the parking facilities to which they can get entitlement are not covered by the recommendation .
Following a process of wide-ranging consultation amongst the Member States and NGOs of and for disabled people the idea of putting forward such a recommendation has been warmly welcomed .
At a later stage the Commission will draw up in all the Community languages , and with the help of the Member States and the competent NGOs , a booklet detailing the parking facilities granted in the different Member States and will encourage its distribution at the same time as the parking card is issued .
The booklet should be available at the same time as the Member States start issuing the Community model parking card .
This is the kind of card we have in mind so far as the model is concerned .
I think you will find it very acceptable .
With regard to the amendments proposed in the report .
The Commission would endorse the following six amendments : Nos 1 , 2 , 6 , 8 , 9 and 10 .
We believe those amendments generally clarify and improve the text quite a lot .
But we would not agree with the following four amendments : Nos 3 , 4 , 5 and 7 .
The reasons are that the term ' Community parking card ' , as proposed in the identical Amendment No 3 , first part , 4 and 7 is not correct .
The card will not be a Community card .
It will be a national or regional document issued by the national , regional or local authorities but designed following a standardized Community model .
That is the way it is done insofar as the driving licences are concerned .
Amendment No 3 , second part , would not be acceptable as it stands .
But it might be useful to use the new and existing cards in parallel , as was suggested by the rapporteur during a transition phase .
But it would not be useful to introduce a non-limited obligation for such parallelism .
So I have asked my services to consider how the amendment could be reformulated to clarify the position .
My own personal support is assured to the House and to the Members here on all of this .
I am going to try once again to get the Ministers to have the political will to make the necessary adjustment .
That is all that is needed .
It seems an extraordinary thing to me that since 1977 we cannot come together and agree on this .
We can have the euro , we can have driving licences , passports and so many things but still this eludes us .
So I will have a word with the Dutch presidency on this particular point and hopefully we will be able to get on with it finally .
I now turn to the Banotti report and resolution .
I want to thank Mrs Banotti for her contribution .
It is a very reflective and well-structured report and confirms what is known about Mrs Banotti : she is very well informed on all matters related to disability .
I am very grateful for the contribution she made this evening and , indeed , those of all her colleagues .
Clearly the idea of equal opportunities for people with disabilities is something whose time has come .
The Banotti report and the accompanying resolution complements the whole variety of initiatives that are now emerging both within the Member States and all the Community institutions .
When you put all that together , all these initiatives play their part in turning thinking and policy away from charity and towards equal rights .
That is the point Mrs Schmidbauer made so well .
It is a question of rights , not sympathy .
So , the Banotti report is quite special here in that it is based on the real-life situation of many people who come forward with their own petitions to Parliament .
Such individual petitions speak volumes and put a human face on the situation faced daily by people with disabilities .
I was very interested to see how many of these petitions dealt with the rights and liberties guaranteed under Treaty law which most of us usually take for granted , including free movement , access to goods and services , access to employment and , of course , access to transport .
You will be pleased to know that we are making some genuine progress in that particular area .
We will talk more about that when we have the opportunity of talking about my communication for which Mrs Schmidbauer is the rapporteur .
What this brings out , of course , is that even though primary responsibility rests , as Mrs Banotti said , with the Member States , the Union too has its sphere of legitimate concern in this field and must be active here .
There are many things of great interest to me personally in this resolution .
It calls on the Member States to change the antidiscrimination provision of the Treaty and to make reference to disability .
This is a call we have all accepted now and I look forward to a happy conclusion insofar as the Treaty revision is concerned and the anti-discrimination clause .
I would urge all those who can influence this , both Members at home and the NGOs , to be active to see to it that the Member States recognize how seriously this is taken by this Parliament .
I reiterate my own view and that of the Commission .
It is necessary .
It was specifically proposed by the Commission in its opinion on the review of the Maastricht Treaty and it supports the move to a rights-based approach which as I have said is the cornerstone really of the Commission 's communication on disability strategy .
While the resolution acknowledges that primary responsibility rests with the Member States it nevertheless proceeds to outline several practical ways where the Community could , within its own sphere , pursue this rightsbased approach .
I find these practical suggestions very useful .
I would reassure you that every one of them are going to be studied by my services .
In conclusion let me take the opportunity to thank Mrs Banotti for her own initiative in producing your report to Parliament and for tabling this important , timely and very practical resolution .
Looking at these two reports together with the Commission 's communication and the Council 's resolution , I feel there is an increasingly strong complementarity in all the thinking of the three principal institutions of the Union in relation to people with disabilities .
We can say that we are all marching to the same tune .
This can only be to the advantage of people with disabilities themselves and to the benefit of the concept of a people 's Europe , giving fair play and equal opportunity to all of our citizens .
Mr President , I was simply waiting for an answer from Commissioner Flynn , concerning the extent to which the principles he proclaimed agree with the practice that a one-day visit to a psychiatric clinic should be sufficient cause for the automatic revocation of a driving licence .
I am asking whether this can be compatible with the principles he expressed and with which we all agree , and indeed with the EU Directive on driving licences .
I have one more question .
Regarding the amendments to the Megahy report which you are not incorporating , I have one additional request , because not only the content has been changed but also the wording , in other words it sounds like an editorial change but actually affects the content .
In the German version , at least , of the Commission 's text there are several references to ' the disabled ' rather than to ' disabled people ' .
I therefore ask the Commission to refer to them in its final version as people , not things !
I would like to take the last point first .
I have had this discussion with many NGOs and people who are daily involved with people with disabilities .
There is a difference of opinion , but I have been recommending that we should refer in this matter to people with disabilities and that we should have all of the documentation framed in that way .
I have put it to some people who are very closely associated with people with disabilities and they say that it does not matter .
But perhaps if we could agree here it might give a good lead as to how things should develop .
Secondly , I would like to say to you , Mr Alavanos , that I wanted to answer you , but you have asked me to look into it .
That is the reason I did not reply this evening .
But just bear one thing in mind : there is a question of driving fitness here .
I would have to take it in that context insofar as subsidiarity is concerned .
But you have asked me to check it out with the Greek authorities and that is what I propose doing .
Mr Alavanos , I too think the fact that a patient was under psychiatric care for just a day is irrelevant .
What matters is why . The issue is rather a complex one .
Mr President , just one final word .
First of all , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
You congratulated me on my own initiative , Commissioner , but I would like to say that it was very much at the initiative of the Committee on Petitions that this report was drawn up .
I would like to pay tribute to the support given by the chairman of the committee , Mr Newman .
As regards the wording and terminology , we did go to some considerable trouble when having the report translated to have the correct title in each language .
This is important .
Some people may say it is not important but most people feel , as we know ourselves in terms of civil rights and terminology , that language really does matter in this area .
In all our translations of the report we have been very careful to monitor how it was translated .
I have presented to the Commissioner a large print copy of the report and would like to remind colleagues that it is available in this form in various languages .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 9.15 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I do have one comment on yesterday 's Minutes , and I will use this opportunity to raise a point of order , if I may .
During yesterday 's declarations of affection for President Hänsch , I paid careful attention to Mrs Green 's statement on behalf of the Socialist Group .
In particular , Mrs Green told us that she had discovered certain radical qualities in Mr Hänsch , for which I personally can only congratulate her , but she also said something else that intrigued me .
She referred to her Group 's discussions on the previous evening regarding the personality and style of Mr Hänsch 's successor .
Well , that surprised me very much .
I should like to remind the House that Rule 14 states that Parliament shall elect the president , not that the entry into office of our future president is to be the result of any nomination or appointment .
That has been noted , Mr Hory .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to point out to my colleagues the fact that all the political groups are perfectly entitled to issue an invitation to a presidential candidate and , of course , to discuss with him his views on what his future work will entail .
He may also be fortunate enough to discuss them with Mr Gil-Robles .
Under no circumstances will the Group of the Party of European Socialists let anything stop it from holding talks with potential candidates .
Madam President , I took particular note of that part of the proceedings .
Mrs Green referred to ' a potential successor ' , not to the President-elect .
Madam President , I refer to page 16 of the English version of the Minutes concerning the vote on my report yesterday .
Firstly , I want to correct the Minutes .
It states that the vote was 11 for and 184 against .
That is a slight understatement : it was 111 for and 184 against .
I know we lost the vote , but it was not that bad .
Secondly , I should like to ask you , Madam President , and the incoming President and the incoming Bureau , to look at the situation where a vote in progress is interrupted on the technical question of language versions not being complete .
This is a serious problem which could cause the work of Parliament to seize up , and the Bureau and perhaps also the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities should look into this .
Thirdly , I should like Parliament 's services and the Commission 's services to undertake as quickly as possible the translation of the original directive into Swedish and Finnish , which was the substance of the complaint , so that we can deal with this report as soon as possible in Parliament , and with this important question of labour legislation .
Finally , I wish to say to Mrs Lindholm , as I said to her afterwards , that I of course respect the principle of access in all languages .
I have discovered that she not only speaks perfect English , but actually teaches English .
She has read the report and fully supports it herself and was only making a point of principle .
I must say it was unfortunate that she chose my report about which to make it .
All those statements have been noted .
Madam President , may I say , for the benefit of Mr Hory , that the Minutes merely say that the Members who spoke were Mrs Green , chairman of the PSE Group , and the other group leaders who wished to pay tribute to the outgoing President and to thank him for the work he had done .
Mr Hory 's remark has nothing at all to do with the Minutes of yesterday 's sitting .
That makes sense .
That had nothing to do with the Minutes , but we have got into the habit of listening to comments from here and there for three or four minutes .
Madam President , through your good offices , I should particularly like to say good morning and welcome to Mrs Baldi and her substitute .
( Laughter and mixed reactions )
Madam President , I will not prolong this speech , but my intention was not sabotage .
It is true that I speak good English and it is true that I teach English , but I am not a lawyer .
The English that we use in school is not comparable with that used in legal texts - this is the point I wanted to make .
Madam President , I wish to table another amendment to the record of yesterday 's vote .
As recorded in the minutes , I took part in yesterday 's vote on the Collins report , but I see from the minutes that my name does not appear in the list of names recorded for the vote on Amendment No 42 , which is of particular importance for us .
While I acknowledge that this must not , of course , influence the vote , I should like it to be put on record that I wanted to vote in favour of this amendment , but it is possible that because of the turmoil that erupted during the vote yesterday - Madam President herself described the voting as chaotic at times - I activated the voting mechanism too late or there was a technical problem .
This applies also to my colleagues Mr Haber , Mr Raschhofer and Mr Lukas .
Madam President , on page 25 of yesterday 's Minutes , evening voting time , it says ' Mr Valdivielso de Cué ... queried the validity of a vote when certain versions of the report were not available ' .
I was referring to the Kerr report , as I thought the vote would be taken again .
My question was simply whether yesterday 's vote was valid or not , and if it was not valid , what we were basing ourselves on to invalidate what had already been debated and voted on .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Agenda
Madam President , in view of the heavy agenda and the fact that Commissioner Bonino is not with us , I can propose that we vote on the three reports ( Kofoed , Izquierdo Rojo and Souchet ) without debate , under Rule 99 of the Rules of Procedure , but that there should be a Commission statement on these points in January on the Thursday morning .
Madam President , the Socialist Group agrees with the proposal from the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I have absolutely no objection to the proposal that the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries has made .
However , I would point out that I have been waiting , along with other colleagues , since the middle of yesterday afternoon for a precious one minute of speaking time on those very important issues .
If this House cannot manage its own business , how on earth does it expect to be heard outside in any effective way ?
If anyone wishes to speak against that proposal , I shall give him the floor .
Madam President , on behalf of the Green Group , I should like to say that I do not agree with this proposal , because I feel that these are some of the most important documents for the future planning of fisheries in Europe and that it is therefore impossible to express the various positions that have emerged in committee and have been stated in this House .
For these reasons , I request that both the debate and the vote be postponed until January or at least , under Article 131 , that a discussion be held in January to clarify , and perhaps lead to a resolution on , the various aspects that cannot be covered because of the cancellation of today 's debate .
One speaker has spoken in favour of the proposal and one against .
I am therefore going to recall this proposal by the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Arias Cañete , and I shall invite the House to vote .
We are all very sorry that this extremely important debate could not take place yesterday , since it concerns the entire fisheries policy up until the year 2002 .
I shall therefore put Mr Arias Cañete 's proposal to the vote .
We will vote on these reports without debate , quite simply because we cannot conduct this debate on fisheries in the time available .
Therefore we will vote on these reports today , and we will arrange to ensure that a Commission statement , followed by debate , is included in the agenda for the January part-session , which would enable us subsequently to table a motion for a resolution .
We will vote on this request .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Madam President , on a point of order , I feel I have to take a stance here this morning on behalf of the smaller parties .
I have been ignored in this House all morning .
Is it because I come from a smaller group ?
Is it because I want to represent the interests of the fishermen , who have been afforded very low priority by this Parliament ?
Therefore , I am leaving this House in protest and in support of the fishermen I represent !
Although Mr Gallagher has left I shall still address my remarks to him , hoping that a member of his Group will be kind enough to pass them on .
In my capacity as a member of the Committee on Fisheries , I have to acknowledge that Mr Gallagher is a very active member and a staunch defender of his fishermen .
I must give him credit for that .
Now , in my capacity as President , I have had to apply our Rules of Procedure : one speaker for the proposal , one against and then a vote .
There was no intention to prevent Mr Gallagher from expressing his opinion .
Madam President , this incident with Mr Gallagher is worth noting .
I advise all Members who have an early morning plane to catch on a Friday to claim they are protesting about some decision in Parliament .
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Wijsenbeek and this House for noticing that I really am here .
Madam President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I want to mention that yesterday we had an incident which has not been resolved and was one of the reasons for the delay in yesterday 's work .
This was the violation of Rule 117 on the right to vote , by virtue of which Members vote individually and personally .
There was a card vote from Mrs Baldi when she was not present , and that gives rise to the application of paragraph 1 of Rule 110 .
Parliament will have to take a decision at a time to be determined by the President .
I would like to know what action the Presidency has taken on this .
Yesterday the matter was left unresolved .
On that point , I believe , in fact I am certain , that in a statement yesterday the President of the sitting proposed that this matter should be referred to the Bureau for consideration .
That is what appears in the Minutes .
Madam President , on this point , I wish to ask that the matter be referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
I have in front of me Rule 162 - Application of the Rules of Procedure .
Nowhere in the eight paragraphs is there any mention of the Bureau .
It only states that application of the Rules is a matter for the Rules Committee .
I should like to ask that this matter be referred to the Rules Committee .
Mr Ford , it is not up to me as President today to change a decision that was taken by the House .
So the Bureau will consider it , and I think the Bureau in its wisdom will not go against our ruling and will consider it , wouldn 't you agree ?
Votes
Madam President , Mrs Bonino would have liked to say yesterday what I am going to say today , on her behalf , in this House .
In view of the state of progress of the proposal , which is to be examined , in particular , at the Fisheries Council on 20 December , the Commission prefers not to reply immediately to this request .
I can confirm that Mrs Bonino will be very happy to take part in a debate on the issue in January , and she has also asked me to state very clearly that she hopes the debate will not take place at night .
Commissioner , you can assure Mrs Bonino that the Chair will see to it that this debate and the Commissioner receive better treatment in January .
Madam President , as rapporteur I listened to the Commission 's statement and I think we are basically in agreement .
I want to put it that way , because when we voted to reject this proposal we were primarily rejecting the method of working that the Council urged on us .
So I think this Commission 's position is basically the same as ours and we will be able to debate this or any other proposal with composure in January .
The oral amendment I am proposing would clarify the concept of ' geographical position ' in paragraph 2 of article 3 .
In fact the text would read as follows : ' To protect professional confidentiality of the data , ' geographic position ' will be understood to mean the area or sub-area , as applicable , the fishing vessel is in .
To this effect , the vessel 's computer system will incorporate a program which converts the geographic coordinates into area or sub-area values and this will be the information transmitted ' .
Mr Imaz San Miguel , I must ask you , and indeed all honourable Members , to have a little patience because that is quite different from the information I have .
We shall do the best we can .

Madam President , I understand Mr Imaz San Miguel 's proposal and attempt to improve upon the legislative proposal , but this is not now possible ; on behalf of the Socialist Group , I therefore oppose the oral amendment .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Madam President , I should like to point out that Mr Malerba , who was to present a report this morning , was involved in an accident last week .
I am glad to say the accident was not serious , but Mr Malerba has had to be admitted to hospital .
He has informed the administration .
I am sure we should all like to wish him a speedy recovery .
Thank you , Mr Pasty .
We certainly add our best wishes for Mr Malerba 's recovery .
On behalf of the PPE group I want to highlight the fine work carried out by Mr Kofoed , work not without difficulties because this is a very controversial matter as witness the debates not only in the European Parliament but also in the Council of Ministers and , of course , in the sector itself .
For all that , the compromise reached in the Committee on Fisheries has the merit of underlining the basic principles on which the fourth generation of multi-annual guidance programmes for the Community fishing fleets should be based .
Our group has never disguised its deep concern about the degree of deterioration in certain fish stocks in particular Community fishing grounds , necessitating a serious and determined policy geared to restructuring the fishing fleet to assist biological recovery of the species .
In this sense , we support a reduction in fishing capacity , which is justified not only for biological reasons , but also as a factor in improving the viability of the activity , the profitability of enterprises , and , finally , the competitiveness of the sector .
We also support the alternative measures proposed by the Commission , because they will increase flexibility , as long as these measures are mainly directed towards those fleets which have complied with the reduction objectives of earlier MGPs .
What should be very clear is that we cannot continue with the present policy in the future . This policy has resulted in majority and manifest non-compliance by numerous Member States .
The last balance sheet drawn up by the Commission is utterly discouraging : of a total of thirteen Member States , only four are complying with the assigned objectives for adapting their fleets .
This gives the states that are complying a growing feeling that their efforts and sacrifices to achieve the common objectives are useless .
And as we all know , these tensions are being expressed in the current debates inside the Council .
It is undeniable that a policy geared to the reduction of capacity is bound to have negative effects on employment .
That is the other side of the coin and we must deal with it seriously with socio-economic accompaniment measures which , Madam Commissioner , have hitherto been conspicuous for their absence .
This is the great gap in the Commission 's proposal and we must return to this issue which is also of the greatest concern to the sector . Because we can only deal with the social problem seriously if the Member States and the sector can be persuaded to cooperate in resolving the existing over-capacity .
Finally , it is important that the Commission tone down article 5 of its proposal , in the way the European Parliament has done , because management and conservation of resources outside Community waters is not in the power of the European Union and the fleets that fish external resources are subject to competition from other factors , like commercial , economic and even political interests , which play a major role in the adaptation of fishing capacity for this type of Community fleet .
Fish are a finite natural resource .
Fishing must be pursued with care taken to ensure that fish stocks are maintained long-term so that fishing can continue to be pursued by future generations .
A reduction in fishing and compensation for this is necessary to preserve the natural resources and stocks .
It is important that everyone adheres to the regulations and that no further action is taken against fisherman , who have already limited their fishing .
The report is a step in the right direction so I have voted yes .
It is necessary to oppose the MAGP proposals to allow first of all for time for the long-term implications for the industry to be worked out ; and secondly for the vexed questions of quota hopping , flags of convenience , and the size of the UK shipping region to be sorted out .
Hence my vote to reject the report outright .
It was equally necessary for Parliament to throw out the technical measures proposals ( Izquierdo Rojo report ) and for similar reasons to Kofoed .
The Izquierdo Rojo report and amendments reached the Committee on Fisheries in translation very much at the eleventh hour .
Yet this is an immensely technical subject , with knock-on effects from every proposed change .
That is why I tabled the amendment for rejection and was delighted that the Fisheries Committee passed it unanimously .
I am very pleased that Parliament has followed suit .
Now we will have an opportunity for proper debate on the revised proposals in January and time too for consultation with the industry .
As far back as 1991 the European Commission estimated , in a report to this Parliament on fishery resources , that European Union fishing grounds could yield an extra 2 , 500 million pounds worth of fish annually if the resource was managed properly .
This means that the fish yield in any one year could be 50 % more than it actually is .
In other words our fishing communities could be much more prosperous than they are today if we can succeed in putting together an acceptable package providing effective management of the resource and maximizing yield .
The Commission has now proposed to reduce the fleet and improve controls .
Reform is necessary but the Commission has only provided a partial solution .
Even if the Commission proposals are accepted in full , and this is unlikely , there would be enough fishing capacity available to continue overfishing .
We need the cooperation and goodwill of the fishing industry if any plan is to succeed .
I believe we need a ten-year plan with greater compensation provided for reduced capacity both for small boat owners and those who would lose their jobs .
The PESCA programme is underfunded and should be focused more on the fishing communities and on those who are actually losing their jobs in the fishing industry .
A much bigger budget is needed if we are to attract the support of the industry .
In my view a 30 % increase would be required to establish an enforceable programme acceptable to the fishing industry .
Implementing such a strategy would maximize stocks and retain the necessary capacity and jobs to catch and process a sustainable catch .
The industry would then be profitable with a reliable future able to function without further subsidy .
Unfortunately our present budget is inadequate to achieve this aim .
We are voting for the Kofoed report for four reasons :
1.It rejects the Commission proposal where it imposes the rigid reduction of capacities ( i.e. in promoting new boat reductions or reductions in fishing fleets as high as 40 % in the case of sardine fisheries in Portugal ) .2.On the other hand there are clear consensuses on the scarcity of resources and the on-going monitoring of their evolution , on impartial and effective controls of fish stocks , on a management of activities and techniques , on the need to defend coastal non-industrial fisheries , or on the attention to be paid to whoever has or has not complied with the reductions planned in MAGP III.3.It is also clear that renewed management of fisheries calls for as assessment of the social impact and additional financial means , whether Community or national , to deal with the loss of income resulting from the willingness of fishermen to introduce new methods.4.It is also clear that it is possible to manage without attacking jobs or putting at risk the social stability of certain communities or affecting productive capacities .
What will tomorrow 's fishing fleet be ?
That is the subject of this fourth restructuring plan , christened MAGP IV .
Supported by scientific studies , this plan proposes that the fishing effort should be reduced by an average of 40 % between now and the year 2002 to allow the reestablishment of stocks .
Can this objective be achieved by an identical reduction in our fishing fleets ?
We all know that that is out of the question , bearing in mind the economic and social consequences it would have for our sea fishermen and the whole fisheries industry .
Less fishing , sometimes , but better fishing too , with the right market prices for quality products : that is the pact of confidence we could offer our fishermen if we had the resources to do so .
It is illogical to see prices falling from year to year at a time when we want to reduce catches .
Falling volumes and falling prices is too much to ask of the profession .
You know my views on this .
Better fishing for the sustainable husbandry of the sea , calls for satellite monitoring , selective equipment , the protection of young fish , control of fishing time at sea in order to retain a European fishing fleet ; restoring employment as a central focus of our political concerns : these are the priorities by which we should be guided .
With that in mind , I endorse your proposal that the small-scale fishing fleet should be retained as it stands for vessels of under 7 metres , as the Commissioner suggests , while Parliament is asking that all vessels up to 12 metres be spared .
This restructuring plan must take account of specific national and regional features , such as the wide diversity of fishing activities in my own country .
What may be right for the North Sea is not necessarily right for the Bay of Biscay .
This fourth restructuring plan calls for substantial budgetary resources to finance social and structural solidarity measures .
We can propose this contract to the fishermen up until 1999 .
It 's up to them to share this responsibility .
The Community 's fishing fleet is not , as it would appear from the Commission 's introduction to the proposal for the Council 's resolution with respect to the restructuring of the Community 's fishing sector , responsible for the overfishing of resources ; it is the Community 's fishing policy which bears this responsibility .
There is , in particular , a need to reduce the size of the fleet in the individual maritime areas and to reduce the size of the individual vessel categories which can ensure the sustainability of fishing activities .
With respect to the Community 's ' relations with countries outside its borders , however , it is relevant to ensure that there is no connection between the contemplated restriction of vessel categories and the vessel categories , if an attempt is now being made to promote a number of arrangements with development countries in the area of fishing agreements which the EU Commission is neither in the process of , nor contemplating , carrying out .
To put it another way , it is necessary to ensure that , in reality , the EU is not simply engaged in the exportation of EU cutters ' overfishing to the waters of countries outside its borders .
It is necessary to ensure sustainable fishing activity in EU waters , but this also applies , and is particularly relevant , to small coastal fishermen in many developing countries .
I have chosen not to vote in favour of the Kofoed report because sustainable fishing stocks must be guaranteed as soon as possible .
Before the technical measures which were found unacceptable as they stand by the Committee on Fisheries , the Commission is now proposing a restructuring programme which is equally unacceptable , envisaging a 40 % reduction in the European fishing fleet over five years .
What profession could accept such a destructive , cold and technocratic approach ?
Even for tactical reasons , one cannot play games like this with the future of an entire occupational group .
The Committee on Fisheries has adopted 42 amendments .
In other words , it has radically revised the content of the text presented by the Commission .
I should take this opportunity to thank our rapporteur , and Mr Arias Cañete , as chairman , who have enabled particularly important improvements to be made to the initial proposal .
Four essential points have been integrated into the report by way of amendments tabled by me :
limiting the programme to 31 December 1999 instead of 2002 ; -taking account of the constraints associated with multi-species fisheries and multi-functional fleets ; -the elimination of discrimination between static gears and towed gears ; -taking into account of the social impact on employment aboard ship and on land.Amendments Nos 43 and 44 , taking into account the rate of utilization of each Member State 's quota and incorporating the amendments I had tabled in committee , seem to me just as important .
After all , taking this parameter into account would avoid any speculation regarding the purchase of vessels between Member States with a view to unofficial quota transfers .
I regret that these amendments were not adopted .
So , heavily amended though it is , the Commission 's proposal is still unacceptable .
That is why I , and my group , opposed the amended proposal and the legislative resolution .
The Common Fisheries Policy must no longer be conceived as a form of palliative or euthanasia .
It must be designed to guarantee the long-term survival of a profession and an industry that are essential to the future of our countries and our societies .
On behalf of the Green Group , I wish to support the Commission 's proposal concerning the objectives and detailed rules for restructuring the Community fisheries sector for the period 19972002 ( MAGP IV ) .
The MAGP III programme failed to reach the objectives set because the compromise that was reached limited its scope from the outset and because various Member States failed to comply with their commitments .
The reductions proposed by the Commission for MAGP IV are the absolute minimum required if fish stocks are to be replenished ; if these guidelines are not followed , the already dramatic situation of fishermen is bound to get worse in many regions in the long term .
In the short term , however , given the reductions being proposed , there is a need to establish appropriate compensation for fishermen .
For these reasons , the Green Group opposes the Fisheries Committee 's proposal and proposes that the Kofoed report be rejected .
Nor do we support the Fisheries Committee 's decision to reject the legislative proposal concerning the regulation laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources ( Izquierdo Rojo report ) .
Finally , we should like to say that we shall be voting in favour of the Souchet report , since we feel that continuous satellite monitoring of fishing-boats would be useful , though we share the concerns expressed by the rapporteur regarding the date on which the regulation would come into force and the economic issues associated with that decision .
The main task of the Joint Fisheries Policy must be to manage fish stocks in a responsible way .
This is why it is important to take appropriate action to reduce the European fishing fleet when there are ecological reasons for doing so .
To base reductions on very general categories , as proposed by the Commission , has a particularly severe affect on the flexible Swedish fleet .
A relatively large proportion of the Swedish fleet will fall into the group hit by the greatest demands for reduction , despite the fact that there is no ecological justification for this as they also fish other stocks .
It is most important to ensure that the reductions take place in a way which reflect the cutbacks already implemented by Member States and does not therefore , favour those countries which reached their previous quotas .
I would like to conclude by emphasising that any compensation proposed to lessen the social and economic effects of this necessary restructuring of the fishing industry must of course be settled through a redistribution of funds within the existing budget .
European policy measures are necessary to prevent overfishing .
The starting point in this is to decide the quantities of fish which can be caught .
Fishermen are encouraged , using multiannual guidance programmes ( MAGPs ) , to tailor their capacity to these quotas .
The MAGPs are thus not an end in themselves but simply a means to enable the fleet to tailor its size to the amount of fish that can be caught .
This means that the profitability of the various fleets must be a central factor in determining the MAGPs .
For some fleets reducing the number of ships is the only way to remain profitable .
Other fleets are economically able to meet the catch restrictions by cutting down on fishing effort .
The Dutch rules on days at sea are a good example of this .
It is a good thing that the Commission leaves room , in its proposals for the fourth MAGP , for rules of this kind .
But it defies belief that the Commissioner is currently not prepared , in evaluating the third MAGP , to acknowledge the successes which the Netherlands has recorded using its own system of management .
I also regret the fact that in setting the percentage cuts for the next six years the Commission has been guided primarily by the biologists ' figures .
The economic and social implications need to be weighed too .
I thus endorse the rapporteur 's suggestion that we should wait for the opinion of the Scientific , Technical and Economic Committee on Fisheries before taking a final decision on the percentage cuts .
I have difficulty too with the Commission 's proposal to exclude small-scale fisheries from the cuts .
We must not forget that these fishermen usually fish in the ocean 's nurseries .
These spawning grounds in particular need extra protection .
If , as the rapporteur suggests , the maximum length of ships not subject to the cuts is increased from 7 to 12 metres , the burden of the cuts will rest unfairly heavily on the larger ships .
Lastly I agree with the rapporteur that subsidies to build new ships must be ended as soon as possible .
Existing programmes covering the period up to the end of 1999 must be amended accordingly .
On the one hand we are phasing something out by means of subsidies , whilst on the other hand we are encouraging it again using money from the same European pot .
That is totally unacceptable .
Souchet report ( A4-0366 / 96 )
The Commission has put forward a costly proposal for a satellite monitoring system .
The Committee on Fisheries and the European Parliament have decided not to try to get the Commission to listen to reason .
On the contrary , it seems to want to increase the cost of the Union even more .
Of course I can see the great benefits of the proposed system but strongly doubt whether these benefits outweigh the huge costs involved .
Instead of starting with this large scale project , we ought to begin with a more limited trial .
This could be evaluated and then we could decide whether to proceed .
For the above mentioned reasons I have decided not to vote for the proposal .
Banotti report ( A4-0391 / 96 )
I welcome the initiative by the Committee on Petitions and the Banotti report as well as the excellent cooperation among members of the Intergroup on the Disabled in which we both took part and which greatly improved the report .
Point A of the preamble and points 4 and 8 were proposed , through me , by Portuguese NGOs which thus were able to take part in the drafting of the report .
I emphasize the crucial point of enshrining in the Treaty a ban on discrimination for reasons of disability and regret the objection raised by certain Governments because this clause would have practical effects , with economic or financial repercussions in the EU .
I propose that we continue down the road towards close cooperation with disabled persons ' NGOs when defining European policies that affect them .
This is a requirement of equal opportunities , citizenship and democracy .
Products subject to excise
The next item is the report ( A4-0408 / 96 ) by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Directive ( COM ( 96 ) 0548 - C4-0619 / 96-96 / 0266 ( CNS ) ) amending Directive 92 / 12 / EEC on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the holding , movement and monitoring of such products .
Madam President , I should like to begin by discussing briefly the exemptions from duty for tourists travelling to the Scandinavian countries and , in particular , the quantity restrictions on alcohol .
First I wish to point out that we were consulted on this matter extremely late .
I know difficult negotiations between the Member States were necessary , but I have also established that this is not the only case in recent times where Parliament has been consulted extremely late .
I should like to point out that we have acceded to this urgency only because it really is an important question and because if we did not do so a legal loophole would open up ; however , we expect more account to be taken of Parliament 's rights next year .
I should like to discuss a second aspect of this proposal which we consider to be important , namely the question of reducing controls within the European Union .
This week we have passed important resolutions on improving controls on the European Union 's external frontiers , and we stand by our views that border controls should definitely be abolished within the European Union .
We consider this aspect of the proposal to be particularly important .
Thirdly , however , I should like to point out that this is also a question of special regional features .
There are huge variations in drinking habits in the different EU Member States .
During the committee 's deliberations , a Finnish colleague illustrated this very clearly .
He said he himself had experience of working in the forests , where the Finns are accustomed to eating bacon washed down with vodka .
He said it had now dawned on them that it might be healthier to eat salad and drink wine , but that the change was rather slow .
In this Parliament we have always held the view that we should take account - and I say this in all seriousness - of the special regional features of the different EU Member States .
I therefore believe that we should do so in this case too and propose that we vote in favour of the Commission 's proposal .
Madam President , I echo the remarks of the chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , Mr von Wogau , with regard to the procedure in this matter .
It is extremely unsatisfactory , in parliamentary terms , to find ourselves so late in the year and with so little time to consider this matter , to be bounced into a position which , in effect , represents a fait accompli .
I would certainly urge the Commission to ensure that somehow or other Parliament is more closely involved , when we can anticipate changes like this without , of course , transgressing on the Commission 's own proper function in respect of executive decisions and negotiations with the various Member States on the detailed aspects of the proposals .
Secondly , we already know that the vote which we are about to take in favour of the Commission 's proposal has , in fact , has already been bypassed by a political understanding in Ecofin .
Effectively what we are voting for is something which will not , in fact , be the law after Ecofin has made its changes .
I make this appeal for the record : even though this is only an opinion , Ecofin might show some courtesy to Parliament by meeting with us so that we can register with them too our concern that we should be properly consulted .
Finally , I am very pleased that Mr von Wogau has shown , as chairman , how closely he listens to people who have worked in Finnish forests and have had to drink vodka , and so on .
I am sure when I bring forward the concerns from Ireland and my constituency , I can rely on him displaying his acute listening skills and showing the same sympathy .
Madam President , the representatives of the Suomen Keskusta party are pleased that agreement has been reached between Finland and the Union on maintaining the current restrictions on imports of alcoholic beverages until the end of 2003 .
I hope that the negotiations to be held with Sweden in the year 2000 will result in a system of exceptions extending beyond this date , which according to the agreement now reached should also benefit Finland and Denmark .
I have always believed that policies on taxation and alcohol are matters for the Member States rather than the Union .
However , as there is a possibility that restrictions on the import of alcoholic beverages into the Nordic countries may be considerably relaxed , we must inject more urgency into the debate on taxation of alcohol in the EU Member States .
In my opinion the Nordic model is good .
We tax alcohol relatively heavily , which both brings in a good deal of tax revenue for the state and curbs the excessive consumption of alcohol .
If we had to make do without this revenue it would be impossible to find alternative sources in a situation in which it ought , on the contrary , to be possible to reduce various taxes .
The fall in revenue would therefore mean further expenditure cuts , which would have to be applied , inter alia , to social security and health care and which would inevitably increase unemployment .
I therefore recommend that measures be adopted in the Union to raise taxes on alcohol considerably .
This would generate extra revenue in countries which currently have low alcohol taxes , which could be used , inter alia , to reduce other taxes .
At the same time the damage caused by alcohol could be reduced throughout the Union , as could the resultant social and health care expenditure .
Madam President , I should first like to thank Parliament for accepting our request that this proposal be treated as urgent ; in particular , I should like to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and its chairman , Mr von Wogau .
I am aware , as Mr Cox has pointed out , of the difficulties Parliament has had to overcome to take a very rapid vote .
The Commission 's intention to submit a proposal on this matter was announced in the 1996 programme .
Before submitting its proposal , the Commission held negotiations with the Scandinavian countries to ensure that any extension were kept to the strictly necessary minimum .
The Commission tried to submit a proposal that would not be opposed by the Member States concerned ; it is only very recently that it has managed to reach agreement on a balanced solution with two of the Member States in question .
This helps to explain the background of the difficult practical situation in which Parliament was left . Once again , I should like to express my thanks to Parliament for having overcome that difficulty .
The Commission feels the proposal represents a good compromise .
Mr Väyrynen has already described the specific needs and difficulties of the Member States in question .
It is a good compromise between citizens ' legitimate expectations of the Single Market and the practical need for Denmark , Sweden and Finland to have longer to comply with the general provisions of Community directives .
The reasons for the exemption initially granted are already known and I see no point in going over them again .
Since the exemptions concern a fundamental right of European citizens , these provisions have been time-limited , although the wording of Article 26 is not clear and there is some disagreement as to the correct interpretation of the deadline .
However , irrespective of the precise wording of Article 26 , the Scandinavian countries need more time to comply with Community provisions ; this is further emphasized by the fact that there has not been the programmed increase in minimum excise quotas , which was expected when the exemptions were granted .
As a result of this , we have proposed an extension of the deadline beyond 31 December 1996 , together with - and this is very important - a gradual liberalization , a gradual phasing-out , of current restrictions .
I hope that Parliament will vote in favour of this proposal today , so that the matter can be dealt with by the end of the year , in order to avoid any legal problems .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Support for beef and veal sector
The next item is the report ( A4-0407 / 96 ) by Mr Funk , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture , on the proposal for a Council Regulation providing for additional measures for direct support of producers ' incomes or for the beef and veal sector ( COM ( 96 ) 0606 - C4-0650 / 96-96 / 0286 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , the BSE crisis has caused serious distortions in the beef and veal market .
Declining consumption and falling prices pose an enormous threat to the livelihood of many beef and veal producers .
The Commission and Council have therefore initiated a number of measures to protect consumers , to restore confidence in beef and veal and to support the market .
At its meeting of 28-30 October 1996 the Council agreed on additional measures for direct support of producers ' incomes or for the beef and veal sector amounting to ECU 500 million , to be distributed among the Member States in accordance with an agreed key .
The Commission was asked to find the ECU 500 million in the agricultural budget .
With this proposal for a regulation the Commission has complied with the Council 's request to provide this support package .
I welcome the Council 's and Commission 's readiness to take emergency measures to help those who have suffered losses .
Of particular importance in this context is the fact that the Member States are authorized to make the additional payments to support producers ' incomes or the beef and veal sector .
The Member States have asked to be allowed to make their own decisions on payments and to compensate those producers who have suffered the greatest losses , in order to avoid simply distributing the money in such a way that everybody gets a slice of the cake .
I advocate approval of the Commission proposal as it stands .
I should like to point out that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has approved the proposal , with only one member voting against it .
I would also like to mention that the Commission proposals for financing the stabilization of the beef and veal sector in 1997 and 1998 were submitted to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development of the European Parliament for its opinion .
The committee has , however , asked the Commission to withdraw its current proposals and submit instead , as soon as possible , a proposal relating solely to financing in 1997 .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has made this request because it is not prepared for the time being to give the Council a blank cheque , as it were , for decisions on financing these measures in 1998 by delivering an opinion on the current Commission proposals .
These decisions should , rather , be taken by the European Parliament as a whole during the deliberations on the 1998 budget .
Madam President , on behalf of the PSE I would like to thank Mr Funk for the very swift and efficient way in which he worked to produce both his reports on the proposals to safeguard farm incomes put in jeopardy as a result of consumer resistance to eating beef and veal following the statement admitting the possibility of a link between BSE in cows and CJD in humans .
This will be very welcome to those farmers whose livelihood has been very precarious over the last eight or nine months .
Of even greater importance in the longer term is the complete eradication of BSE .
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the rumours - which I hope prove to be true - that the UK Government is about to implement the additional cull and really take seriously the need to eradicate BSE completely .
Only then will the market in beef and veal fully recover , and our farmers will again have an assured income .
Madam President , our Group supports Mr Funk 's report and I endorse Mr Goepel 's statement .
I want to draw attention to another matter , namely that I have the impression that the Committee on Agriculture has become rather more self-assured .
Perhaps that has something to do with the committee of inquiry , which refused to deal with the Commission 's proposal which suggests ways of guaranteeing this funding by making cuts in other areas .
Had we rejected this Commission proposal , as suggested by Mr Funk , the Council would still have been able to take a decision , since we have only a consultative role , under Article 43 .
Consequently we did not deal with it , which means that the Council cannot implement these proposals or take any other decision .
We shall be involved in this process too .
The Commission will submit a new proposal to us , and then we shall consider how the CAP should evolve .
Madam President , in order to provide compensation for some of the losses suffered by producers as a result of the mad cow crisis , the Council and the Commission had proposed amendments to three Regulations .
The first related to the ' beef and veal ' measures , the second to financing and the third to structural measures for young farmers .
The Council had requested the urgent procedure so that the measures could come into force quickly .
Parliament only accepted the ' beef and veal ' measures , without pronouncing on their financing .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Budgets , however , rightly declared in due course that it was irresponsible to vote in favour of the ' beef and veal ' measures but to refuse any arrangements for financing them .
We , for our part , oppose the idea that the financing of the ' beef and veal ' measures must be entirely compensated by the cereals sector .
After all , the problem of mad cow disease is not connected with the responsibility of the farmers but that of other economic operators in certain Member States , together with various malfunctions on the part of the Commission .
I therefore welcome the proposal before us today .
It shows that it was ultimately possible to find 500 million within the budget , without penalizing other farmers .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , here we have the continuing saga of mad cow disease , ' Madman II ' , in the tradition of Rambo I , Rambo II .
' Madman ' follows the same pattern .
Following Volume I , written by the British and entitled ' I , the Poisoner ' , we now have Volume II , ' I , the Compensator ' .
In ' Madman I ' , compensation was provided by making the innocent pay - reducing the compensation paid to cereal farmers and to growers of oil seed crops , and reducing the set-aside premium .
Incidentally , the contract represented by the CAP was called into question for good measure , but none of that mattered very much , if I may venture to say so .
Now , ' Madman II ' begins with the discovery , at the back of a drawer , of ECU 500 million .
There will , incidentally , be ECU 117 million for France .
So much the better , glad to hear it , nothing against that .
The only problem , if I can put it like this , is that we are beating about the bush , or rather the bull , shirking the question of responsibility .
This is a political problem , not a technical , budgetary one .
It is a problem of identifying the people responsible and holding them liable .
First , there is the responsibility of the meal manufacturers .
I 've said it before and I say it again , we know who was poisoning the whole of Europe .
It was Demulder Brothers of Doncaster , Yorkshire .
Incidentally , a small delegation from the committee of inquiry went to meet with Demulder Brothers .
Those people should have helped to compensate for the damage they caused .
Then there is the responsibility of the British Government , which said nothing and let them get on with it . All it did was to prohibit those meals in its own territory in 1988 , but allowed them to be exported so that they could poison others !
Then there is the responsibility of the British Members of Parliament .
We saw them in action here yesterday . They are fantastically keen-sighted , able to see from 40 metres away whether another Member is voting once or twice or three times .
With that vision , how did they fail to see that there were 160 , 000 cattle dying ?
How did the eagleeyed Mr Ford and the others fail to spot that mountain of dead cattle poisoned by their own meal ?
Another case of the proverb of the beam and the mote .
Well , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , obviously we 're all for this additional 500 million , but we still need , thanks especially to the committee of inquiry which refused to take evidence from Mr Delors - and that would take some doing , incidentally - we still need finally to pluck up courage to tackle the central problem : whose fault is it ?
And let the poisoners pay !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as I am sure you know , and as has indeed already been mentioned , at its meeting of 28-30 October in Luxembourg , the Council agreed on a package of emergency measures for the beef and veal sector .
In view of the continuing problems , in the context of this package additional direct income support for producers or the beef and veal market amounting to ECU 500 million was considered to be warranted .
With the regulation which is before you , the Commission has fulfilled its obligation to establish a legal basis for achieving that objective .
Hence the proposal provides for an additional support package of ECU 500 million for the beef and veal sector .
Each Member State will receive its share of the 500 million package in accordance with a distribution key which has also already been agreed in Luxembourg .
It is being left up to the Member States to decide whether to use their share of the aid to support producers ' incomes or in a more concentrated way , to support the beef and veal sector in general .
We hope that in this way the financial support will reach those worst affected by the crisis .
I should like to conclude by thanking Parliament for treating this proposal as urgent , so that its opinion will be known before the next Council of Agriculture Ministers , which will meet on Monday and Tuesday of next week .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Common organization of the market in bananas
The next item is the report ( A4-0337 / 96 ) by Mr Santini , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 404 / 93 on the common organization of the market in bananas ( COM ( 96 ) 0082 - C4 / 0233 / 96-96 / 0080 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , behind the technical and economic reasons underlying the need to reform Regulation 404 / 93 , Mr Santini 's report reveals numerous factors which undeniably contribute to complex sets of problems mingling social and employment policy , foreign policy and even matters arising from news stories or civil war .
This derives especially from the economic importance of bananas , the leading commodity in the world fruit and vegetable economy .
Three sources of supply characterize the form of the Union banana market : Community production , ACP production and production in dollar zone countries .
On the balance between these three sources depend the future of the market and the destiny of many producing regions , but that balance is lacking .
Today , the banana market is going through a deep-seated crisis .
The oversupply of the Community market with bananas from the dollar zone has caused prices to collapse , the main sufferers being Community and ACP bananas , pressurized by two main factors : higher production costs and a weaker commercial organization .
What we are seeing today , then , is an unequal struggle between a coalition of two big multinationals , aiming to monopolize the world market of which they already control 80 % , having previously monopolized the American market and invaded the European market to the extent of 70 % .
An unequal struggle , then , between these two giants on the one hand and the European producers and their historical allies on the other .
A market organization cannot attach priority to financial interests when such objectives are at stake .
To provide the necessary protection , the following measures are essential . First , we must reject any increase in the quota beyond 2 , 300 , 000 tonnes ; secondly , we must maintain a tariff quota capable of guaranteeing a minimum price ; and thirdly , we must retain the present split which grants 30 % of the quota to Community and ACP banana operators , 66.5 % to the dollar zone operators and 3.5 % to the Latin American newcomers .
If we accept an increase in the quota - an increase as high as 3 million tonnes has actually been proposed - or change the present split it would amount to delivering the European market into the hands of the American multinationals and so sealing the doom of Community production .
In the interests of clarity and fairness , it is also necessary to revise the clause which provides that , when quotas are allocated , the two previous years should be taken into account if exceptional circumstances have had a heavy impact on the current season 's production .
It is unacceptable that , in that event , the policy of two weights , two measures should still be applied .
Assessing the exceptional character of any disaster is left to the discretion of the Commission which , hitherto , has only regarded it as applying to damage caused by hurricanes .
As far as Somalia is concerned , it can be argued that this country , still regarded as a traditional ACP State , has not ratified the Fourth Lomé Convention .
But who could have signed it , since the country was gripped by a civil war which has now reached the proportions of an endemic catastrophe ?
Of the 60 , 000 tonnes which had been assigned to it , Somalia has been able to guarantee barely one-third , and then under disastrous conditions of financial profitability .
Before the common organization of the market in bananas was introduced on 1 July 1993 , the market of the then twelve Member States was partitioned .
This situation was incompatible with the introduction of the single market .
To establish ground rules and harmonize the market , therefore , the European Union introduced the COM .
That arrangement , ladies and gentlemen , derives from a compromise which respects the balance between the interests of the various sources of supply , while taking due account of the Union 's prior commitments : Community preference , preferential access for ACP bananas and GATT rules for third countries .
The accession of the three new Member States , all of which imported bananas from the dollar zone , was reflected by an increase in the quota by 350 , 000 tonnes to allow for those countries ' internal consumption . This allowance is now recognized to have been excessive .
Without amending the Council Regulation on the COM in bananas , the Commission saw fit , during 1995 , to increase the tariff quota for dollar zone bananas to 2 , 553 , 000 tonnes .
Today , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is asking us to approve , apart from other minor points in the text , changes in two major areas which characterize the very existence of the COM in the banana sector : the tariff quota for the dollar zone and the distribution of import licences .
On analysing the way in which this COM functions following these provisional changes , we regret to note the following facts : the volume proposed by the Commission in 1995 is excessive in terms of the European Union 's consumption requirements , estimated at 4 million tonnes .
If the Commission 's proposal were to be ratified , the basic Regulation would permit the marketing of 4 , 264 , 700 tonnes , or approximately 265 , 000 tonnes more than the European Union has the capacity to absorb .
Even now , ladies and gentlemen , having regard to the statistics produced since the second half of 1995 , whereas Caribbean production is 270 , 000 tonnes below its authorized level because of natural disasters , the European market is in the grip of an unprecedented crisis , entirely attributable to a glut which is holding the market price in Europe down at its lowest ever level .
This situation cannot continue , because it is seriously disrupting the economic equilibrium of the European regions of the French West Indies , and also of several ACP States whose social equilibrium depends primarily on the banana business .
The crisis to which I refer , ladies and gentlemen , is a very real one where I come from , in Guadeloupe .
As I speak , planters in Guadeloupe have abandoned their fields to occupy the port of Pointe-à-Pitre , the key point in the island 's fuel supply , and other strategic points , resulting in the virtual economic paralysis of the region .
Their aim is to call attention to the difficulties they face as the situation continues to deteriorate , with the selling price of West Indian bananas below 2 francs a kilo as compared with a production cost of nearly 6 francs . The loss of income not compensated by the COM amounts , according to the growers , to 1.96 francs per kilo .
The West Indian producers are no longer able to keep their business going .
Some cannot even harvest their crops , because they are unable to pay their workers or buy packaging .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Community 's producers are expecting a major political gesture from us today .
They are hoping that the tens of thousands of jobs that depend on the banana crop and are now seriously at risk should be shown due consideration in our actions .
They also expect category B import licences to be maintained at the level of 30 % , to enable them to retain their presence in the Community market as a whole , and they hope that the tariff quota assigned to third countries will help to restore equilibrium to the market .
The application of the COM , which is a useful framework , has been reflected by a deterioration in the situation of the producers .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is contrary to the spirit and letter of the CAP and the COM .
Our production operations are struggling by comparison with bananas from the dollar zone in the entire European market .
This , too , is contrary to the very principle of Community preference .
Madam President , after 14 months we are again debating a proposal to modify the COM for bananas .
In reality , the arguments put forward in October 1995 remain valid .
So we support Mr Santini 's report , especially in the terms set out by Mr Aldo a few moments ago and in line with the report approved by the Committee on Agriculture , which coincides with the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , for which I am rapporteur .
Certain new facts have arisen during 1996 .
As Mr Aldo said , there has been a surplus of bananas on the European market , causing prices to fall in some Member States , with serious damage to certain European regions , specifically the French overseas territories , and certain ACP countries .
That should not surprise us given that the Commission had already been warned about it in this very forum .
Furthermore , Ecuador and other countries , including the United States , have complained to the World Trade Organization .
Bear in mind that the United States is not a banana-producer and is representing the interests - doubtless legitimate - of the American multinationals which trade in the banana-dollar .
But the ACP countries have not been allowed to represent themselves as affected third parties , so they do not have an equal right to defend their legitimate interests .
This situation violates the neutrality of the committee of experts and I want to emphasize that clearly .
Ladies and gentlemen , I therefore ask for a vote in favour of the report approved in the Committee on Agriculture on the understanding that this is the best way to defend Community law and the interests of European and ACP banana production .
Madam President , this European Community that we belong to is a little more complex than it might seem to be at first sight .
For example , we have just approved a regulation providing aid to continental Community producers affected by the BSE crisis .
But although the majority of the European population is found in what might be called central Europe or the European nucleus , the European Union also has certain regions which are a bit further away - the ultraperipheral regions - and I think Community solidarity requires that we also show support for these regions .
Actually , several million inhabitants of the European Community live in these regions , and currently rely on a regulation in the banana sector which protects banana producers .
Secondly , the banana regulation establishes protection for certain African , Caribbean and Pacific countries with which we have economic relations and which depend to a large extent on our protection .
So the regulation on the common organization of the banana market is not an arbitrary regulation but is aimed at achieving equilibrium between producers in the ultraperipheral regional and producers in the rest of the Community .
Any change in the established statute would greatly endanger the position of Community producers and producers in ACP countries with which we maintain relations .
So I think we need to be very careful in introducing changes of this kind .
Increasing the quotas every time there is an enlargement of the Community may effectively lead to the collapse of existing protection in the sector and even the disappearance of the current system .
So the Socialist Group joins previous speakers in supporting the report from the Committee on Agriculture , and opposes any increase in the quotas and any other change which could endanger the current system for regulating the banana sector .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have already spoken a number of times here in Parliament on the subject of the organization of the market in bananas , and perhaps I have sometimes conveyed my views rather forcefully .
I think we must all acknowledge that we can achieve our aims in this matter only by means of a compromise , and that we have to abandon extreme positions if we are to reach agreement .
I am pleased to be able to speak today , for the first time , on behalf of my Group , the Group of the European People 's Party , and to be able to submit a proposal for a compromise which will make itself felt in the vote .
It is not true that good bananas are produced in the ACP States and the European Union , and bad bananas in Latin America .
The situation is not as clear-cut as that .
Latin America too has small-scale producers who are hardhit by market regulation , because they do not have access to licences like multinational companies .
We must take these small-scale producers into account .
Therefore I ask you to vote in favour of Amendment No 12 , which I have introduced jointly with a number of colleagues from many different States .
To move on to the tariff quota , we have here two extreme positions , firstly the one which finds expression in Amendments Nos 10 and 11 , which provides for a drastic increase in the tariff quota , way beyond the Commission proposal .
This position is not so far-fetched , since it has also been adopted by a number of national delegations in the Council of Ministers .
The other extreme position finds expression in Amendment No 6 , put forward by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , namely that the tariff quota be retained .
It is true that we have a new situation here , since the three new Member States have hitherto imported only ' dollar ' bananas .
Thus we have two extremes .
The PPE Group will vote against Amendment No 6 , and the colleagues with whom I introduced Amendments Nos 10 and 11 will withdraw both these amendments .
In the interests of a compromise , I ask the whole House to join in voting against Amendment No 6 , so that we can really achieve unanimity on this difficult question .
Madam President , we are by now used to the proposals to change the COM for bananas which translate a systematic permeability to the interests of huge American multinationals and , it must be said , some of the major Community importers , mainly German .
Once again there is an attempt to destroy the existing balance struck in the share-out of the yearly import quotas , with once again an underhand attempt to include certain artificial types of crop , and a proposal for a continued and exaggerated increase in the levels of those quotas .
In the past 2.2 million tonnes a year were accepted instead of the 2 million previously accepted ; now there is a move to increase that to 2.533 million tonnes , reduced to 2.3 million in the Santini report ( which we shall be voting for as an alternative to the previous figure although we still are not satisfied , since it accepts , albeit at lower figures , the principle of increasing the quota ) .
However we do not seem to have a reply to the increase in domestic consumption through a real policy of promoting internal production which could be possible and there is no proposal to increase the incomes of Community producers who are also poor and experiencing great difficulties , although those Community producers are , for the most part , from ultra-peripheral regions from which I should like to pick out , for example , the French Overseas Territories , the Canaries and Madeira .
The proposals for a regulation that we have from the Commission are prejudicial against Community producers and ACP countries and overlook the principle of Community preference .
The amendments to the Santini report seek to avoid this prejudice but still do not manage in our opinion to defend in full the interests of the Community banana .
However we shall be voting for it unless Amendments Nos 10 or 11 are adopted since they propose a huge and inadmissible increase in the annual import quotas .
We are sure that the European Parliament is not going to go off its head and approve them .
Madam President , Mr Liese 's suggestion that we should think of the smaller banana producers in Latin America is a sensible one .
We have introduced a similar amendment .
It does not matter too much which one is carried .
But we do not agree with him on the subject of the quota .
Three million tonnes is sheer nonsense .
I am assuming that the committee 's proposal will be accepted .
However , it is much more important that the proportions allocated should remain the same with the new quantity .
In the Commission proposal the so-called dollar bananas are granted 70 % ( previously 66 % ) and the bananas from the other group of countries 26 % ( previously 30 % ) .
What matters here is that , whatever quota is arrived at , the quantities are allocated in the same way as before .
I should like to address the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development as follows : Mr Jacob , if this amendment is carried with the same shares as before , it is important for you , as chairman , to proceed to ask the Commission if it will accept this proposal , so that if it does not accept it , we can if necessary ask for the matter to be referred back to the committee ; in this way we can force the Commission to engage in negotiations on the way in which the proportions are allocated .
Mr President , speaking for myself , of course , but also speaking on behalf of my colleague Professor Castagnède , who is the greatest specialist in the banana market , I should like to express our firm rejection of the proposals made to us by the Commission and our equally firm support for the proposals submitted by our rapporteur .
Let me remind the House of the principles on which the common organization of the market in bananas was based .
First , Community preference .
Secondly , preferential access for the ACP countries .
And finally , but only finally , the GATT rules , the WTO rules as they are now , which apply to third country producers .
I cannot help wondering whether those principles are even being respected in the quotas that apply today : 850 , 000 tonnes for European production , 850 , 000 tonnes for the ACP and 2 , 200 , 000 tonnes for the reduced rights quota .
And now the Commission wants to make this situation worse .
It proposes to increase the reduced rights quota to 2 , 550 , 000 tonnes , plus a few , and within that quota to change the share-out between the Community ACP producers on the one hand and the third countries on the other .
Applying such proposals - since , as Mr Aldo most relevantly said recently , the Community 's requirements can be assessed at about 4 , 000 , 000 tonnes - would result in a sharp and lasting decline in prices , to the detriment of producers in the Union and their ACP partners .
I think we must reject these proposals categorically , bearing in mind that the debate relates to two conceptions of our European Union .
For our part , we give preference to the farmers defending our territory against the importers operating on the financial flows ; we give preference to the producers who create jobs rather than the dealers who make a living out of exploiting the unacceptable social conditions prevailing in third countries .
Over and above the market itself , the issue in this debate is , therefore , the ideology of free trade against a pattern of events which has a human scale and a human purpose .
That is why we will unconditionally support the position of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Mr President , whenever Community institutions discuss issues of development cooperation , there appears to be a unanimous wish to aid and promote the development of less advanced countries .
When it comes to discussing practical commercial issues , on the other hand , one gets the clear impression that it is other interests that prevail , in open contradiction of the need for development cooperation .
The case of the common organization of the market in bananas is perhaps the most typical example .
The European Commission 's proposals are very negative and threaten , once again , to favour only the interests of the major multinationals that control the European market for ' dollar-zone ' bananas and often practise ' dumping ' policies .
The attempt to increase out of all proportion the import quotas for third-country bananas , thus depressing the market and making production in the Community and ACP States definitively uneconomic , is unacceptable .
But we need to remember that the Commission has often shown itself to be discriminatory in its treatment of poorer countries and ACP States as well .
The Commission has never been prepared to recognize any ' force majeure ' concerning the crisis in banana production in Somalia , caused by the country 's well-known troubles , and yet it has reserved more favourable treatment for other traditional producers in the ACP States .
We , therefore , totally support the amendments proposed by the Committee on Agriculture , which make provision for fairer organization of the Community market and raising the value of production in the ACP countries .
We need , therefore , to provide producers and operators trading in ACP bananas with security , by fully consolidating their quotas and allowing supplies to be brought in from other countries until such time as normal production conditions are fully restored - as in the case of Somalia .
Finally , it is important to allow and encourage importation into the Union of a quota of bananas produced and sold within the framework of fair trade , and we therefore support the two amendments tabled on this issue .
Mr President , I should like first of all to point out the absence of Mr Mendonça , from Madeira , who should be speaking here today and not myself if it were not for an illness that has kept him away .
I wish him a speedy recovery .
The current banana COM was the fruit of one of the toughest rounds of negotiations in the Union 's history .
One country even went before the Court of Justice and its case was rejected .
The COM was intended to strike a balance on three levels :
guaranteeing access , at reasonable prices , to the Union market , for traditional suppliers , without jeopardising the reserve fro up and coming producers ; -guaranteeing priority access to ACP producers in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Lomé Conventions ; -guaranteeing Union producers income support to offset their higher production costs and guarantee them arrangements to make them more competitive.After so many disputes and difficulties , with so many political compromises , the Commission has now come along and for some unknown reason decided to destroy that balance , by increasing the banana / dollar quota by 4 % and reducing the ACP quota by the same amount .
The enlargement of the European Union by three new states does not justify , in any way , a 16 % increase in the quota nor should it shift the way in which the quota is shared out .
The amendments approved in the Committee on Agriculture sought to reestablish that very balance .
Therefore I call on my colleagues to support the excellent Santini report and the amendments by the Committee on Agriculture .
Mr President , as someone from a Community region where bananas are grown , namely Madeira , I cannot but disagree with the Commission 's proposal aimed at changing Regulation ( EEC ) 404 / 93 , establishing a banana COM , since it fails to take account of the interests of Community banana producers or those of ACP countries which have had persistent surpluses recently , given the high level of the annual quota .
The Commission 's latest proposal is mainly aimed at increasing that quota and sharing it among three types of operator , upsetting the current balance and will contribute to the loss of more jobs , generating social and political unrest , with especially negative effects on the ACP countries .
We would agree if the Commission had take account of the principle of Community preference and complied with its commitments to ACP countries as part of the Fourth Lomé Convention .
We would agree if it put more emphasis on environmental and ecological aspects , linked to local production , especially those which respect the landscape and environment , since both factors are vital for tourism , a very important industry in Madeira .
We would agree if the Commission had wanted to change the production support system , to make the compensatory amounts more flexible , based on a specific calculation that reflected each region 's production .
But since that is not the case , we are opposed to the Commission proposals ; we think they are premature and we have not even had the findings of the banana round-table which might make a good contribution to the future of the banana COM .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by expressing grateful thanks on behalf of the Commission to Mr Santini , although he is not present today , and to the committees which have again looked into the common organization of the market in bananas .
This is in fact the third time in 18 months that Parliament has been asked to deliver its opinion on an amendment to the common organization of the market in bananas .
The proposal which is before you today should be seen as an amendment to the 1995 proposal for a regulation .
At that time Parliament expressed its overall approval of the amendments put forward , together with a number of comments and requests for further amendments .
For technical reasons , the draft regulation contains several points which had already been proposed in 1995 .
One of these is the increase in the tariff quota to take account of the accession of the new Member States , which was accepted by Parliament in June 1995 .
The quota for the Community of the twelve was previously set at 2.2 million tonnes .
An increase restricted to 100 000 tonnes would clearly be inadequate to meet the additional requirement generated by the accession of the three new Member States , nor would it cover the traditional trade flows , estimated at 353 000 tonnes .
A quota amounting to 2.3 million tonnes is , therefore , both inadequate and unjustified , since it does not accord with the traditional trade flow .
This means that Amendment No 6 is not acceptable to the Commission .
Conversely , a tariff quota amounting to 3 million tonnes , as demanded in Amendments Nos 10 and 11 , would immediately result in a sharp and general drop in prices .
This would affect bananas from all countries of origin and would thus hit weaker producers particularly hard .
Amendments Nos 10 and 11 are therefore just as unacceptable as Amendment No 6 .
In addition to an increase in the tariff quota , the Commission proposes changing the way it is shared among the groups involved in the market .
This adjustment takes account of the supply structure of the three new Member States , which had previously imported neither Community bananas nor ACP bananas .
Thus it would be illogical to increase the allocation of import licences to Category B operators with the tariff quota .
The reduction in the tariff quota share for market participants who import Community and ACP bananas from 30 % to 26 % is simply an arithmetical operation and means that the absolute number of licences for Category B operators will not be reduced .
I can see no grounds , therefore , for Amendment No 7 , and I am also unable to accept Amendment No 1 , which is linked to Amendment No 7 .
Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 5 , 8 and 9 envisage special provisions for cases in which importers suffer losses owing to crisis situations in exporting ACP States .
These amendments are problematic for various reasons .
Firstly , it is not easy to delimit crisis situations precisely .
In such cases it is better to fall back on the concept of force majeure , for which there are legal precedents .
Secondly , the Commission has proposed measures for cases in which the import of ACP bananas is disrupted for reasons of force majeure , to ensure both that the market continues to be supplied adequately and that market participants affected are compensated .
Thirdly , in the event of disruption for reasons other than force majeure - if , for example , an ACP State is not in a position to export the full amount allocated to it for the year - a temporary reassignment is possible .
With regard to the particular situation in Somalia , let us not forget that it would be possible to consider temporarily reassigning the traditional quantities not imported .
Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 5 , 8 and 9 overlap with existing proposals .
I feel obliged to reject them for the reasons cited above .
Now I come to Amendments Nos 3 and 12 , which relate to production under environmentally and socially responsible conditions .
The consideration cited in Amendment No 3 is out of place in this draft regulation for formal reasons .
It would not be appropriate to carry it .
However , in terms of its content , the Commission acknowledges that this type of production deserves support .
At the same time , it is not possible to establish a special quota for so-called fair trade bananas , since this would contravene WTO regulations .
For this reason Amendments Nos 12 and 13 cannot be taken into consideration .
A more appropriate way to support fair trade bananas would be to encourage advertising campaigns on their behalf , aimed at European consumers .
The various options in this field have been thoroughly examined , and I hope they will soon lead to the introduction of concrete measures .
I know that Parliament sees this as an important issue , and I shall keep it informed of future developments .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Before we move to the vote , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf wishes to make a statement .
Mr President , I wish to announce that before the final vote on the legislative resolution I shall ask for the report to be referred back to committee , since I assume that Amendment No 7 will be carried and the Commission has declared that it will not accept Amendment No 7 , unless it declares after the vote , when the amendment has been carried , that it will accept it after all .
Then we shall be facing a different situation , but I did not want matters to move so fast that I was unable to intervene .
This is why I am making the announcement now .
Mr President , in view of the Commissioner 's refusal to accept the amendments , I wish to support the motion for referral back to committee .

Thank you , Mr Medina and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , for telling me in advance what you are going to do , but you will have to do it at the appropriate time .
We will now move to the vote on the amendments .
After approval of the Commission proposal :
Mr President , under Rule 129 of our Rules of Procedure and on behalf of my Group I request that the report be referred back to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Mr President , I want to confirm what I said earlier and support Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's proposal .
Mr Fernández Martín has the floor now to speak in favour of the request for referral back to committee .
Mr President , this is the same situation as we had in October 1995 , when Parliament voted the way that it has and the Commissioner rejected the amendments Parliament had voted for by a majority .
So to be consistent with that position , we are going to support referral back to committee .
Mr Liese has the floor to speak against the request for referral back to committee .
Mr President , I regret that I must contradict Fernández Martín , a fellow member of the PPE Group , but the position with regard to our Group 's decision was that we wished to reject the difficult Amendment No 6 .
Obviously , therefore , we cannot now support the referral because this amendment will not be accepted by the Commission .
It is sensible for Mr Fischler not to accept the amendment .
Therefore we are voting against the referral .
( Parliament decided to refer the report back to the committee responsible )
The Community Regulation instituting the COM in bananas takes account of the commitments entered into previously by the European Union ( Community preference , preferential access for ACP bananas , GATT rules applicable to third countries ) .
There are thus two parts to the COM :
an internal part which provides , for Community producers , a compensatory aid system intended to offset the net losses resulting from the departitioning of the market .
This aid is intended to limit to 854 , 000 tonnes the quantities that can be marketed for the Community producers , who include , among others , those in the French overseas departments ; -and an external part , which provides for a volume of 857 , 700 tonnes at zero duty for the traditional ACP States and a tariff quota of 2.2 million tonnes at reduced duty ( dollar zone bananas , in essence ) .Consequently , I voted in favour of Amendments Nos 3 and 7 .
I naturally voted against Amendments Nos 10 , 11 , 12 and 13 , whose only purpose is to encourage imports of dollar zone bananas to the detriment of European and ACP producers , to whom , may I remind you , we have commitments associated with our history and with our traditional and preferential trading relationships .
Is the principle of the ' acquis communautaire ' already a multispeed one , and is it not worth more in connection with our contractual commitments to our partners under the Lomé Convention ?
An increase in the custom 's quota is very much in the interests of the Swedish consumer .
We wish to see more free trade in bananas on the world market .
My aim is to ensure that the Swedish consumer be given a choice when they buy bananas .
They should be offered best quality bananas at the lowest possible prices .
Naturally , I also hope that consumers if they so wish , should be able to chose bananas which have been produced under the best possible ecological and social conditions .
There is every reason to complain about the EU 's current joint organisation for the banana market .
It is preposterous that the price of bananas has increased by 20 % in Sweden since we joined the EU .
The banana COM for which there is a proposal for changes to certain aspects of the regulation , has offered Community producers a precious and fair assistance keeping hopes alive of maintaining and improving this crop , bringing it up to acceptable yield levels .
A case of solidarity and economic and social cohesion well expressed through the principle of Community preference , a principle we would like to see extended , especially in relation to high quality crops , farming crops or not , in the ultra-peripheral regions of the European Union .
In my small island region , with a sub-tropical climate in part of its growing area , banana farming is of particular importance , not only because it involves over 8000 producers and an annual crop running into tens of thousands of tonnes , 20 % of the farming GDP , but also because the attractive plantations enhance the landscape , which attracts tourists to Madeira .
Madeiran producers , since Portugal joined the Union , applauded the COM but are now concerned that important into the Community might be increased , which would obviously overload the market with negative effects on their interests . They have asked for compensatory amounts to be increased and to be complemented so as to improve their meagre incomes .
We want to defend them and will fight for their rights .
By lending support to the Santini report which goes against Community banana growers and ACP producers , we hope that the Commission does not increase imports from third countries over and above 2.3 million tonnes - not justified at all by the entry of three new Member States .
We think that it is fair not to go along with the Commission proposal and to share out the import quota granted to third countries in accordance with Regulation ( EEC 404 / 93 , with a 30 % share for operators marketing Community bananas and / or importing additional ACP bananas ( category B operators ) since there is no justification in reducing their share of the market .
Community structural assistance for Ireland
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0284 / 96 ) by Mr G. Collins , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission decision on the establishment of the Community support framework for Community structural assistance for the Irish regions concerned by Objective 1 , which is the whole country ( C40037 / 96 ) .
Mr President , firstly I should like to express my gratitude to the members of the Committee on Regional Policy for their cooperation in producing this report .
I would like to thank all those who participated in the excellent hearing we had on this subject on 7 May .
In particular , I thank the Irish Minister for Finance for his contribution .
I was particularly pleased to note that , speaking at a recent European seminar in Ireland , the Minister shared all the essential conclusions of my report .
Both the first and second Community support frameworks confirm the policies of successive Irish governments .
Both CSFs confirm the efforts that have been made to pursuing economic and social development in order to attain the Community average and to meet the conditions for participating in EMU .
I fully approve the four priorities established by the second Community support framework for the period 1994-1999 .
It has to be said that both the first and the present CSF have been success stories for Ireland .
Over the period most , if not all , of the economic indicators have shown particular improvements .
Ireland 's economic growth increased on average to 5 % of GNP , the best performance of any Member State of the EU .
Employment rose by almost 2 % per annum and the balance of payments which was marginally in deficit in 1989 , was in surplus by 8 % of GNP in 1995 .
The budget deficit continued to decline to below 2 % in line with public borrowing .
While it is undeniable that the Irish economy has several key assets such as a young and active population , significant potential for tourism and a steady application of a rigorous and consistent national economic policy , we must not forget that various problems arising notably from the peripheral situation of the island and its low population density , the importance of its agricultural sector , the country 's dependence on foreign-owned companies and the weakness of its domestic industry all beset the economic and social development of Ireland .
I must emphasize that the actual incidence of long-term unemployment is much higher in Ireland than statistics show .
I cannot stress enough the imperative necessity both at national and Community level to make more effective inroads on unemployment , particularly long-term unemployment , during this period .
The Irish authorities must use the mid-term review to make urgent adjustments .
They must tackle the problem of unemployment headon .
The mid-term review must not be another missed opportunity .
We must strengthen interventions from both the European Regional Development Fund and the European Social Fund .
We must improve them in a way that enables measures to improve education and qualifications to be more effectively coordinated with job-creating investment .
I cannot emphasize enough the need to strengthen education and vocational training structures and significantly so , with the purpose of improving the level of qualifications achieved by young people .
I am only too aware that only the more highly qualified employees can take full advantage of the new job opportunities created through ERDF assistance .
The high level of school drop-outs and young men and women with no qualifications in Ireland is of particular concern to me .
I therefore call on the Irish authorities significantly to increase the number of training places for these young people .
Without well-grounded educational and initial occupational training , the danger of decline into long-term unemployment will increase enormously .
We cannot and must not let this happen .
I would like to see much stronger financial support for social infrastructure measures which would open up new education , training and employment opportunities for women , in particular for disadvantaged women .
In view of the strong presence of foreign interests in Ireland , we must improve the capacity of the domestic market .
In this context development and competitiveness of the small and medium-sized enterprises is essential .
My report also underlines the fact that it is crucial for Ireland 's economic and social future to develop and diversify its agricultural sector , hence the importance of the LEADER II programme ; modernize the fisheries section and aquaculture to restore their opportunities for development ; create new opportunities for the development and diversification of a year-round high-quality tourist industry ; and apply the principle of long-term environmentally acceptable development .
I emphasize that it is imperative that since Ireland is an island nation to make continuous progress towards the completion of the necessary road , rail , port and airport infrastructures .
Without economic and social cohesion we know there is no prospect of a viable EMU .
At the end of the present CSF in 1999 I have no doubt that there will be many regions in Ireland still needing significant assistance .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Irish authorities to guarantee that any region in the country still needing assistance in the post-1999 period will be fully assured of all the resources required to strengthen their economic and social cohesion .
For the future we need a new approach to the ERDF eligibility criteria for the Union in its present composition of fifteen Member States .
This is something that needs urgent examination by all concerned .
For my part there is no doubt that they must retain unemployment as one of the priority criteria .
Finally , my report is a new opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to the implementation of the peace programme for Ireland .
I stress the importance of cross-border cooperation between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland at both the economic and political level and I have no doubt of your support on this question .
Mr President , colleagues , I should like to restrict myself to the subject of the use of appropriations from the Social Fund .
If Social Fund appropriations have ever been used anywhere in a truly meaningful way , it is in Ireland , as this report shows .
That must again be stressed from the start .
For example , Ireland has used money from the Social Fund to enable young people in particular to receive a decent education and occupational training .
In addition , however , it has also opened up opportunities for the unemployed and the socially disadvantaged to access the labour market , by offering them further education and retraining measures with European aid .
But it is never true to say that there is no further room for improvement .
15 % unemployment in Ireland probably speaks for itself .
After all , we all know that a good education and good occupational training represent the best life assurance .
This is why I consider that the road the Irish government is going down here is the right one , and I should like to encourage the Irish government to continue down this road , particularly given the fact that over 20 % of young people in Ireland drop out of school and are then usually unable to obtain a job or a training place later .
These school drop-outs later make up the bulk of the long-term unemployed .
Therefore it is doubly important to do even more .
Also , as the rapporteur has already said , it is essential for us to do more to improve the opportunities for women .
Only 32 % of women are in paid employment , which is over 10 % below the EU average .
As for the percentage of women in initial occupational training , I do not wish to say much about this at all .
Women account for under 2 % of apprenticeship training places , and in all honesty it is a joke that a mere 0.4 % of Social Fund appropriations are earmarked for special measures to promote equal opportunities for women .
While the mainstreaming of promotion of equal opportunities for women introduced into the structural funds in 1994 is important , it is not enough in this context .
Special programmes to promote equal opportunities for women are therefore imperative .
If you will forgive my saying so , when we are given an opportunity to instigate a preventive labour-market policy , we should take full advantage of it .
It is precisely the need to adjust workers ' qualifications in line with new profiles and manufacturing processes which will prevent us from financing unemployment instead of work again afterwards .
After all , there is good reason why 20 % of the Social Fund resources available for horizontal use should be allocated to a preventive labour-market policy , and despite everything Ireland is still a long way from putting this into effect .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Collins and Mrs Jöns for their excellent work here in relation to the structural funds for Ireland .
Ireland is a success story , as we know , in this respect , with an economy which is performing well .
Our GDP per capita has increased from 64 % of the EU average in 1983 to 87 % last year .
The labour force is growing steadily and unemployment is at last beginning to fall , down from almost 16 % in 1993 to actually just over 11 % this year .
There is a bit of confusion about the figures in the reports , but the statistics have come from different areas - but 11 % is my understanding now .
The three factors I would attribute this success to are : firstly , the sound consensual politics pursued by governments over recent year , but particularly since 1993 ; secondly , the creation of the single market , which Irish exporters and industry have been able to exploit and , thirdly , the operation of the structural funds since the late 1980s .
This performance gives the lie to the simplistic and essentially anti-European myth that preparing for EMU necessarily entails higher unemployment and drastic cuts in public expenditure .
Our Irish example shows that this is clearly not the case .

As Mr Collins indicates , Ireland has made full and proper use of the structural funds , so much so that if the funds were being allocated in 1996 under the present criteria , i.e. , GDP per capita of less than 75 % of the EU average , we would not qualify .
Structural funding in Ireland , however , will not come to a sudden halt at the end of 1999 .
The criteria for the third phase of the funds , including the regional distribution of funding , will not be decided until early 1998 .
But if we look at the explanatory statement there is a little problem there in that Mr Collins seems to be suggesting that Ireland be divided into separate regions after 1999 .
This might involve Dublin being cut off .
Now there are huge areas of deprivation in Dublin , pockets of deprivation that I have often spoken about here - I think you are all familiar with my worry over Dublin .
I do not want to see Dublin being sidelined .
We have to continue to have our substantial development needs looked after post-1999 .
We must strive to ensure that the structural funds continue to play an important part in achieving the economic and social cohesion which the Treaty underlines .
Our aim in this context must be to maximise Ireland 's share of the structural funds .
Thank you , Mr President , and Happy Christmas !
Mr President , I wish to convey to Mr Collins my congratulations on the presentation of an excellent report .
This report not only highlights the areas where there are major difficulties but also draws attention to the need for necessary changes in the future .
Even in the present situation , where Ireland is considered as a single region , there are some parts of the country that are far healthier and much more competitive than others .
I stress and make no apologies for stressing that the counties of Donegal , Cavan , Monaghan , Sligo , Leitrim , Roscommon , Mayo and Galway - all of which are in my Euro-constituency - still remain amongst the most handicapped .
It is therefore vital that Community structural fund aid continues in these regions after 1999 , when the present programme ends .
Post-1999 , Objective 1 status should be granted to the constituency of Connacht / Ulster .
Economic and social cohesion must not remain simple words : they must also become a reality for the west and the north-west of my country .
In conclusion , if the way to do this would be to divide the country up into subregions , then so be it !
The economic survival of many parts of my constituency will depend on such a subdivision .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Collins on an excellent report and review of the progress to date in Ireland under the Community support frameworks .
I wish to take the opportunity today to impress on the Commissioner - and since the Commission is a college I know that it is entirely appropriate to do so through Commissioner Monti - the very high ratio relative to other states that these funds have represented as an inflow from the Union to the Irish economy .
As the Commissioner appreciates , as we move towards the achievement of economic and monetary union with medium-term convergence programmes , stability programmes and so on , it is important that the Commission as a college when it deals with the evolution of regional policy and cohesion policy into the future should , at the earliest stage and without waiting for all the details of the financial perspective and the size of the budget into the year 2000 and beyond , at least delineate the general lines of thinking early enough for states like Ireland , with a major net inflow , to incorporate this into their whole convergence process .
A sharp discontinuity in flow of funds would be a disaster in terms of the smooth evolution of macroeconomic policy in that context .
It is clear , as other colleagues have remarked , that under the standard rules Ireland would no longer qualify in the next round as one state , one region under Objective 1 .
I should like to say to the Commissioner , as Mr Collins has pointed out , that the structure of the Irish economy has a very high bias towards foreign industry : over half the net industrial output from that sector , only one-fifth of the employment .
It distorts our GDP / GNP figures dramatically .
In most EU countries the average gap between GNP and GDP is 1 or 2 % , in Ireland it is 10 or 11 % , because of the transfer pricing and so on of multinationals .
Perhaps for Ireland there is a strong rational economic case for looking at GNP rather than GDP as the index of measurement .
That , in fact , would not get over , in my view , the problem of one state , one region but it would still be a more realistic basis for assessment , and objectively that would hold versus other states .
Finally , in respect of the mid-term review , there is an extraordinarily high level of long-term unemployment persisting in the Republic of Ireland , along with a high level of social exclusion .
This needs to get the focus of any slack funding identified in the existing CSF or any new funding at a halfway term .
In the context of EMU , the small and medium-sized enterprise sector in Ireland , as everywhere , is employmentintensive per unit of output .
It is vulnerable in Ireland to one major thing : if Ireland joins the EMU and Britain stays out , they are the vulnerable sector because their first trading is culturally , socially and linguistically in the UK-Irish zone .
They need a special focus , especially through the structural funds , as a key ingredient for the future .
Mr President , I wish to begin by speaking about Ireland .
It is correct to say - and I am glad my colleague has mentioned it - that economic and monetary union will be the counterpart to the structural funds , and Ireland is always described to us as the country setting an example in terms of the trend towards EMU .
But if we look at the other side of the coin , which reveals 20 % unemployment and 30 % youth unemployment , of which 49 % are long-term unemployed , then we have to ask ourselves just what this trend involves .
On the other hand , however , Ireland also has the courage to expound a national plan for sustainable regional development , which provides an extremely important basis for deploying the structural funds and offers an opportunity to make genuinely effective use of them .
At the same time , it is right that combating unemployment is the priority here .
That should also be made clear in the report .
We know that Ireland has a great deal of experience , indeed that it already has over 15 years ' experience of local employment initiatives , and it would be good if further advances could be achieved in this field .
Despite this , it should be noted that improvements are necessary ; for example , there is still a major problem regarding access for women , and as yet not enough attention is given to ethnic minorities .
Above all , non-governmental organizations should be involved to a far greater extent in the question of monitoring , as set out in the White Paper and the Green Paper on social policy .
Mr President , the Commission is delighted with the exhaustive report presented by Mr Collins , whom I congratulate wholeheartedly , just as I congratulate Mrs Jöns .
Over the past few years , Ireland has enjoyed a higher rate of economic growth than any other Member State of the European Union , with its per capita GDP rising from 64 % of the Community average in 1983 to 90 % in 1995 .
I agree with the report 's conclusions that these very considerable achievements can be put down to three major factors : firstly , the pursuit of highly coherent national policies in the financial and fiscal field ; secondly , real social partnership , as has been stressed , in particular , by Mr Malone ; and , finally , a substantial contribution to the rate of growth - of about 1 % - by Community funds .
It is encouraging to note that positive development has also been reflected in significant reductions in Ireland 's high unemployment rate .
The Commission is , therefore , generally speaking , satisfied with the structural-fund appropriations allocated to Ireland , and not only in terms of overall expenditure .
The Collins report rightly highlights the progress achieved in terms of indicators measuring the impact on the various sectors of the economy , though there may still be some structural problems in certain regions , as Mr Gallagher has pointed out .
I should like to congratulate the Irish authorities on their cooperation with the Commission to ensure on-going evaluation of how European taxpayers ' money is being spent .
Evaluation is currently at the phase of mid-term review , which is compulsory for structural-fund interventions .
All operational programmes , including the Community support framework , are being independently assessed by outside experts .
These assessments will be discussed by the individual monitoring committees , whose members include representatives of the social partners and the various sectors .
The Commission greatly appreciates this openness and transparency , and is particularly pleased with the notable contribution made by the regional authorities , which will from now on be represented on the committees responsible for monitoring operational programmes .
The Collins report is timely , having been produced during the mid-term review , and will certainly make a major contribution .
I do not intend , not least because there is insufficient time , to make detailed comments on all the points raised by the report , which is very exhaustive .
I should , however , like to mention a few aspects : firstly , the need to tackle the problem of long-term unemployment in Ireland and , as Mrs Schroedter has pointed out , to encourage women 's participation in working life .
The Commission also appreciates recognition of the need to continue to invest in roads , railways , ports and airports in Ireland , and fully supports the commitment expressed in the report as regards implementing the peace programme for Northern Ireland and the border areas of the Republic .
The Commission takes note of the report 's recommendations concerning the forthcoming definition of eligibility criteria for Objective 1 regions , but points out that this issue will not be considered before the end of the current programming period in 1999 .
Finally , and briefly , Mr President , Mrs Jöns has mentioned the high levels of school drop-out .
Working in collaboration with the Irish authorities , the Commission is trying to find ways of increasing the number of training places available for young people with no qualifications .
The issue was discussed at the last meeting of the monitoring committee for the ' Human Resources ' programme in October , and we hope to see progress being made in the near future .
Lastly , in response to what Mr Cox said , I have taken note of his various comments and , in particular , of the need he emphasized for us to delineate the general lines of thinking early enough to prevent any sharp discontinuities in the flow of funds .
I can confirm that , in the light of the review of the financial outlook and looking towards enlargement , the Commission has been carefully considering this matter for some time .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We will now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Cross-border cooperation EU / CCEE
The next item is the report ( A4-0359 / 96 ) by Mr Schröder , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission report on the implementation of cross-border cooperation between the Community and countries of Central and Eastern Europe in 1994 ( COM ( 95 ) 0662 - C4-0142 / 96 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , the implementation of the programme with which we are concerned here , namely the programme of cross-border cooperation between the Community and countries of Central and Eastern Europe in 1994 , has been one of the Commission 's successes .
This programme was given a budget of ECU 150 million , and thanks to cofinancing a total of ECU 350 million was available , all of which was used to good purpose .
Cofinancing came largely from the European Investment Bank , the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the private sector .
What were the aims of the programme of cross-border cooperation ?
On the one hand , to stabilize border regions , to boost economic development in them and to reduce disparities and , on the other - and this aspect is just as important , if not more so - to facilitate the integration process in the Central and Eastern European states ; for we must never forget that we need them as much as they need us .
Turning to the question of whether further improvements need to be made , I would say that there is always room for improvement , and in this particular case a more varied spread of measures is required .
To date the emphasis has been on supporting the transport infrastructure , the environment and also the energy sector .
I should like more advantage to be taken of the possibilities in these sectors .
I should also like to see multiannual programming and increased funding for the ECOS , OUVERTURE and INTERREG II initiatives .
It is very easy to say that funding must be increased without specifying where such resources are supposed to come from .
I should therefore like to make two proposals , although I shall only outline them briefly .
I am certain that next year a report by the Committee on Regional Policy will lead to a deepening of the problem .
I have already mentioned this in the debate on the Christodoulou report .
I hope you will allow me to outline these two possibilities of cutting down on funding in the field of structural policy and using the funds saved for cross-border cooperation and , I may say , not only for cross-border cooperation .
The first point is that in future it will no longer be a question simply of supporting underdeveloped regions as such , but of supporting what are obviously disadvantaged regions .
This will , in future , need to be specified precisely .
In this context I should like to cite three aspects : firstly geographical disadvantages - even after enlargement , Madeira or the Greek islands will always be on the margins of Europe - , then climatic factors - northern Finland or northern Sweden will always be cold and will suffer as a result - and lastly historical factors .
Here I am thinking in particular of the new German Länder , for the effects of 40 years of socialism in practice were devastating , and we are now having enormous difficulty in dealing with them .
This , then , is one possibility , namely to apply the criterion of obviously disadvantaged regions .
The second point I wish to make is that we should completely abandon the principle of giving everyone a slice of the cake and instead use financial resources in a targeted way , in other words inject financial aid where it is specifically needed .
In my view , we cannot continue to support whole states or regions indiscriminately , but should direct support to specifically targeted areas , right down to parts of cities - I believe we should plan as accurately as that - so that funding will be available for cross-border cooperation between the European Union and the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and , I repeat , not simply for cross-border cooperation .
Finally , I should like to thank the Commission again for its good work and to tell the Commissioner that we await with great interest the Commission 's corresponding report for 1995 .
Mr President , the opinion of the Committee on External Economic Relations on the 1994 programme of cross-border cooperation we are dealing with , highlights the fact that this cooperation has proved to be an especially useful instrument in terms of the pre-accession strategy for the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
In fact , cross-border cooperation between these countries and those of the European Union has made contact between the border regions possible at the political level and thus increased the degree of trust and good neighbourliness between them . At the same time it is allowing stable habits of cooperation to develop , familiarizing the CCEEs with the Union 's management methods and , above all , encouraging in the associate countries the sense of belonging to a common area , hence accelerating the process of adaptation prior to accession .
So the programme has clearly had positive results overall .
That is precisely why the Committee on External Economic Relations believes the budget should be increased for the measures to promote cooperation , both cross-border and inter-regional , particularly between regions of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and regions of the European Union .
For the sake of greater effectiveness in the future , we should also consider making the programmes multi-annual and intensifying the measures to promote cooperation in training , especially business training , and the transfer of technology and marketing skills to small and medium-sized firms , given that they represent an irreplaceable factor in the economic development of these countries .
In addition , the Committee on External Economic Relations believes it is fundamentally important to establish operational mechanisms to coordinate the various European Union programmes and the PHARE programme if we are to optimize the return on Union resources and thus increase the effectiveness and incidence of the measures funded by them .
That is an aim the Committee on External Economic Relations fully supports .
Thank you very much , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen .
I can assure you that Mrs Ferrer could not have improved much on your excellent Spanish .
But do not take that as excessive flattery , because Mrs Ferrer and I usually speak Catalan and our Spanish is not all that perfect .
Anyway , many thanks .
Madam President , may I thank Mr Schröder for this report , which provides a good basis for a general debate on interregional and particularly cross-border cooperation .
Cross-border cooperation has been a very successful element in the Union 's activities , but it could certainly be developed to render it even more effective , for example with a view to forthcoming enlargement .
I wish to stress that cross-border cooperation can also be combined with interregional cooperation .
In my opinion it affords many opportunities for the EU countries and future Member States , their regional authorities and regional NGOs to develop practical cooperation between the regions , as well as administration and democratic structures .
In this way close practical cooperation can be established .
In order for cooperation at borders and cross-border cooperation to achieve really impressive results , it should be possible to monitor the effectiveness of the existing programmes more effectively than at present .
The problem is how to find the right means .
On the one hand , additional supervision rules are needed , while on the other , the subsidiarity principle must be respected .
In my opinion , more measurable results should also be attained in the EU 's programme cooperation with third countries .
The Commission and those responsible for the implementation of programmes should reach agreement on priorities , objectives and ways of evaluating them .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to start by congratulating my colleague and friend , Mr Schröder , not only on his excellent report on the implementation of the programmes on cooperation between the European Union and the CCEEs , but also on his constant concern about the problems arising from the enlargement of the Union to include Central and Eastern Europe , and especially for his broad understanding of the repercussions that the enlargement is having on the less developed regions of the Union , as his report demonstrates .
This Parliament is highly sensitive to the issue , which is at the very centre of the Union 's priorities .
That is demonstrated , to mention a few examples not included in Mr Schröder 's considerations , by some of the statements of the Europa 2000 Plus report on the organization of the territory of Europe - for which I myself was the rapporteur - and by Mr Speciale 's report in connection with the debate on the financial framework for Community initiative programmes over the next few years .
The request to continue the INTERREG programme through a new INTERREG III responds to a need within the CCEE 's current pre-accession strategy of cross-border cooperation .
The excellent results of the PHARE programmes and INTERREG II , as set out by Mr Schröder in his report , are a stimulus to greater effort in this direction .
Naturally an increase in expenditure , with new funds and programmes to finance the enlargement , must not endanger the stability pact necessary to guarantee the success of economic and monetary union .
An effort of imagination and solidarity is needed to make both things possible .
Deepening and widening the Union are not and should not be mutually exclusive objectives - but no-one is saying the challenge is easy .
Mr President , we have had a rather chaotic and busy time of it , but we have this week discussed a few matters of historically important strategy which on the eve of the IGC are concerned with enlargement , notably the Christodoulou and Rehder reports , and this report by Mr Schröder is a very practical exposé of what the Union will be doing in future with Central and Eastern Europe .
It is a good thing to reduce the economic and social conflicts in the border regions .
It prevents depopulation , but it also promotes regional stability .
As we know , the need for money to achieve this is so great that the funds given on a once-only basis have already been fully used up .
That is reassuring and encouraging .
So what do we now need to do in future ?
Prevent any overlapping , diversify our measures more , and thus look at more than just infrastructure and environment , and above all guaranteeing cohesiveness .
I look to the Commission to continue doing what it has done in the past , namely reporting to us and informing us of how additional funds , more financial resources can be found .
That is important .
Cross-border cooperation gives the citizen faith in Europe .
We need that in the Union and outside the Union too , because what is ultimately at stake here is stability in Europe .
Mr President , first I would like to turn to Mr Schröder , whom I know to be a very agreeable representative for his country in this Parliament , and thank him for his short and concrete report .
Eleven Eastern and Central European countries have applied for membership of the EU .
Regardless of how long it takes for them to be members and regardless of whether they become full members or if some other form of association is chosen , it is very important that we strengthen our cross border cooperation with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The measures established in 1994 in the fields of energy , the infrastructure and the environment must continue and they ought to be extended to include other areas such as the economy , education , exchange of technology and a vastly extended social and political cooperation , with a broadening of the PHARE and other programmes .
The liberal group supports the programme and wants to see it implemented and strengthened along with an expanded internal cooperation between the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and between these countries and Russia and other OECD countries .
Mr President , better cooperation between the EU and Eastern and Central Europe is , long-term , one of the most important actions to promote peace and security in our part of the world .
Mr President , in contrast to cross-border cooperation within the EU , it is still not possible to support joint projects on the borders with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
In the course of my visits to Euro-regions I have established that , while the programmes are certainly welcomed , when it comes to concrete implementation it is enormously problematic to support joint projects .
I should like to quote two examples : a ferry crossing is to be established on the Oder ; one border station is built and then the other border station is built - one is eligible for support from INTERREG and the other for support from PHARE - but the ferry which is to cross the river between the two is not eligible for funding , and so the project comes to nothing .
To give another example : a sewage treatment plant is to be built in a valley , and for geographical reasons this can only be done on the Czech side .
Everything is in place but one thing is missing : the pipe from the German to the Czech side .
Because it runs on the border , it is not eligible for funding , and this may mean that the project comes to nothing .
We need to resolve problems of this kind as a matter of urgency .
We cannot allow cross-border cooperation to revert to the conditions of the old interzone border .
I have , therefore , tabled an amendment which proposes that we should at least try to link the ERDF 10 Regulation with PHARE 's micro-programme in model projects , and this needs a very rapid decision .
I am pleased that there are signs that the rapporteur believes this amendment should be carried .
I consider that in any case this improves the quality of the report .
It is also important that the second amendment should be carried , since the Euro-regions occupy a key position in the question of enlargement .
After all , we are in favour of rapid enlargement , are we not ?
Mr President , our group unanimously supports all the conclusions of Mr Schröder 's report on cross-border and regional cooperation with the CCEEs .
By this means we are easing their integration , cementing relations and mutual understanding , and making a significant contribution to the economic development of their regions .
But in view of the report and the committee 's conclusions , we clearly need to increase the funding for the measures of inter-regional cooperation between CCEE and EU regions .
Logically , we should also improve the implementation process to make the development plans for the European regions more effective in areas as vital as transport infrastructure , environmental protection , and the use and distribution of energy , and we should also making a special effort to boost cooperation in training and business development for what we regard as the basic sector in the future economy of the integration , the small and medium-sized firms .
All this would mean we were designing a genuine and effective strategy for the future accession of these countries to the European Community project . This would make the process less traumatic and more natural for them , and the Member States would see a reduction in the wide political , economic and social differences that exist in some specific cases .
Mr President , we must strengthen and boost programmes along these lines , like INTERREG , PHARE and especially ECOS / OUVERTURE .
This will strengthen cross-border relations between the regions of the European Union and the CCEE regions .
However , we must be demanding with ourselves and strictly control the results of these measures so as to avoid the serious mistakes which have been made in some cases , and , of course , attempts to defraud .
I am winding up , Mr President .
We can evaluate the outturn for the year 1994 as good overall , but we now look forward to the results for 1995 to confirm favourable development of the application and development of these cross-border and inter-regional programmes for cooperation with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .

Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Schröder on his excellent report , since he attaches particular importance to the Euro-regions .
In my view their role is becoming increasingly important given the fact that the debate on enlargement is now , as it were , shifting from declarations of intent and fine words to actual ' homework ' .
We need this cooperation not only to boost economic development and make traffic possible again on both sides of the borders , for both sides have been disadvantaged for very many years , but we need to use it also to heal historical wounds .
There can scarcely be a better way of healing these than by cooperation in the Euro-regions .
Mr Pirker knows about cooperation between the Carinthians and the Slovenes , the Styrians and the Slovenes , where there is the problem of the divided Radkersburg .
In the debate on Slovenia we discussed Görz , which is divided between Italy and Slovenia , we have cooperation on the borders between Bavaria and Bohemia and Saxony and Bohemia - I myself was one of the cofounders of the Euro-region of Neisse between Poland , Bohemia and Saxony - and in all these regions we need to promote cultural cooperation .
Perhaps we should do more in future in the way of cross-border support for the media .
In northern Bohemia , Mr Pìaoda , who is a journalist , is producing a CzechGerman-Polish newspaper ; we should support minority languages on both sides of the borders , the German minority in the Czech Republic , the Sorbian minority in Saxony .
There is a wide arena for cooperation , for example in environmental protection too , in other words we are witnessing not the end of a trend , but the beginning .
Those who believe , and are always making their views known , that basically we could do without it , since the first rank of candidates for accession to the Community are already so far developed that they no longer need it , are deceiving themselves , for they are the very ones who have a long way to go to catch up , as an extremely poor region has bordered on a relatively rich one for a very long time .
Mr President , I venture to describe Mr Schröder 's report as excellent .
And were it not for his obsession with austerity and his insistence that the enlargement does not have to mean an increase in costs for the European Union , I would venture to call it magnificent .
But that small difference remains and I hope that in the coming dialogue we can convince Mr Schröder that there is a need for additional funds if we want to be realistic about the enlargement .
Obviously , Mr Schröder 's report resonates beyond its immediate objective , which is to analyze the position for the year 1994 , and that is another merit of the report .
Enlargement is already the issue here .
We are clearly talking about a pre-accession situation .
INTERREG is still small , all the existing projects are still small , and we need to be speaking positively and inclusively about those countries which expect so much of the European Union and whose rapid accession we definitely support .
We must take Mr Schröder 's report as a starting point for talking about the future in greater depth , and unless we want to linger in Utopia , as the previous speaker said , that depth should lead to a clear proposal from Parliament to create a financial instrument for the pre-accession countries , a specific instrument which incorporates PHARE , INTERREG , and other programmes .
We must think about the global cooperation needed by the countries that are now on the point of joining and those we hope to welcome soon .
Thank you very much , Mr Monti , and your Spanish is really good too .
The debate is closed .
We will now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Schröder on his report .
I have been a very strong supporter of cross-border cooperation because of the need to develop those run-down areas which , by virtue of previous hostilities , have always had very little economic activity , and because cross-border cooperation gives a very practical example of the importance of peoples working together .
The more examples we have , the easier it is to ensure a long-term peaceful solution to border problems .
I have several points to make .
Firstly , I welcome paragraph 6 and Mr Monti 's remarks that we should move away from hard infrastructure towards soft infrastructure .
That is the next stage and we ought to be encouraging it .
I support the rapporteur 's other observations about multiannual programmes and the need for greater coordination .
We are still concerned about insufficient coordination in this particular area .
One final point , not mentioned in the report I have to say , is that some of the countries involved are countries where the financial systems are not as strong as they should be - I will say no more .
We must ensure that these funds are not subject in any way to fraud as this will undermine the legitimacy of what the European Union is trying to achieve .
Support system for producers of certain arable crops
The next item is the report ( A4-0378 / 96 ) by Mr Hallam , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1765 / 92 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops ( COM ( 96 ) 0175 - C4-0389 / 96-96 / 0167 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , set-aside is a very unpopular regime .
It is unpopular with farmers and the public , but it has been very successful in reducing surplus production , and so some form of set-aside will be with us for many years .
This proposal aims to make the situation more flexible .
It helps producers who have suffered climatic disasters by granting total or partial exemptions in the year in question and in the base area in question .
It enables Member States , which opt to treat the whole of their territory as a single base area , to subdivide and then concentrate the overshoot provisions on particular regions and a particular sub-base area .
It is a proposal which will enable our Member States to be much more flexible in their application of the set-aside rules .
I wish to refer to the two amendments submitted today .
The one by Mr des Places was rejected by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
It would make things much more complicated and so I would urge the House to reject that particular amendment again .
I am concerned about Mrs Redondo Jiménez 's amendment , which tries to extend the special provisions put into this report to help the Spanish farmers for a second year .
I am sorry that this was not debated at the Agriculture Committee but my understanding is that this would mean a doubling of the expenditure that has already been incurred in that particular area .
So , reluctantly - because I do not like turning down amendments - I have to ask you to reject that particular amendment .
As you know , it is Christmas and we are coming to the end of the year .
For me , this year did not start on 1 January : for me this year really started on 20 March - the Commissioner laughs at that point because I think his year started on 20 March as well .
On Christmas Day I will be eating an organically-reared turkey , grown and matured in my own constituency - in fact the turkey in question is about to meet his maker this afternoon .
But the day after Christmas Day - Boxing Day , as we call it in Britain - I do not know what it is called elsewhere in the European Union - we shall sit round our family table and we will eat a nice piece of British beef .
I look forward to the export ban being lifted at some point during next year and I hope that next year , next Boxing Day , you , the citizens of the European Union , will be able to join me in eating a good piece of British roast beef .
I thank the Commissioner for all his work during the year in helping us overcome this crisis and let us hope that for our agricultural industry better times are ahead .


Thank you very much , Mr Hallam , and we hope you enjoy all the excellent meals coming your way .
Mr President , the structural imbalances detected in the systems for basic areas and regionalization plans for the various Member States led the November 1995 Agriculture Council to adopt an agreement by which the Commission was charged with drawing up and presenting , in January 1996 , a proposal amending Council Regulation 1765 / 92 , in order to make the sanctions system more flexible .
First it was established that the Commission could grant total or partial exemption from penalties if basic areas were exceeded when exceptional weather conditions reduced crop yields significantly .
Secondly , the national and regional basic areas would be defined in each Member State to allow the penalties to be applied more fairly , restricting them to the regions responsible for the situation .
For bureaucratic reasons , there has been delay in implementing this regulation and the Spanish members of the Group of the European People 's Party have therefore tabled an amendment to ensure that its provisions are implemented in the 1996-1997 financial year .
The Group of the European People 's Party does not support Amendments Nos 2 and 4 because we think the Commission 's text has greater technical rigour .
Mr President , I should first like to congratulate Mr Hallam on his report .
Together with my colleagues Mr Jacob and Mr des Places , I tabled a number of amendments , one of which seems to me very important - Amendment No 4 .
The objectives of this amendment are simple .
First , it introduces greater flexibility into the principle of compulsory set-aside .
Everyone must know that there is nothing mathematical about farming .
Farmers are exposed to constraints which they can do very little to overcome , constraints imposed by the climate , the topography and the size and agricultural quality of their land .
It is important , therefore , to be able to make internal transfers within regional or national arrangements .
This amendment is also intended to establish a degree of equity between those Member States which opted for national rather than regional references .
It should be recalled that equity is the fundamental principle of any economic organization .
Finally , I must make it clear that this amendment has no impact on the European Union budget .
So no budgetary argument can be advanced against it .
In conclusion , Mr President , I hope that Amendment No 4 will be adopted by this House , in the interests of European agricultural policy but , most of all , in the interests of the farmers themselves .
Mr President , our Group agrees with the Hallam report and I believe those measures should be adopted on behalf of the Spanish producers afflicted by drought , and that this general principle that Member States should be exempt from financial sanctions in the event of overshoots , when they are due to exceptional climatic conditions , is correct .
I have a question for Commissioner Fischler , relating to another category of producers affected by exceptional climatic conditions , by natural disasters in September - I refer to cotton producers in Greece .
Does Mr Fischler know that for 15 days economic life in Greece has been paralysed , is he aware that the road network has been blocked all over Greece , and does he understand that the nucleus of those mobilizations are the producers in certain parts of Karditsa and Trikala , where a major disaster destroyed up to 80 % or 90 % of their cotton crop ?
At the same time , however , they are required to pay the co-responsibility tax , with the result that they have reached desperation .
You all know that if you turn on Euronews , the first thing reported every day now is the drama that is afflicting Greece with the desperation and harsh mobilization of the farmers , led by the cotton producers of Karditsa and Trikala whose crops were largely destroyed .
Here , in the Regulation , I see the following principle very rightly stated : Member States shall be exempt from financial sanctions in the event of overshoots , if the latter result from exceptional climatic conditions .
For cereals and other arable crops we have the set-aside system , while for cotton we have the co-responsibility tax system .

I want to ask Mr Fischler , and I expect an answer , which I believe is also awaited by all the farmers , while I believe in parallel that Mr Fischler 's position could play some part in determining the outcome of developments in Greece , where we expect much from the Commission and in particular from Mr Fischler in person :

first , has any application been made by the Greek government to assist precisely this category of producers , who are the nucleus of the mobilization , and-secondly , regardless of whether or not an application has been submitted , how does Mr Fischler view the possibility of some intervention by the Commission of the European Union , to address the issue of the areas that have reached desperation ?
Does he accept the general principle - which of course means after it has been examined by the Commission , the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers , and I am aware of the difficulties - that special measures can be adopted on sanctions when there have been exceptional climatic conditions , and that the said principle could also apply for Greek cotton in the specific areas affected ?
Mr President , I in turn should like to stress the value of Amendment No 4 , which we tabled together with Mr Martens , Mr Jacob and Mr des Places .
In the Member States which have national base areas , the Commission proposal fails to solve any problems .
It is appropriate not to discriminate between the Member States and to allow offsetting between base areas , whether they be regional or whether they be national .
The issue is as much to benefit from any overshoots as to arrive at an extraordinary set-aside rate specific to each farm .
The danger is that the overshooting of several national base areas will result in the existence of several extraordinary set-aside rates on a single farm : one rate for irrigated maize , one rate for dry maize , one rate for the other dry cereals , one rate for the other irrigated cereals .
To solve these problems , we propose that the ' volume ' overshoot should be assessed by weighting the surface areas by the yield of the base areas .
I should recall that our amendment has no financial impact on the European Union 's budget , in so far as the intention is to avoid offsetting a hectare of a high-yield base area against a hectare of a low-yield base area .
In conclusion , this amendment enables discrimination between Member States to be avoided , discrimination between those which have opted for regional base areas and those which have opted for national base areas .
This amendment also represents simplification , since it will enable many producers to have only one extraordinary set-aside rate per farm .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Hallam for his report on the Commission 's proposal .
The proposal which is before you was drafted by the Commission in response to a request by the Council .
The content does not exceed the terms of our brief , since otherwise the principles of the 1992 reform would be weakened , particularly in respect of implementing controls on production .
The suppression of extraordinary set-aside would mean giving up a specific instrument for controlling production and might mean a future increase in the rate of compulsory set-aside throughout the Union .
This contradicts the aim given expression in the proposal before you , namely to increase the sense of responsibility of producers .
Such an amendment might also be seen by our WTO partners as an opportunity for attacking the Union 's handling of the blue box .
Nor is the suppression of extraordinary set-aside desirable , particularly since , under the regulations currently in force , it is possible to suspend its application if this appears necessary on the basis of an analysis of the market situation .
Such was the case , for example , in the current year .
The second amendment tabled in the report of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development aims to apply the additional area of 150 000 hectares granted on a temporary basis to the new Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany , which faced restructuring problems , to the whole of the Federal Republic .
The Commission does not consider this to be justified and is of the opinion that an unjustified precedent would be set by introducing such a change in Germany .
I am unable to accept Amendment No 3 because it does not appear to me to be a suitable way of resolving the Spanish problem .
What you are really trying to achieve with this amendment is to make it possible to overshoot base areas with irrigated crops .
In this case the compensation exceeds the share of the budget allocated to Spain , resulting in a reduction in the compensation payments for all Spanish producers in the 1997 harvest .
With regard to Amendment No 4 , I can only emphasize that this would favour intensive crops such as maize and irrigated crops and , instead of keeping production under control , this would cause it to increase .
In addition , the proposed system would lead to further complications in a regime which is already very complex .
This opinion is after all shared by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which also rejected this amendment .
Mr Alavanos , as regards what you said about cotton , I should like to draw to your attention the fact that cotton production and cultivation do not come under the heading of arable areas and arable crops ; it is a special crop and cannot , therefore , be dealt with in this context .
In answer to your question as to whether the Greek government has made a proposal , I am assuming that the Greek representative will speak on this matter on Monday , at the Council of Ministers of Agriculture .
I would not wish to end without also expressing my thanks to the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for rejecting some proposed amendments which would only have complicated this already very complex regulation still further .
Mr President , I know that , and I did not ask the Commissioner whether cotton is included among arable crops .
It is not included , and it cannot be dealt with under this Regulation .
My question , to which I would like an answer from the Commissioner , is whether , consistent with the rationale of relaxing sanctions somewhat in the event of exceptional climatic conditions , the Commission could discuss the possibility of some measures for cotton , outside this Regulation , for areas that have been afflicted and that form the nucleus of the mobilizations and drama taking place in Greece today .
Mr President , I am sorry that we are not going to accept our report in toto .
I would , however , ask the House to back fully the submission by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and support Amendments Nos 1 and 2 .
I would express to the Commission our hope that it will take our views on board even at this late stage .

Mr President , Mr Alavanos , I can only add to the explanation I have already given by saying again that I am sure that if the Greek government has particular wishes , it will make them known to the Commission .
Naturally we shall then submit their proposal to appropriate and careful examination .
Without having a proposal , however , I cannot promise in advance a decision on a proposal which does not exist .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
We will now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Community aid schemes ( ' integrated system ' )
The next item is the report ( A4-0286 / 96 ) by Mr Garriga Polledo , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 3508 / 92 establishing an integrated administrative and control system for certain Community aid schemes ( ' integrated system ' ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0174 - C4-0313 / 96-96 / 0122 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , thank you for your concern . I am sincerely grateful .
Today we complete the parliamentary procedure on a report which has had a very bumpy ride .
To begin with , this report states the position of the European Parliament on a proposal for a regulation amending the co-financing criteria to help the Member States establish an integrated management and control system for certain Community aid schemes .
Parliament was asked to extend the co-financing period .
The request reached us in April , four months after the deadline for the system to be operational , in principle , in all the Member States .
So the Commission presented Parliament with a fait accompli . And that is hardly advisable , ladies and gentlemen , when we are talking about a system intended to control half the EAGGF agricultural expenditure , which represents about ECU 18 , 000 million per year .

In 1994 Parliament itself had already asked the Commission for a report on the operation of the integrated aid system . We gave it a year .
Well , the report did not arrive .
And to avoid the costs of the financial adjustments provided for by the existing regulation , should Member States fail to establish the system in time , the Commission confronts this Parliament with the dilemma of rejecting the extension of the co-financing - thus presenting the Commission and the Member States with an embarrassing problem - or condoning this behaviour and accepting the request for extension , even if amended .
The Committee on Budgetary Control and this rapporteur decided to accept as sufficient the promises made in a letter from Commissioner Fischler that by 31 December this year , that is , a year later than should have been the case in theory , all the Member States except the three new ones would have this system up and running .
However , by the time this report reached the November part-session for approval , the Court of Auditors had stated in its annual report that it would be difficult to get the system operational in all fifteen Member States during 1997 .
Italy and Greece would have particular problems .
These delays are that much more serious the greater the EAGGF amounts to be controlled , and they are at the origin of possible irregularities , even fraud , and definite harm to European taxpayers .
That is why one of the Amendments , No 2 , calls for a general cut in monthly payments in advance to Member States where the integrated system is not in operation , as from 1 January 1997 .
The Council itself provided for and backed this measure in its Decision of 31 October 1994 .
On top of that , the Court of Auditors has severely criticized the Member States and the Commission , pointing out that neither the Commission nor the Council have ensured strict monitoring of statements of costs in relation to these co-financed systems .
I can tell this House that we are talking about an amount of ECU 16.6 million which is at the very least under a question mark from the Court of Auditors .
There is not even enough control over the money which is intended to improve the control itself .
As always , whenever the Commission is asked to take responsibility and provide explanations , it has assured Parliament that from now on there will be strict monitoring .
For that reason and that reason only , the Committee on Budgetary Control consents to the Commission 's proposal and asks the European Parliament to approve the amendments we have tabled .
Finally , I thank Commissioner Fischler for being here and I would like to hear him explain to this vast but attentive emptiness the grounds on which his representative gave guarantees to the Committee on Budgetary Control that there would be more efficient monitoring from now on .
If the Commissioner can really guarantee that this control will be seriously monitored , we will at least have had a very useful sitting .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by thanking you , Mr Garriga Polledo , for all your work and for your report , and also by thanking the committees involved for their constructive suggestions .
I should like to comment on the amendments as follows , beginning with Amendments Nos 1 and 4 on co-financing : here the Commission agrees with Parliament that appropriations which are not utilized should not lapse , and it will do all it can in the Council to ensure that appropriations which are not taken up can be made available to other Member States .
With regard to Amendments Nos 2 and 5 , in the Commission 's view a failure to implement certain parts of the Integrated System should be examined in the context of the relevant budget discipline and the regulations covering balancing of accounts .
For this reason the Commission does not consider these amendments to be appropriate .
With regard to Amendment No 3 , I can confirm that the Commission has drafted a proposal for the introduction of a system for the identification and registration of cattle .
The regulation which is proposed would replace the relevant provisions of Directive 92 / 102 / EEC .
This makes Amendment No 3 superfluous , but I can assure Parliament that the content of the proposed regulation is very much in line with the recommendations made .
The Commission 's proposals also stipulate that by 1 January 1998 a database must be set up in every Member State to store all the animals ' identification numbers with age , sex and date of birth , together with details of their arrival at or departure from farms .
The introduction of animal passports and enactment of regulations on ear tags are also included in the proposals .
With regard to Amendment No 6 , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's desire to receive information from Member States on whether the Integrated System is operating effectively .
I should , however , point out that since as far back as 1993 the annual report of the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund has included a special section covering this point .
In the Commission 's view , this amendment is , therefore , unnecessary .
In any case it would be premature to draw up a report on the definitive implementation of the system before the middle of 1997 , since it will be impossible to assess gaps in implementation in the three new Member States until the end of 1997 or 1998 at the earliest .
Mr President , I just want to repeat that the rapporteur maintains all his amendments , especially the rejection of Amendment No 2 .
I just want to tell the Commissioner that I do not see how he is going to avoid making financial corrections for the Member States in settling the EAGGF accounts when the time comes .
The issue does not have to be resolved now but we are obviously going to have a disagreement on this point in the Committee on Budgetary Control , which is responsible for analysis of the settlement of EAGGF accounts .
Thank you very much , Mr Garriga Polledo .
The debate is closed .
We will now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Court of Auditor 's report on Mostar
The next item is the report ( A4-0386 / 96 ) by Mrs Müller , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on Special Report No 2 / 96 of the Court of Auditors concerning the accounts of the Administrator and the European Union Administration , Mostar ( EUAM ) , accompanied by the replies of the Commission and the Administrator of Mostar ( C4-0513 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I should like to begin by citing a figure which perhaps characterizes the current situation in Mostar more clearly than anything else could do .
Since the beginning of this year , more than 70 people have been driven from their homes in western Mostar .
All too often these expulsions continue to occur under the noses of police who are simply passive onlookers .
Recently there have again been even more of them .
The homes of those who have been driven out are then sold off in exchange for German currency by an avaricious Croat mafia .
Only in six cases were the rightful owners or tenants able to reclaim their homes .
These sad statistics show that the European Union has failed to achieve its political goal in Mostar .
Genuine reunification of the city , a functioning joint administration and a common police force , full freedom of movement and the return of those who have been driven out - for the time being all that remains a pipe-dream .
Many fear that the situation will deteriorate further when Sir Martin Garrod comes to the end of his term as the EU 's special representative in the city just before Christmas .
Despite this , the decision to draw a line under the action after two and a half years is the right one .
The European Union has spent almost ECU 150 million on Mostar during these two and a half years .
Thanks to this aid , the city has been given a head start , and reconstruction is much further advanced here than elsewhere in Bosnia-Herzegovina - local elections were in fact already held last summer .
Whether the local politicians on both sides in Mostar will build on this head start in the common interest , or whether they will throw it all away again , is now largely in their own hands .
The current protests and demonstrations in Belgrade are giving rise to some encouragement since they show that there is also reason to hope for a change for the better .
What are the lessons to be learned from this , the first major joint action we have undertaken under the common foreign and security policy ?
The goal we set ourselves for Mostar was to achieve reconciliation following a savage civil war .
And it was surely not a mistake for us to attempt to do something which was virtually impossible in the short term .
However , we have to acknowledge that we did not do everything that could have been done if we were to come close to achieving this goal .
In particular , we failed to equip the administrator with full executive powers .
As Mr Koschnick said at the hearing held by the Committee on Budgetary Control , ' I was able to make all the decisions but accomplish nothing . '
In its special report , the European Court of Auditors documented a long list of omissions and shortcomings .
It was not , however , in Mostar itself that the crucial errors occurred - there Hans Koschnick and his successors , together with their colleagues , worked with great personal commitment and at great risk to themselves ; the most serious errors occurred in Brussels and in the Foreign Ministries of the Member States .
At the crucial moment , after Mr Koschnick had nearly been lynched under the noses of police who simply looked on passively , the pressure which needed to be put on the Croatian politicians responsible was not applied .
For the sake of a dubious compromise with these politicians , the Foreign Ministers accepted Mr Koschnick 's resignation .
However , Mr Koschnick and his comrades-in-arms in Mostar were also victims of the completely inappropriate decision-making and administrative procedures of the common foreign and security policy , a travelling circus of political responsibility - every six months the contacts changed with the Council presidency .
An advisory working party set up to support the presidency carried decisions over from one meeting to the next .
An absurdly complicated procedure for releasing appropriations and making them available meant that for months on end the EU administration was only able to pay its bills very late . Hans Koschnick summed up his experience as follows : ' on the one hand , unimpeachably good intentions on the part of all those involved in the EU , and on the other , unimaginable obstructionism ' .
Have the lessons at least now been learned ?
It seems unlikely .
For one thing , it is unfortunate that the Council refused to have anything to do with the contradictory procedure and was conspicuous by its absence from the discussions of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Now , in the context of the intergovernmental conference , it is making proposals which - I cannot put it any other way - constitute an attack on the rights of Parliament .
The non-compulsory expenditure under the common foreign and security policy is to be made compulsory , which would eliminate the only genuine right of co-determination and monitoring which Parliament has in the field of foreign policy .
It is a mockery for the Council to talk about getting closer to the people and greater transparency if , at the same time , it lapses back into the pose of an absolute ruler in a field as important as foreign policy .
Mr President , there is a certain irony that this is the last debate of 1996 in this Chamber because at the end of 1996 the EU administration in Mostar also comes to an end and I rather suspect we may have to return to debating Mostar in the new year .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent and wide-ranging report .
There are many lessons to be learned from the EU administration in Mostar .
Most of them are political lessons .
The main objective of this report was to look at budgetary and financial questions .
But politics set the framework in which financial management can operate and what this report shows about the EU administration in Mostar is that there was a lack of clarity , a lack of coherence , a lack of consistency and a lack of clearly-defined objectives .
That reveals to me the importance of reaching agreement in the intergovernmental conference on having a unit responsible for common foreign and security policy whose job it is to identify the long-term problems confronting the European Union and strategies for dealing with those problems and also personnel for dealing with these problems .
As Mrs Müller has pointed out one of the problems was that Member States sent people off to Mostar without regard for whether they could do the job that was needed .
That was one of the problems the administration had to face .
There was also clearly a lack of a clearly-defined line of command in Mostar .
As Mrs Müller has also pointed out , every time the presidency changed so did the people responsible for Mostar in the Council of Ministers change .
What we therefore need is somebody responsible for the foreign and security policy who would be the same person regardless of what the presidency is .
That would enable us to have a clearer line of command .
But most importantly , paragraph 9 of the resolution , highlights the fact that the pillar structure of the Maastricht Treaty has left huge gaps and areas where there are doubts about demarcation , about responsibility , about coordination .
We really have to clarify in relation to EU external policy who does what , when and how , and who they are accountable to .
Otherwise we will repeat the mistakes of Mostar .
We should also be drawing attention to Article J.3 of the Maastricht Treaty which says once a common action has been agreed unanimously in the Council of Ministers , it is possible to use qualified majority voting to carry out that joint action .
One of the problems in Mostar was that at one point it seemed that every decision , down to the buttons on the police uniform , were having to be referred back to the Council of Ministers for unanimous decision .
You cannot operate this sort of administration on that basis .
Mrs Müller also made reference to the financing .
You cannot finance an action by passing the hat round between Member States in the hope that they will come up with money , and more importantly , that they will come up with the money when they say they will come up with the money .
Far too often money did not materialize .
These sort of actions have to be financed out of the EU budget , which will then give the European Parliament its proper role as the authority of accountability .
There is no doubt that Mostar was successful in terms of physical reconstruction .
I have been there and I have seen the extensive progress that was made but it was not successful in terms of political reconstruction .
We must learn the lessons that are clearly set out in Mrs Müller 's report .
I personally have tremendous admiration for the work of the people on the ground .
That admiration does not extend to the people they were responsible to .
I will finish by making reference to a famous book in Spanish which you will be familiar with , written by somebody quite closely connected to the man who may next be President of the European Parliament .
It says peace was not possible .
I would say to you in relation to Mostar that political reconstruction was not possible and it will not be possible until we identify very clearly who should do what , when they should do it and how they should do it .
Let us hope we learn those lessons .
Mr President , first I want to thank you very much indeed for your kind words about my speech in Spanish , and I promise that next time I prepare a speech with Mrs Ferrer I shall try to do it in Catalan to support that important language in the culture of Europe .
If I may , I should like to continue in German , and to begin by telling Mr Titley that I am actually glad this debate on Mostar is being held today , as the last debate this year , as I hope it will serve as a sign for the future , in terms of the tasks we must continue to undertake and the goals we must achieve in the former Yugoslavia in the next few years .
In principle I am very pleased that this report has been presented to us , and I am also pleased that it is a critical one .
I probably do not agree with Mrs Müller on every point , but I am glad all the same that the points have been so clearly made .
However , I wish to emphasize above all that in my view it was enormously important for the European Union at least to fly the flag in Mostar , particularly in view of the number of times when it has been expected to help and has done nothing .
I am also firmly convinced that the EU administrator Hans Koschnick , the former Mayor of Bremen , has achieved a very great deal .
I was able to visit him on a number of occasions and was able to see at first hand the progress made there , as Mr Titley described it .
It was very interesting to notice in my discussions with him the way he frequently emphasized how much he had learned from studying history , particularly from studying the Moravian agreement of 1906 , which was Europe 's first example of how a legal basis can be secured for the peaceful coexistence of peoples and ethnic groups with equal rights .
However , I should also like to point out that Mr Koschnick 's activities and tasks really came to grief at the point when he stopped keeping to the principles of the Moravian agreement .
For me , however , Mostar is also a clear example demonstrating that much that was resolved in the Dayton Agreement was incapable of leading to the establishment of a goal simply because many of those involved were not willing to put the required effort into backing it and working on it .
Please allow me to take this opportunity of citing two brief examples of human rights which merit a mention in this context .
The first is that of Father Matanovi , the Catholic priest who , with his parents , is still being held prisoner by the Bosnian Serb army ; Bishop Komarica of Banjaluka is continuing to draw attention to this , and has established where he is being held .
No practical steps are being taken to obtain his release , which would also help to implement the Dayton Agreement .
The second case is that of Colonel Peresyn , who was shot down in the liberation of Western Slavonia , landed in an area occupied by the Serbs , and is still languishing in prison today .
Although his precise whereabouts are known , nothing is being done to help him .
I believe that all this serves as a signal to us that we as a college have a duty to concentrate more in the next few years on our responsibilities to the states adjoining the EU , to remember our European responsibilities , and to give our support to the former Yugoslavia .
Thank you very much , Mr Habsburg-Lothringen .
I think those were your first two speeches in this House .
So I want to welcome your participation and I feel sure that your views will be a valuable addition to our debates .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a kind of compensation I should like to speak in English now .
The Commission greatly appreciates the fact that both the European Parliament , in particular the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control , and the European Court of Auditors have taken an early , active and , I would add , supportive interest in this first major CFSP joint action of the European Union .
The Commission , as well as the Union Administration in their joint official reply to the Court of Auditors ' report , have expressed their basic agreement with its findings and recommendations .
Mrs Müller 's report broadly endorses these findings by elaborating on the mainly institutional lessons which should be drawn from this unique experience .
We share the conclusion of the motion for a resolution that this joint action was justified and worthwhile , although not all its goals have been achieved and that it provides valuable lessons for the future .
This is not the place to discuss in detail all the points stressed by the resolution , many of which are indeed on the agenda of the IGC and all need careful consideration .
Certainly , political and administrative procedures need streamlining in the future .
Financial accountability has to be clarified .
Proper preparation , follow-up and supervision by a permanent structure could greatly improve efficiency .
The same is true of exclusive financing from the Community budget .
Recommendation No 14 encourages the Commission to propose new joint actions in the former Yugoslavia , in particular for the return of refugees and support for independent media .
The 