Resumption of the session
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish you all a very happy New Year , and declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday 19 December 1997 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of 19 December 1997 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , at the start of our last Parliamentary part-session , various Members from various political groups condemned the murder of José Luis Caso , a local councillor in the Basque Country . Also during that week , this House received a visit from the family of another local councillor , Miguel Ángel Blanco , who was also murdered some months previously , 48 hours after having been kidnapped .
On Friday , Mr President , José Ignacio Iruretagoyena , a local councillor in Zarautz , was murdered .
All of them were Basques , " guilty ' of having been democratically elected to represent their people - the Basque people .
In recent days there have also been acts of terrorism in other regions of the European Union . People are demanding that we , the representatives of the European peoples , should not just issue a condemnation , Mr President , but also commit ourselves to initiative and to boosting Community policies to combat terrorism .
What is at stake is the most basic of all human rights , Mr President : the right to live .
Mr President , I do not want to spend too much time on this , but obviously , the loss of a human life - the despicable murder of a representative of the Partido Popular , Mr Iruretagoyena , in Zarautz last week - means that we in the Group of the Party of European Socialists are forced to repeat our condemnation of this type of act .
Europe needs to develop an awareness of pacifist issues , in order to avoid a repetition of such acts .
The Spanish people have repeatedly held demonstrations on this question .
I believe that the rest of Europe supports us , as do the governments of the European countries , in our struggle against terrorism .
Let us hope that in the building of Europe such acts - which are totally unjustified - can be completely eradicated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is painful to have once again to begin one of our part-sessions by reminding ourselves that , using the force of the word , we are pitted against the force of arms and the force of murder .
Once again , Mr President , intolerance , violence and fascism have destroyed a life .
The destruction of a life is always painful , but this was the life of a democratic representative of the people .
It is a double murder : the murder of an individual and the murder of democracy .
However , I would like to take this opportunity to say that there is an ample majority in the Basque Country who are opposed to violence and fascism .
They are witnesses to the fact that in the Basque Country and in Spain all opinions can be upheld , through democracy and coexistence .
We have to tell the fascist minorities that we have already experienced fascism this century , disguised as the Right and also as the Left , and it does not fool us when it comes disguised as nationalism .
We respect the wish of each and every people to defend their identity , as long as it is done by democratic means .
Mr President , as a Member representing the Basque Country , I should also like to comment : firstly to express support for the family of the murdered man , José Ignacio Iruretagoyena , and also , on behalf on my party , for members of the Partido Popular , to which he belonged .
However , he was not just a member of that party ; he was an elected representative of the Basque people .
Therefore , not only has ETA committed the heinous act of murdering an individual , but it has also committed the additional crime of killing a representative of the people .
Nobody - not even ETA - can succeed in silencing the voice and the will of a people , not even using guns and bombs .
So , besides expressing support for our colleagues in the Partido Popular and for the victim 's family , I would also like to end on a note of hope : the voice of the people , democracy , liberty and human dignity can in the end defeat violence , bombs and guns .
Thank you very much , Mr President .
Mr President , the Group Union for Europe fully agrees with the comments just made by our Spanish colleagues .
We share their emotion and their indignation .
We have never ceased to repeat that no political cause justifies murder , and we of course stand in solidarity with all those who , elected by the people , by democracy , are savagely assassinated by those who challenge the very roots of democracy , as Mr Gutiérrez Díaz has just said .
Mr President , we request that you send our very sincere condolences to the victims ' families and to the Basque people .
Mr President , since we last met we have seen the arrest of former President Kenneth Kaunda in Zambia and the rather shabby treatment which has been dished out to him .
Several governments have asked the Zambian Government to release him or charge him and , at present , he seems to be in a state of limbo .
I should like to ask if you would consider writing a letter to Mr Kaunda , expressing the support of this Parliament , and also to the Zambian authorities voicing similar concerns to other governments ?
Thank you , Mr Wynn .
Order of business
Mr President , we all know that , politically , the European Commission is accountable to the European Parliament .
It is an essential part of the democratic relationship we have in the Union .
It is in the light of this democratic relationship that I would like to ask the Commission to give a short statement this week .
It is stated in various newspaper reports that a difference of opinion exists within the European Commission about whether Members of the Commission have the right to accept political mandates during their membership of the Commission .
To be more specific , according to newspaper reports , Commissioner Silguy is alleged to be going to stand in Brittany in March .
According to these same newspaper reports the President of the European Commission , Mr Santer , is alleged to be opposed to Mr Silguy 's seeking and accepting a mandate of this kind .
My question is whether the Commission wishes to make a statement in which it clarifies its position in this matter .
The question is the more important , Mr President , as it does not only concern relations between the Commission and this Parliament .
According to the Financial Times of this morning , the French President , Mr Jacques Chirac , is alleged to have intervened personally in favour of Mr Silguy 's right to seek a political mandate .
If the French President gets involved in this discussion it seems to me that the Commission as an institution cannot remain silent .
I would like to ask the Commission to make a statement by way of clarification .
The Commission may have the floor , to express their view on this .
Mr President , I wish to simply inform the House that it would be appropriate to put the business down for consideration .
That would serve the interests of this democratic Chamber and also , of course , the requirements of courtesy as far as the Commission is concerned .
Mr President , all I know about this case is what I have read in a few press agency telexes this afternoon .
I think it is important that the European Commission gives an explanation of this in the European Parliament .
I have read that consultation will take place in the confines of the European Commission , at least between the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , and Mr Silguy .

But it is extremely important that we in this Parliament are informed as soon as possible .
So I agree with the question , but I must insist that the European Commission is given the opportunity to define its position .
As you know , the Commission has the right to make a statement , according to Rule 37 of our Rules of Procedure .
Clearly , at least two political groups - the Group of the European People 's Party and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party - have requested the Commission to avail itself of that right .
I am informed that the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left also support this request .
The Commission will come to its own conclusions , and it is up to them to make that statement when they are ready to do so .
I feel sure it is important for this to be done as soon as possible , for the sake of good relations between Parliament and the Commission .
( The order of business was adopted )
White Paper on railways and rail freight freeways
The next item is the report ( A4-0412 / 97 ) by Mr Sarlis , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Commission 's White Paper " A Strategy for Revitalizing the Community 's Railways ' , and the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , " Trans European Rail Freight Freeways ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0242 - C40269 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the Commission 's White Paper is a comprehensible , clear and comprehensive text and has been constructed on firm foundations .
This commendation does not of course detract from the fact that there are disagreements about the analysis and the recommendations that the Commission makes .
Firstly I must emphasize that the views , the proposals and the conclusions of the White Paper should not be surprising , given the fact that , to a large degree , they are in keeping and in harmony with the principles laid down for the first time in the 1965 Council Resolution No 271 and Regulation 1191 / 69 .
How and why both these statutes , which were made law 25 years ago , have to a great extent not been put into force is another story .
There are two main points on which the Committee on Transport and Tourism disagrees with the proposals of the Commission : firstly , the Committee on Transport does not accept on the one hand the Commission proposal for immediate and unlimited liberalization of access to the railway network , and on the other , the proposal for a posteriori settlement of any problems that may arise on account of total Big Bang-like liberalization .
Quite the contrary , the Committee on Transport is of the opinion that open access to the railway network must come about not all at once but progressively , step by step , in parallel with the taking of necessary accompanying measures such as those implemented in air and sea transport and telecommunications .
The second point on which the Committee on Transport disagrees is on social policy : the Committee on Transport feels that the White Paper is short on recommendations of how to face the problems that will arise for working people , and also on the safety of rail transport following the completion of open access .
With the resolution that you are being asked to rule on , the Committee on Transport is proposing various measures for the further training of personnel , for the mutual recognition of degrees and diplomas , and for the harmonization of working conditions , which we hope the Commission and Parliament will accept .
However , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Transport agrees with many of the proposals of the White Paper , such as those relating to economic measures and to the revitalizing of the railways , those relating to services of mutual benefit , to the integration of national systems and , above all , those relating to rail freight freeways .
Particularly as regards freeways , while we are in favour of creating such freeways with all possible speed , we would nevertheless wish to draw the attention of the Commission , but above all that of the Council , to the fact that particular care needs to be taken over the choice and backing of the first freeways , so as to exclude the possibility of the dissection of the rail network in the European Union .
For this reason and in this regard , in our resolution we stress the necessity of there not being a beginning or an end point which would be determined by a single port of call , especially in the initial phase of the creation of rail freeways .
We believe that rail freeways should be open to all , and they should have the possibility of being linked either from north to south or from east to west .
For this reason we repeat once more that the issue of the railways , which we regard as urgent and about which we are in sympathy with the Commission study , must be looked at very carefully and very assiduously , since it is very easy for these rail freeways to prolong the dissection of the railways of the European Union .
We must also be aware that the rail network of continental Europe still essentially reflects today the disagreements and differences that were prevalent in Europe in the nineteenth century .
Therefore , by creating rail freeways , we must make very sure that this is the nucleus of the creation of a unified European rail network and not , as I said before , the beginning of the dissection of the railways on our continent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has been studying the social issues connected with the general revitalization of the railways .
As draftsman of the Committee 's opinion on this subject I am pleased to see that the Sarlis report has dealt with the general social aspects of the public transport sector and has also included personnel issues .
Let me make a few general comments on this subject .
To do this , we must go back a little way into the history of the European railway industry to see the many instances of neglect which have led to the current need for revitalization and for the proper management of the social aspects involved .
I would like to say something about this .
Fundamental to any revitalization process is the ability to face up to economic reality - and this is an area in which the public authorities of the different Member States have often been lacking .
Without doubt , this has in turn led to unfair competition between rail and road transport .
We are attempting to rectify this situation at a time when environmental compatibility is at least being properly understood , when the advantages of rail transport are incontestable and when the appropriate framework conditions for freight transport in Europe have not even yet been laid .
To me this seems absolutely absurd .
Furthermore , I ought to mention that now the EU 's eastwards enlargement has been given de facto approval , it seems to be essential that this project be given a pan-European dimension .
This question is of special significance for the environmental management of the forthcoming transport agreement , particular the freight traffic agreement , as we anticipate the growth rates currently being forecast for this sector .
As well as appreciating the full extent of this problem and the real need for a revaluation of the EU 's railway services , we must not forget that safety has a vital role to play in all this .
Better training of railway personnel must therefore be high on the agenda , and this must have a trans-border dimension .
Such improvements are only sensible , yet the White Paper still makes no mention of them .
This oversight also applies to many supporting measures and to those personnel who are involved in major revitalization projects - and it is one which must be remedied with immediate effect .
Commissioner , this is not just wishful thinking , it is something which should be reflected in the policies we implement .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Sarlis for the hard work that he has put into this report .
I would also like to thank the Commission and Commissioner Kinnock for the work they have done .
The fact remains that whilst we all love railways and recognize the need for railways , there are severe problems within the European rail industry , problems that need to be addressed by us all .
There are many areas in which we can agree with both the Commission and Mr Sarlis .
We can agree that there is a need to revitalize our railway network , particularly in the freight sector .
We can agree that we need to assure open access to that rail network , particularly for international cross-border freight .
We need to wholeheartedly support the principle of the freight freeway , and the Commission has done very good work in establishing that particular principle .
We also agree that we need to ensure that the existing directives , particularly Directive 91 / 440 , which I have a personal interest in , is implemented in national law and implemented in the railway sector .
The only point on which we differ slightly with the Commission is the speed or the timetable for introducing these proposals .
In that regard we very much support Mr Sarlis ' step-by-step approach , because we must ensure that any liberalization is accompanied by the social measures that are needed to protect those within the industry .
Let us be under no illusion here .
Unless we take action in the rail sector we are in danger of having no rail freight at all in 20 years time within our continent of Europe .
That is a situation we cannot let go without taking the drastic actions that are needed .
If we can get this balance right we could be at the beginning of a much needed renewal of the railways , we could be instrumental in giving the railways back the priority that they deserve .
Mr President , the report we are debating today represents a great leap forward , because we are now closer to the highly desirable aim of liberalizing Community railways , in such a way as to permit their revitalization in terms of competition with other methods of transport .
That is what the Commission is advocating in its White Paper , and we agree .
The rapporteur , Mr Sarlis , deserves to be congratulated , because his work combines sensible doses of realism with the headstrong eagerness felt by many of us to see our railways modernized as quickly as possible .
Proof of that realism is his insistence , and the fact that he concludes that such liberalization must be carried out gradually , to avoid setbacks due to counterproductive haste .
By the same token , his proposed order of priority is entirely reasonable , dealing successively with international freight transport , national freight transport , and international passenger services .
This point needs to be stressed : it will never be possible to achieve a high quality international passenger service , worthy of a modern European Union , without developing the relevant infrastructures .
It is impossible to picture the European Union as a world pioneer , in keeping with the demands for progress which are to be expected of the twenty-first century , if we do not manage to achieve high-speed passenger links between the capitals of all the Member States , at the very least .
Because of where I live , I regularly experience the deficiencies of the rail link between Madrid and Lisbon , and there are other capital cities within the Union which could be mentioned as further examples .
Until we succeed in converting routes like Madrid-Lisbon to high speed , our railways will fail to enter the twenty-first century .
To conclude , Mr President , I want to place on record that the rapporteur is also right to attach so much importance to social aspects , especially with regard to adapting the railways for the convenience of children , the disabled and the elderly .
Mr President , Commissioner , once again we have the opportunity to cry out in pain and also , if we want to , to try to find a solution to several problems , in connection with Mr Sarlis ' excellent technical report .
We all know that in Europe in general and , unfortunately , in my country in particular , the railways are facing ever deeper crises .
The statistics bear this out : over the last 25 years , the railways have lost 58 % of goods and passenger transportation , while road transportation has increased by 150 % ; the passenger share has dropped to 4 % of overall transportation , and the goods share to 9 % .
In view of this situation , I believe that the full and demanding transport plan for the trans-European lines can no longer be sufficient to point out the paths to be taken .
So we have to ask ourselves : how have we reached this situation ?
First of all , the initial cause is the appearance of other means of transport , certainly faster and also more economical ; then the lack of management independence ; and also bad management , particularly when assigned to public bodies .
So what are the solutions ?
It is difficult to mention them all in the space of a few seconds .
Firstly , the sector should be opened up to free competition and to private operators ; then we need to carry out business improvement and a general reorganization of the sector , and , in several amendments , my group gives a few specific indications on how to act ; we also need to ensure the full implementation of Directive 91 / 440 , favour the development of railway passes for goods transportation , provide greater inter-operability between the system and , finally and above all , implement works such as railway tunnels and trans-European projects , that are the keystone to many other problems .
With regard to the central European region , I am thinking in particular of two main lines , Lyons-Turin-Venice and Monaco-Verona , of the north-south route , which would solve many problems But all the governments need to get involved in this .
Mr President , senate deliberante perit Saguntum . We are here together , and beneath us the entire plan which the Commission presented so beautifully , which we have talked about so often and on which we actually agree , is falling to pieces .
We in Europe are suffering from a traffic infarction , we agree overwhelmingly that we want to move traffic away from the roads onto the railways as soon as possible , and yet nothing happens .
The freight freeways , assuming the Commission is right , are already doomed to failure , because every railway company continues with its own line , as ever , and says : no , we are not going to participate .
You are shaking your head , Commissioner .
SNCF does not want to participate . Ferroriale Statale , which owes the Italian State L6000 billion , does want not any stops on any part of its network , but wants journeys to be continued straight through to southern Italy .
The Rotterdam-Genoa freight freeway is now doomed to failure .
The previous speaker said it : road transport has increased by 150 % and rail transport has decreased by 75 % .
With all due regard to Mr Sarlis ' report , despite the Commission 's good intentions , and despite the fact that we all agree ( with the exception of Mrs Moreau , whose amendments amount to nothing and are wide of the truth ) we are not achieving anything .
The responsibility is yours , Commissioner .
Mr President , the revitalization of the railways is a necessity , given the structure they provide within our societies .
This revitalization is essential to provide an alternative to " everything going by road ' . The environmental damage and danger to safety that road transport represents are reaching limits which are unacceptable to the public .
Unfortunately , the only way the Commission has envisaged revitalizing our railways is by completely liberalizing them .
Mr Sarlis ' report proposes achieving this in two stages which , apart from opening them up to competition , will leave only national passenger transport in place .
We cannot agree to this .
This liberal fixation , whether it be in one or two stages , is not likely to provide an answer to the challenge which has been raised .
The rail transport sector has already lost 500 , 000 jobs in Europe since 1985 .
Yet the White Paper only devotes a few anodyne lines to the social consequences of the policy to be followed , which Mr Sarlis rightly criticizes .
In this regard , a balance sheet of how Directive 91 / 440 has been applied is necessary , and we are in agreement with the demand in Mr Sarlis ' report that this balance sheet should be democratically drawn up , in coordination with the unions and passenger associations .
By favouring more profitable services , opening up to competition risks shattering the coherence of national networks , and open access to freight freeways for all operators - which is demanded in the report - moves in this direction .
A completely different orientation must be taken by substituting the destructive logic of competition with the constructive logic of cooperation .
That is where efficiency lies , and it is not by chance that the first freight freeway in service - opened today , I believe - is the fruit of cooperation between French , Belgian and Luxembourg state networks .
It is in the interests of the European Union to promote this perspective , enabling both the service and the supply of transport to improve .
In this regard , just like the French Government , we are opposed to moving beyond Directive 91 / 440 .
Furthermore , the rail workers reject the ultra-liberal orientation of the Commission .
Many workers ' actions have taken place , with public support , and last November 10 000 rail workers from the European Union demonstrated in Brussels against the direction the White Paper was moving in .
Our group will continue to relay constantly these demands , which highlight the urgent need to come up with a transport policy based on the development of public services and on cooperation , which encourages a quality rail transport system , accessible to the greatest number , and which respects the environment and creates jobs .
Mr President , the revitalization of the railways is of crucial importance to the sustainable society in Europe .
The developments in transport do not make us feel very optimistic , even though we have recognized for years the importance of changes in transport and of finding a way for us to organize it .
In the densely populated centres of Europe , traffic grinds to a halt daily .
The emissions of CO2 in particular are not getting any less , as we think they should , but in fact are increasing .
In the near future , it is not only passengers who should get out of the car and onto the train , but freight which should go off the road and onto the railway .
Unfortunately , our still extremely national railways are simply not ready for such an operation .
Total liberalization looks like a an elegant solution , but causes tensions , particularly in the transport of passengers , as regards the responsibilities of public services .
Besides , liberalization will not have a positive effect until all modes of transport actively foot the bill of the costs actually produced , including social and environmental costs .
We should not have a situation in which one mode of transport does not have to pay VAT or taxes , whereas the other one does ; because that leaves a big discrepancy .
The White Paper 's proposals for freight freeways can be called thoroughly positive .
Their development will have a positive effect on the increase in the amount of freight transported by rail .
For it requires - although we are not there yet - the demolition of national barriers and the creation of space for this form of transport .
Priority for the development of these freight freeways will have to be primarily centred on transalpine transport , and on increasing freight transport between eastern and western Europe , so that there will finally be a proper solution to the problem .
Mr President , the White Paper conveys very clearly the precarious position of the European railway companies .
In 1970 the share of rail transportation in the total movement of goods within the European Union was still 31.7 % .
In 1994 this share had dropped to 14.9 % , less than half !
The growth in freight transport has ended up entirely on the road .
This development must be reversed .
Citizens in EU countries are increasingly confronted with the harmful effects of road transport on the environment .
What 's more , in large cities , road transport is reaching its spacial limits .
Roads are simply getting full up .
In addition , in the near future , an even greater increase of goods transport is to be expected .
We have to conclude that rail transport 's biggest problem is the way in which the railway companies operate .
Despite the fact that there has been one internal European market since 1993 , the railways are still of a very markedly national orientation .
Besides , they do not always work with the best interest of the market and customers in mind .
I therefore support the remedy recommended in the White Paper , which is for there to be more competition on the railways .
The Sarlis report , more so than the Commission , rightly points to the social consequences of restructuring the European railway companies .
On 19 November 1996 , tens of thousands of railway workers from the European Union demonstrated in Brussels against the European Commission 's White Paper . They would not have done that without a reason .
But we have to bear in mind two issues .
Firstly , restructuring is necessary for the survival of the railways and the preservation of jobs .
Secondly , the social consequences should not be absorbed by the European Union , but by the Member States .
The Sarlis report does at least suggest that a European solution to the social problems is required , but it thereby raises false expectations .
Setting aside the long time the rapporteur took to produce the report , another point of criticism against the report is the restrictions it wants to impose on road transport .
The restriction requested in paragraph 7 on freight weight and the speed limits for road transport does not make rail transport any more efficient .
Restrictions on freight weight is harmful for the environment as it will mean an increase in the number of journeys .
The most remarkable proposal by the Commission is the plan for freight freeways .
The first , from Rotterdam to Milan , was supposed to have started about now .
When other Member States remain uninvolved , the Commission should take measures for limited liberalization , to which the Member States were bound back in 1991 by means of the directive .
Mr President , the Commission 's White Paper is full of the necessity for great foresight .
The plans resulting from the White Paper for freeways for the benefit of freight transport is proof of the notion that words and paper are no longer enough .
The report by the Committee on Transport and Tourism to which my colleague Mr Sarlis has given his best efforts , shares the analysis made in the White Paper , but displays some reticence when it comes to the speed of the necessary restructuring .
I want to say that the measures the Commission has in mind , and which in themselves are supported in Mr Sarlis ' report , may be able to give the railways a new place on the map .
In this , governments will play a different , but no less important role .
What should not be allowed to happen in the meantime , is for the doors which are now ajar to be quietly closed .
The splendid cooperation Mrs Moreau spoke of just now could be an example of this .
This may have disastrous consequences for freighters , transporters , and also for society .
Mr President , it goes without saying that I am very sympathetic to fears of the social consequences of such farreaching restructuring .
But Commissioner Kinnock is right .
Without the measures he has in mind , jobs will be lost on a very grand scale .
Not only from the railways themselves , but also from the industrial railway complex that lies behind it .
However , noblesse oblige .
The call for reform may put the concern about social consequences in the shade .
When the Member States , the Commission and this Parliament all wish to give rail the future suggested in important speeches and important policy documents , employers should not be the ones to suffer , and suitable solutions must be found .
An antisocial market economy has no place in the profile of a European Union .
To conclude , political discussion about transport policy is interesting , but no less interesting are the opinions of other participants in the debate .
In the magazine of the Dutch freighters ' organisation EVO , the mouthpiece of tens of thousands of small , medium and large businesses , I read the following in a survey of trends within the transport sector , under the heading of " rail transport ' .
I quote : ' ' European rail policy finds itself in a crucial phase .
The freighter can expect little from rail transport over the coming years .
Politicians should therefore stop going on about the increase in road transport . '
They are mere words , but they are words which emerge from the corner which carries the freight , Mr President , and it is this freight which is the subject of this debate .
From now on we should realize this more than ever .
Mr President , I should like to welcome the Commission White Paper and the Sarlis report .
In particular , I support the main objectives with the aim of encouraging the transfer of traffic from road to rail .
All of us in this House would welcome the environmental benefits that such a transfer could bring .
Further liberalization of the rail sector is necessary .
As Mr Simpson has mentioned , we are awaiting the implementation into national law of the Commission directives already adopted .
In my view , there should be a clear separation between the management of infrastructure and the operation of services to ensure transparency .
Perhaps the Commission might like to take the UK model in this regard .
Open access should be extended to all freight and international passenger services .
It is especially important that we insist that normal state aids criteria should apply in restructuring railway finances .
It is absolutely vital that there should be no distortion of the market in this regard .
In supporting the introduction of rail freight freeways , I see this as a first step towards the creation of open access on Member States ' rail networks .
However , it is important that this be accompanied by proposals on financial restructuring and the development of methodology for access charging .
I commend the Sarlis report to the House and congratulate the Commission on introducing its White Paper .
Mr President , as the late Tip O 'Neill said : ' All politics is local ' .
I want to address this paper on that basis .
Ireland 's urban transport is in chaos .
In my own constituency of Dublin , transport congestion must be tackled as a national priority .
Gridlock is the order of the day .
With the Irish economy doing so well we cannot stand by and allow transport inefficiencies to become a limiting factor in that growth .
Hard political decisions must be made now .
It is time for firm political leadership .
It is imperative that the work begins on the Dublin light transit system known as Luas before the millennium .
New structural funds have been allocated to it and will be re-routed away from the project if work does not commence by the year 2000 .
The Luas tribunal must begin as a matter of urgency .
The light transit system should be part of an integrated transport system .
It would not succeed without other mainstream transport infrastructure projects such as the major C ring road , the Dublin port tunnel and the upgrading of the main roads out of the city .
More than 30 % of the traffic into Dublin is in transit and it is time to take a firm political decision to sort out the transport problems once and for all .
All these systems should be linked to a modern rail network with up-to-date rolling stock .
Irish Rail needs major investment and modernization .
In my view , it is unfair to blame the workers for constant breakdowns and delays in the train service .
The reality is that we have neglected our transport and rail systems at a national level .
We must ensure that while the economy is buoyant we invest wisely in rail and road networks and in other transport infrastructures .
It is of the utmost importance that we in Ireland do not get left behind our mainland European neighbours on the economically and socially vital issues of transport .
Finally , I find it intolerable that in a major capital city like Dublin we still have an inefficient bus service from the airport to the city centre .
That is part of what is wrong with our transport system .
Mr President , railways and environmentally-friendly and long-term sustainable means of transport must be one of the most important areas which we as elected representatives can devote ourselves to in the European Parliament , and of course in other parliaments too .
But we must , as representatives of the peoples of the EU , decide whether we want to concentrate on railways more than on aircraft , motorways and bridges , such as the Öresund bridge in Sweden .
We must prioritize railway investment .
But we are not doing that .
Instead we are treating it as part of all the other means of transport .
We should prioritize energy-saving , environmentally-friendly , sustainable means of transport .
That includes railways .
However , I am not so sure that deregulation is the best way to do that .
There are other measures which are much better .
We must also ensure that old railways are improved .
In addition , we must take into account a number of different factors , such as efficiency , regional considerations , energy aspects , environmental aspects and employment aspects , so that railways become a competitive means of transport in Europe .
Mr President , the Commission 's White Paper is aimed at the immediate liberalization of rail transport , and especially the unlimited access of private businesses to rail networks .
Our rapporteur , Mr Sarlis , apparently worried about the consequences , is making an admittedly notable attempt to slow the speed down and to raise a number of problems which , in his opinion , call for the gradual promotion of liberalization .
However , such intense anxieties cannot be confronted in this way .
When all is said and done , at some point in time there needs to be a rundown of the consequences of total liberalization in all sectors , such as air freight , sea freight , the European ship repair industry , etc ..
The citizens of Europe need to realize the repercussions in both the public and the broader service sector , the dramatic deterioration of freight safety and of quality of service .
They need to be aware of the enormous repercussions on employment , on working conditions and on the social rights of workers .
If we look at things in this way , then we will realize the dangers involved in liberalization , which is being pushed forward by the Commission , and of course we will assume our own responsibilities and react accordingly .
Mr President , I argue in favour of an efficient and modern railway system .
Clearly , there are many ways of achieving this and I am not sure that we are all in agreement with the method proposed in the White Paper .
Why plead the case for an efficient rail system ?
Because , in balancing up the different methods of transport , we give an essential priority to rail as opposed to road , for social reasons , for ecological reasons , for reasons of town and country planning , for coherence of transport policies .
From this perspective , Directive 91 / 440 establishes what we consider to be a sufficient starting point .
When , however , a discussion came before the Council to go beyond this Directive , certain governments , including quite clearly the French government , were opposed to this direction .
This is why the idea has been put forward in a White Paper enabling the question of liberalization to be considered as a whole .
Unfortunately , not only does the White Paper maintain fully the amendments to Directive 91 / 440 , it goes further .
It now seems that the White Paper , as it is presented , is not a realistic way to handle the future of the railways .
How could anyone think that the White Paper will enable the problems of this sector to be solved ? The social consequences are vast - we have been reminded of the figures : 500 000 jobs , being one third of all staff , have been lost between 1985 and 1995 , and the Commission confirms this tendency for the future , although it suggests no solution , preferring to leave responsibility with individual Member States .
It seems , however , that recent experience has shown us that to deal with the question of transport from a position of competition and liberalization only , deliberately ignoring the social dimension , may be a serious error .
In his report , Mr Sarlis does not approve of the White Paper as it stands .
Rather than an immediate liberalization , he proposes a gradual liberalization .
This does not seem realistic to us . At least for the moment , all further liberalization should be rejected , given that there has been no evaluation of the results of Directive 91 / 440 on an objective basis .
All the possibilities of Directive 91 / 440 must be explored before it is amended , and cooperation must be encouraged between rail operators .
This is the reason why , along with a number of my colleagues , I have signed many amendments and we will refuse to vote for certain paragraphs in Mr Sarlis ' report .
Mr President , let me first express my sincere thanks to Mr Sarlis for his careful and comprehensive treatment of the subject matter and for his excellent conclusions , with which I agree .
I would just like to look at some of these issues in more detail .
It is regrettable that the Commission has excluded the social question , despite the fact that some 500 000 jobs have already been lost throughout the European rail industry .
Commission proposals are urgently required to provide assistance in the following areas .
Firstly , requirements and procedures for the common recognition of contracts and diplomas awarded to railway staff .
Secondly , retraining of personnel for the new jobs being provided by the new railway companies .
Thirdly , the general harmonization of working conditions for railway employees ; and fourthly , the necessary formal and fundamental qualifications and the guarantee of a professional training scheme for personnel who are taken on by the new railway companies .
I would further urge the Commission to propose the necessary structural amendments to the operation of the European social fund so that it can deal with the problems arising in respect of unemployment and early retirement in the railway industry , which in many Member States have been the result of restructuring in the rail transport sector .
I would emphasize that rail transport has a vital role to play in allowing socially disadvantaged citizens , who cannot afford private transport of their own , to assert their right to freedom of mobility .
Mr President , good though unification and the attempt to revitalize the railways may be , there are nevertheless other alternatives apart from those emphasized by my colleagues , especially in the social sphere .
Firstly , the rail network is literally facing scandalously unfair competition from trucks .
What direction is the Commission going in ?
Will we burden trucks with the cost of motorways or will we deduct from the railways the cost of infrastructure ?
But then the states will get hold of it and what will become of their deficits ?
I want a clear direction .
Or will we place tolls on the railways ?
Things must be simplified at some point or other .
Secondly , railways in Europe have problems , administrative for the most part in the west , but also problems of development and integration in the east and , chiefly , the south . I am thinking here of the Balkans , of Greece , etc .
There , and I repeat , the problem is not so much administrative as the organization and completion of its network .
What is the direction of the Commission ?
Mr President , I am not convinced by the Community support frameworks that I have seen .
Priority is still given to the car and to motorways , while crumbs are given to the railways .
Policy needs to be changed .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think we know that the social issue should not be ignored . But if we leave the railways as they are , we will lose credibility .
We need to take into account the degree of difficulty faced by the railways in Europe and in the individual Member States at the moment .
We need to restore the competitiveness of the railway system , which is possible in the light of the analysis proposed , but naturally we cannot just consider the railway system and railway transportation ; we also need to take other means into account , the role this competitiveness can play in trade and in combined transportation and , naturally , how the various means of transport are integrated .
From this point of view , we cannot isolate the revitalization of the railway system from the other issues being examined by the European Union .
I am thinking , for example , of the subject that has been rightly raised regarding the internationalization of costs .
I think that , from this point of view , we need to tackle the subjects of possible incidents , congestion , pollution and noise .
The methods of transport will become competitive once again if we deal with these aspects as well as the White Paper on Railways , so as to enable the various means of transport to compete fairly .
In this connection , I therefore think we should not consider this project in isolation , but we should take into account the fact that serious problems exist in Europe .
I am thinking of the 50 thousand killed in road accidents , the 7 , 800 killed in Italy every year - again in road accidents - and the serious problems of atmospheric pollution .
We also have to face the social issue , otherwise it risks being faced alone , because if the railway system is no longer competitive , we will no longer be able to guarantee jobs for those currently employed on the railways .
We therefore need to assume this responsibility , and we should do so above all as the left .
From this point of view , the answer may be more significant .
Who is going to run the railways ?
This is a very important point .
We should ensure that , with competitiveness and competition , access to the railways is not reserved just for the large companies and large groups .
We should also ensure that access to the management of the railways is democratic , and that it is also possible for small and medium-sized companies , cooperatives and social structures to take part , providing guarantees against social dumping , observing working hours and safety .
Only in this way can the railway system be revitalized .
Mr President , thank you very much , can I begin by wishing you and the whole of the House a very happy New Year .
The Sarlis report before the House today , Mr President , is a truly valuable contribution to the debate about revitalizing the railways of the European Union .
As both the Commission and Parliament agree , major changes are essential if the railways are to survive as a significant and essential means of transport throughout Europe , as we all want for every sensible economic , employment and environmental reason .
The report is , as we would have expected from its author , positive and constructive about revitalizing rail transport and while I am glad to say it supports the general policy that the Commission has proposed , it also makes valuable recommendations about how the change should be brought about .
I therefore warmly congratulate the rapporteur Mr Sarlis for a report that has strengths of strategic vision and practicality .
I assure him and the House that the proposals which he makes will be given careful and positive consideration .
I do not think that I oversimplify when I say that there are two basic messages in the report .
One is that liberalization must be progressive and the other is that accompanying measures to facilitate change must be adopted as that liberalization takes place .
On the first point , I accept that market forces should be introduced progressively in order to give the railways time to adapt and for the Community to be able to put a comprehensive framework in place .
There has never been any intention therefore , nor is there any proposition , for what has been described as a ' Big Bang ' approach to the liberalization of European rail .
I also emphasize however , that change cannot be too slow or too gradual , simply because time is not on the side of the railways .
It has to be said , that if change is not made with a greater sense of urgency than is presently the case , there may be no Big Bang and that the only sound that we will hear is the funeral bell tolling at the demise of the railways .
This is not even a twenty-year prospect ; this is a dozen years ahead unless change is urgently embraced and urgently implemented .
In the course of some contributions today , which I greatly respect , including the contribution from Mme Berès , it was said that half a million jobs have gone from rail in the last fifteen years .
That is a tragic truth .
Part of our strategy , indeed central to the social consciousness of our strategy , is an absolute determination to implement policies that will save at least a substantial part of the million jobs that remain in rail and rail-associated industries over the next dozen years .
Without change , the casualty list over the next twelve years could be even bigger than it has been over the last fifteen years .
That is how grim the situation is ; that is how urgent the need for change must be .
Most of us would agree that there is urgency and that change must be introduced in a progressive fashion - not with great drama or with brutality but the direction must be absolutely certain .

It is imperative therefore that we make an energetic start , for instance by opening up international rail freight as soon as possible , as both Mr Simpson and Mr Baldarelli and Mr Castricum have emphasized , not only today but on many previous occasions .
The precise timing of the implementation of liberalization will , of course , have to be considered very carefully .
Once the Commission has produced all its proposals and the Council and the Parliament have begun discussion , that will be the time to decide where transitional periods are needed and which measures should be introduced in parallel .
Clearly , it is too early to discuss a precise timetable now since we do not know what the eventual opinion of the Council and the Parliament will be in reaction to the Commission 's proposal .
All I would say is that anyone , and I choose my words , who really values the contribution and the potential of rail in Europe , and certainly anyone who wants rail to thrive in the future , will not cause unnecessary delay in introducing the essential advances .
Mr Sarlis ' report rightly stresses that various measures must accompany rail liberalization .
As he acknowledges , the Commission 's approach makes broad provision in this respect and we are now moving forward toward action which will give practical effect to the proposal set out in our White Paper .
This year therefore I will be presenting three packages of railway measures : the first in the spring will relate to infrastructure and will include proposals for the further separation of infrastructure management and transport operations .
It will also include proposals relating to guidelines on infrastructure charges and guidelines on the allocation of train paths .
The second package to be produced in the summer will cover public service contracts in particular .
It will also cover state aids not only in the rail sector but in land transport generally .
Then , towards the end of the year , the third package will deal with railway inter-operability and the integration of national systems more generally , including the qualifications of railway staff .
In addition , in the first half of this year there will be two proposals covering transport as a whole with particular relevance obviously for rail : one relating to the extension of the working time directive to all transport workers and one in the form of a White Paper on infrastructure charges in transport generally .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity of responding to Mr Sarlis ' report to inform the House with some pleasure that the first rail freight freeways have opened despite the prophecies of gloom and doom which we have heard repeated from some parts of the House again this afternoon , for reasons I understand but do not necessarily accept .
It is necessary to travel in hope and with energy because if we adopt any other attitude then we guarantee the demise of rail .
Of course , there are different models to be pursued in the reform that is now under way in rail and as yet there are no complete and conclusive arrangements , for instance , on pricing .
No one in this House or elsewhere could have reasonably expected such perfection in these very early days of rail freight freeways .
The fact that freeways are operational and capable of showing their potential for making rail freight competitive with other modes , despite the inhibitions of tradition and the reservations still held in some quarters , is a tribute to all who have worked for progress .
It is also a source of encouragement towards further steps in the future .
Naturally , I agree that the freeways should extend throughout the Community wherever the need exists and links to the ports are important , as has been registered in the course of this debate again today .
The Commission will continue to stress that , whilst recognising that policy decisions on freeways must be made by the Member States and by infrastructure managers and not by the Commission , whose role is to promote the idea and to help to overcome the difficulties .
If we were to advocate the degree of centralization that would make responsibility for the allocation of train paths rest in the Breydel building in Brussels , we would be properly inviting a description of our attitudes as absurd .
We are enablers , we simply strive to ensure that others take full advantage of the changes that we are striving to make .
To conclude I warmly welcome this report and I am sure that this Parliament will consider the forthcoming proposals in the same positive way as it has the White Paper on revitalization and indeed the communication on rail freight freeways .
I am grateful for that and that this House shares the determination of the Commission to try to help to create railways that are capable of competing with other modes , of winning back markets and meeting the demands of people and businesses in this modern age .
If railways succeed in doing all that , they will succeed in giving themselves a full and prosperous future .
Those working for the railways will share in that future .
If change is not made along the lines again set out in this report , and indeed in the Commission 's White Paper the future is very bleak .
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the Commissioner for the kind words he has addressed to me concerning the report .
I would just like to add that the report , as presented to the partsession , is the result of the collaborative work of my colleagues in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , who really worked hard on the issue of railways , and took part in meetings and debates , so that we were able to come up with this result .
I should also add that I am delighted with the Commission 's response to the report , and that Parliament recognizes this response , from what I have gathered from the interest shown in the Committee on Transport .
I have two points that I would like to put to the Commissioner , if you would allow me .
One is that the amendment to the extending of working hours in all sections of the transport industry is very good news .
I regard this measure as extremely important . It is a measure that will smooth out the distortion of the competition that exists at the moment between road transport and the railways .
Finally , I would like to request that careful consideration be given to the issue of guidelines , if they are being contemplated , as regards the work agreements which will be signed by the network administrators .
There is a delicate issue here : that these work agreements may be judged to contravene article 85 of the Treaty .
Commissioner , these are two points that I would like you to bear in mind .
Mr President , it might be that I have missed something , or that we have completely different definitions of what a freight freeway is .
If we are talking about a rail infrastructure where there is free access and price competition , then , indeed , it might be that there is one freight freeway .
I do not want the Commissioner , by the way , to sit in the Breydel .
He should go out and persuade the operators to open up ....
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr President , very briefly to Mr Sarlis , I wish to express my gratitude to him for the reference he made to the extension of the working time directive .
He can look forward to further progress in this respect in the near future .
So far as guidelines relating to cooperation agreements are concerned , it is quite probable that such formality will not be needed .
It is enough - heeding a point made by Mr Wijsenbeek - that working in practical conjunction with infrastructure managers , we can secure the progress necessary .
Naturally , that will be very closely scrutinized .
If we think further developments could assist the more rapid development of rail freight freeways , we will respond to that urgently .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Operation of aeroplanes
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0404 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive amending Directive 92 / 14 / EEC on the limitation of the operation of aeroplanes covered by Part II , Chapter 2 , Volume 1 of Annex 16 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation , second edition ( 1988 ) ( C4-0530 / 97-96 / 0209 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr van Dam ) .
Mr President , Directive 92 / 14 prohibits the operation of all Chapter 2 aircraft in the European Union as from 1 April 2002 .
For the noisiest Chapter 2 aircraft , those that are more than 25 years old , and the so-called " narrow bodies ' , this ban entered into effect on 1 April 1995 .
A review of the Directive is not only necessary in order to amend the list of aircraft from developing countries .
In addition , it appears that Member States interpret the transitional period differently , and that exceptions are abused .
This abuse entails , amongst other things : subleasing or hiring an aeroplane with an exemption by another airline ; the wrongful application of exemptions , which were intended for airlines within the Union in connection with gradual replacement by air carriers in third countries ; and granting exemptions to air carriers within the Union .
The common position deserves positive response on the point of uniform interpretation of the Directive in all Member States .
In accordance with the amendments adopted by the European Parliament during the first reading of the Van der Waal report , subleasing will be prohibited .
Granting transitional terms to airlines outside the Union will also be prohibited .
The United Kingdom will not be required to suspend the licences granted to American companies who provide for gradual replacement .
Furthermore , granting exemptions to air carriers which are not airlines is prohibited .
The consequences of the ban on subleasing should not be underestimated .
It will lead to serious problems for a number of cargo airports within the Union , and for a number of developing countries .
Reports appeared in the press , for instance , saying that Ostend airport in Belgium is losing 45 000 tonnes , ie. about half of its cargo despatch , because only 11 out of the 43 African aircraft which now fly to Ostend appear on the list of exemptions .
Moreover , INZET , a Dutch organization for development cooperation , warned that it will become difficult for some African countries to continue to export their products to the Union by plane , because their cargo planes are no longer to be given exemptions .
In view of the total ban on Chapter 2 aircraft from 1 April 2002 and the serious noise pollution caused by aeroplanes , the rules must under no circumstances be stretched .
Great care has to be taken to ensure that these rules are complied with uniformly throughout the Union , considering the consequences of stepping up the rules against subleasing .
My question to the Commission is therefore whether they are prepared to supervise this compliance strictly .
In this context , I should point out that Ostend is accusing two French airports of trying to attract aircraft which are banned .
The European Parliament had also proposed in the first reading to give airports the opportunity to restrict access for all Chapter 2 aircraft before the commencement of the total ban on 1 April 2002 .
As a result of rapid growth in aviation , noise space has become the determining factor at some airports .
This is particularly the case at the Dutch national airport of Schiphol .
The takeoff or landing of one Chapter 2 aircraft takes up the noise space of five comparable Chapter 3 aircraft .
In the evening this comparison works out at one to ten .
The Council did not accept the amendments from the European Parliament on this issue .
The common position refers to Directive 2408 / 92 .
In this context , I ask the Commission whether this Directive offers airports the opportunity to refuse entry , not because the airport is physically full , but because the noise space has been used up .
Does the Commission agree with me that the reference to this regulation 2408 / 92 is not enough to push back aircraft noise ?
Are the opportunities for this not limited to issues like a night ban for Chapter 2 aircraft , day and night quotas and higher landing rights ?
I would love to hear from the Commission whether this does not leave a gap in the rules which makes it more difficult for airports to combat noise pollution .
On this point of amendment of the annex , the common position deserves sharp criticism .
It is really unacceptable that the Council and the European Commission wish to place Saudi Arabia on a list of exemptions .
Council and the Commission refer wrongly to the OECD 's list of developing nations .
In the original Directive 92 / 14 no reference to this list was made whatsoever .
If we do want to work with this list , then it offers the opportunity to differentiate between richer and poorer developing nations , as proposed by the European Parliament in the Van der Waal report .
By placing Saudi Arabia on the list of exemptions , it may get an exemption for nine more of these out-of-date , environmentally harmful aeroplanes in the year 2000 .
The rightful stepping up of the rules to ban subleasing presents problems to African countries , as I have said .
The fact that Saudi Arabia is allowed to continue flying to the European Union with a large number of equally noisy aircraft is all the more totally contrary to the spirit of Directive 92 / 14 .
I call on this Parliament to support these amendments , which aim to put an end to this unjust preference .
Perhaps we can stir Council and the Commission to return from their digressions .
I would like to thank the members of the transport committee who have supported me unanimously .
Let us be serious about combatting unnecessary aeroplane noise .
Mr President , the report proposed is the result of an exhaustive debate in committee , and it seems to me that the further amendments proposed take into account several inconsistencies that have not been accepted by Council .
I am of course also referring to the Saudi Arabian navy , which is basically classified as a navy of a developing country , something which seems very anachronistic to us .
In this connection , an amendment is tabled that refers to the OECD classification , and should therefore exclude the Saudi Arabian navy from the benefits resulting from the measure relating to polluting aircraft that do not make a noise and that are more than 25 years old .
Consequently , from this point of view , a positive requirement would be restored : the motion would essentially relate to those countries actually in difficulties and would guarantee the safety and , naturally , the quality of life of citizens living near the airports .
One further point , which seems important to me but which has not been raised , is of course competition .
I would like this point to be made , and not just by the Commission , that landing rights should not be the object of transfer because , naturally , the possibility of having a slot with an authorized aircraft is very important today in competition between the various countries .
There may also be the risk of this slot being transferred to third countries , and therefore the risk of a real marketing of slots on aircraft that are basically authorized and are polluting and also noisy .
All this could end up in an incorrect market mechanism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as was the case in the first reading , we now find ourselves caught in an area of tension between efficiency and the environment .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party welcome the current report and the amendments which are being proposed , although we regret that only two of the nine proposals submitted in the first reading are being considered ; these two amendments are in my view very important ones .
They prevent aircraft leasing and therefore have a direct effect on the problem of competition , which has just been mentioned .
I would also be pleased if the Commission could clarify this point and explain that there is now absolutely no possibility , no matter what the circumstances are , that the exemptions which certain countries have in respect of competition and the environment , can be used in a manner which is contrary to that intended by the Directive .
In all events , we regret that certain proposals aimed at tightening up this legislation have not been generally adopted .
In our view , what the Member States propose doing in this sector should on no account fall short of the provisions of the directive , and at best should exceed what is intended in this directive .
I therefore consider that this cannot be prejudicial to the directive in the strained situation which exists in respect of efficiency , the environment and also free competition .
The current wording is a reasonable compromise .
It includes a number of minor corrections .
However , it would be in everybody 's interest if we could in some way clarify the definition of " developing countries ' .
What has been submitted in this proposal seems , I believe , already to have met the approval of the Commission .
I would be pleased if the Commission could briefly comment on this again today .
It would be a good thing for all of us if the Council could incorporate into this definition the meaning of " developing countries ' , so as to prevent any wider interpretation here .
After all , we are talking about aeroplanes which are not just a noise nuisance , but which are on the whole more than 25 years old , and in this context I am of the opinion that even a country like Saudi Arabia should not receive special treatment .
As far as the other countries are concerned , one should not really judge the problem according to the freight situation at the different European airports , but rather one should see to it that perhaps within the framework of various actions - and does this House not also distribute aid for development - certain countries which are directly affected could be provided with support in this area so that European airports , as well as those of the countries concerned , can be afforded some relief from the problem of noise nuisance .
Mr President , if I could very briefly refer to the background to the particular measure that is before the House today and is the subject of the debate .
At the time of the adoption of the 1992 directive , a number of aircraft from developing nations had not been notified to the Commission under the appropriate procedure and were therefore not included in the annex to the law , so in order to identify those aircraft the Commission entered into negotiations with the appropriate regional organization - the Arab Air Carriers ' Organization .
The subject matter of these negotiations was of course the technical eligibility of the aircraft on the basis of the criteria laid down in article 3 of the directive , and the designation of countries as developing nations is completely in accordance with criteria laid down by the relevant international organization , the OECD Development Assistance Committee .
Against that background I would like to respond to the amendments presented by the rapporteur , Mr van Dam and supported by several other Members .
First , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2 and 3 which are useful technical adjustments to the annex .
The House may also be interested to know that they have the support of the Council too .
Whilst I completely understand the motivation behind Amendments Nos 1 and 4 , I have to say however that the Commission cannot accept them for the very simple reason that Saudi Arabia is included in the official international list of developing nations which was used in drawing up the original annex to Council Directive 92 / 14 .
In addition , the aircraft included in the annex meet the criteria laid down in Annex 3 of Council Directive 92 / 14 as amended by this directive .
If we did want to change the rules , as has been suggested , for reasons that I totally understand , we would , for the sole purpose of this directive , have to compile a new definition of what a developing nation really is , an activity which would be disproportionate to the effort involved , given that in this case we are talking about no more than 7 aircraft .
Finally , the Commission would like to point out that because of the limited use of the aircraft concerned , the inclusion of Saudi Arabia in the list has a very marginal effect in terms of increased noise nuisance around airports , although naturally we regret any impact of that kind .
I can , of course , understand the motivations which have inspired the amendments relating to the aircraft registered in Saudi Arabia .
However , I hope that the House will accept that we really cannot renege on agreements previously reached in good faith with partners and we cannot reasonably change internationally recognized definitions when that would affect about half a dozen aircraft which are in any case being phased out of use .
With those considerations in mind , and whilst thanking Mr van Dam for his very competent report , the first that I think he has formally presented to this House in the short time that he has been here , I hope that the House will , on reflection , come to share the Commission 's view .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Industrial competitiveness
The next item is the report ( A4-0384 / 97 ) by Mr Desama , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament entitled : " The European Union and Space : fostering applications , markets and industrial competitiveness ' ( COM ( 96 ) 0617 - C4-0042 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is a very unusual sitting today .
Having talked about the inherent problems of the railways , and air transport , we are now looking at European space policy .
In spite of this brilliant ascent , I fear that given our current knowledge of space physics , we will soon be obliged to come back down to earth .
I will do my best to give a rapid outline of the space report .
First of all , we must remember that Europe is not an amateur in the area of space conquest .
Indeed , over the years we have managed to maintain our autonomy and our independence regarding space access , and this has been largely due to two efforts : firstly , intergovernmental cooperation thanks to the European Space Agency , and secondly a policy of willing public investment on the part of a certain number of European states .
But in spite of these efforts , and this independent access , it has to be noted that compared with the United States , we are the space dwarf .
The space industry employs 200 000 people in the United States , as opposed to around 40 000 in Europe ; 7 % of the financing of space policy in the United States is covered by private investment and commercial interests , as opposed to 38 % in Europe .
In other words we have a great deal of readjusting to do .
It is not necessarily a question of putting a tiger in your tank , but rather of adding something to European policy , of adding a little community policy , even supranational policy , to the intergovernmental in order to avoid raising up a number of old demons .
The European Union now needs its own space policy , not only in relation to others , but to bring that European added value to European space cooperation policies as a whole .
Of course , it will not be Parliament that defines this policy , but the Commission , who have made the first step through this interesting communication , and the Council .
We would like to see a European Council devoted entirely to the issue of space .
The British Presidency will perhaps hear my plea .
This policy , this European added value must , it seems to me , be based on two fundamental conditions .
The first condition is that all the issues must be considered , both strategic and commercial . This means admitting , once and for all , that a space policy is necessarily a global policy , that there is not , on the one hand , a strategic policy and on the other , a commercial policy , but that the efforts as a whole must cover all the issues of this space policy .
The second condition is that the Member States and the European Union must devote more public funds to the establishment and development of space policy .
For although private investment is essential , it is not enough .
By respecting these conditions and gaining inspiration from the excellent report of my colleague , Mr Malerba , we will have placed a certain number of milestones along the path of space policy .
Firstly , the maintenance of a high level of technological competence through an instrument such as the Fifth Framework Programme , but also through our participation in a number of great scientific adventures , such as the space station , for example , and many more .
Secondly , the concentration of the space industry .
This does not mean setting up one great big European space business - an elephant will never run as fast as a zebra - but to federate all of the organizations which , today , devote themselves to pathetic competition on a world scale , into integrated projects : the conquest of a number of large commercial markets , and the provision of a good service .
Thirdly , the consolidation of our strong points , the launcher and satellite business .
Fourthly , the guaranteeing of our means of independence , in particular by putting in place a European navigation system which would be the fruit of European technology . And , finally , the organizing of cooperation with third countries , not only with the long-standing space powers like Japan or Russia , but with the newly emerging space powers .
I am thinking in particular of China and India .
Finally , I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to the need to develop the means for space education .
If we want to follow an ambitious policy , we need the support of public opinion .
But the public needs to be informed , and education is the best way of doing this .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this discussion in this House has come rather late with regard to the Commission 's communication times and , in some ways , the reports being discussed now ( Mr Desama 's excellent report and my own ) are beginning to be almost overtaken by events .
There have been moments of great interest in recent months , such as the Mars Pathfinder voyage , the successful launch of ARIANE 5 and , now , that of Lunar Prospector .
On the wings of the Pathfinder success , noting the success of the planetary exploration and the enigma of life in the universe in American public opinion , NASA is now planning to use the space station as an outpost for the manned flight to Mars as well , and is considering an inflatable module that will be attached to the space station , called a trans-hub .
Space is the place of innovation and creative imagination par excellence .
One example is satellite navigation .
Ten years ago , we did not know what it was .
Today , this application ensures safety in air navigation , offers solutions for the efficiency of taxi fleets in cities , and we are asking for a European satellite navigation system .
In this sea and space of the next millennium , the leading characters are the United States , as stated by Mr Desama , and their world leadership in the economic , military , technological and cultural sector is also shown in their scientific and industrial dynamism in the space sector .
It is not easy to draw a comparison between the American and European space sectors : the United States ' annual investment is around four times that of Europe , and the largest European industrial firm in the sector comes after the three American giants , Lockheed , Hughes and Boeing .
The Commission 's communication does not delve into the problems of a real European space strategy and proposes a series of specific measures which can broadly be divided into three sectors in which space applications are opening up new markets with a high economic and strategic value : multimedia telecommunications , satellite navigation and observation of the Earth .
These trends are largely shared by the European Parliament and have also been the object of a communication on telecommunication satellites , for which Mr Hoppenstedt was the rapporteur , and are to an extent also included in the Fifth Framework Programme .
Here , however , I should point out that , following the revisions to the many amendments to the report , always with tight deadlines , we have ended up by consolidating most of the space research subjects into an aeronautical and astronautical action rather than into the various sections such as transport , environment and information society , general materials technologies , and I think this consolidation should possibly be reconsidered when we get to the second reading , maintaining the assignment to the various sections .
Many political and strategic questions remain to be answered and I would like to dwell on these for a moment .
Over the last three years , the American companies have merged into just three groups of worldwide dimensions , while the European consolidation process is slow .
Do the national space agencies still have a role to play in the future ?
And what about the European Space Agency ?
And the role of the Commission ?
My reasoning leads me to see the Commission assuming a more purposeful role in the near future with regard to space strategies , towards the Council and Parliament , and even internationally to take part in negotiations for frequency allocations and satellite positions .
I have suggested in my report that the Commission ask for a European Council on " space ' , at least to sound it out .
We are waiting to discuss these subjects again in Parliament and we are waiting for a communication on navigation systems , while the Intergroup on space travel and the space-travel Task Force are continuing to increase contacts with the Commission , the ESA and industry .
This chapter has really only just begun !
Mr President , firstly , may I congratulate the rapporteur .
He has shown his usual willingness to incorporate the ideas of colleagues , which is appreciated .
We appreciate too the expert views of Mr Malerba .
This report emphasizes the importance of space , the need for support from public funds - commercial interests will be totally inadequate - and the real added value that comes from European Union work .
He contrasts the position in the United States and the European Union in terms of jobs , spin-offs and the development of a scientific culture .
We are not talking about military research and development .
That point is quite clearly made .
Principally we are concerned with satellite applications .
We are not recommending any encroachment on the role of ESA .
We talk about telecoms , navigation and Earth observation .
This is of tremendous value to European Union citizens and beyond that to the third world .
Mr Desama quotes regional planning , agriculture , fisheries , transport , combatting fraud and the symptoms and difficulties related to climate change .
I share his view that the space industry must ' boldly go along the path towards a concentration which will enable it to compete with American manufacturers . '
I like the reference to Star Trek in the ' boldly go ' .
Although there is an emphasis on satellites , we need to realize there are tremendous synergies with manned or , more politically correct , peopled activities , which is essential .
We have to tackle the problem of space debris .
There are all sorts of things going round in space from space vehicles to hardware to power tools to teapots .
This is going to become a big problem and must be addressed .
On the question which some of the amendments raise about the problems of plutonium , we must do research into solar cells .
They will help us here on earth with energy and there will be spin-offs .
But it is not yet possible to abandon the use of nuclear power for the generation necessary for some of the instruments in deep space .
Like my colleagues I would like to emphasize the role for space education .
Please , everybody , go to Toulouse and see Space City .
It will inspire you .
And of all the sciences which inspire young people , space is paramount . It is one which has driven people in the past into physics , and it is very serious if we have a diminution in the number of people studying that subject .
It is fascinating to all humans and it could be the key to the survival of our planet .
I very strongly support the strategy outlined in both the Desama report and the Malerba opinion , in particular the need for the Council to take on board the need for a Council meeting devoted to space in the European context .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a matter of real importance that the European Parliament is discussing aviation and space travel here this evening , since this is without doubt a European issue .
I myself come from a region which has always played an important role in the aviation and space industry and where today everyone recognizes that only through European cooperation will we be able to maintain our competitive position vis--vis the United States , or at least have a chance of recovering it .
On behalf of them , and also speaking for my own group here , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his comprehensive report .
I believe that all aspects of the problem have been examined here in an appropriate manner .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party will also lend our full support to this report .
We have deliberately refrained from submitting any amendments because we do not want to jeopardize the resolution which was adopted by majority vote in committee .
I do not wish at this point to go over again all the major problems facing the aviation and space industries .
Mr Malerba , Mr Desama , as rapporteur , and also Mrs McNally have all addressed the problem in a very articulate way .
However , at this juncture I should like to refer to another matter , namely the need to achieve full equality of opportunity , particularly with the United States , in the growth markets of aviation and space travel .
It is not right that the USA should be basically funding research and development through its defence budget , thereby giving it an advantage over the European aviation and space industries .
Parliament has already dealt with this matter in connection with another report drawn up by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
I myself have proposed various amendments in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
While these proposals were unfortunately rejected , this is still a subject which merits our attention .
It is unacceptable that we in Europe - and indeed this is the basis of a communication from Directorate-General XII - should have no standard procurement system , while the United States obviously combines its research , development and procurement activities and ensures that many developments from the military sector are adopted by the civilian industries , a fact which gives that country clear advantages over the European aviation and space industry .
We must have no delusions in this respect .
We have to find a European answer to this challenge .
I hope that with the ratification of the Amsterdam Treaty and the development of a common foreign and security policy we will be able to find a European solution to this problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , colleagues , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party I would like to congratulate Mr Desama on his excellent report .
The European space market is fragmented .
Many small companies are actively involved , but they do not cooperate sufficiently .
The restructuring of the space industry - that is , the integration of several companies into one company or grouping - is needed in order to be able to compete in the global market .
European and transatlantic cooperation in space activities is an absolute must .
The Fifth Framework Programme could play a encouraging role in this , especially now the cooperation agreement in the sphere of science and technology has been signed with the Americans during the most recent summit in Washington .
My second point concerns the position of the European satellite industry .
The strategic importance of our own satellite industry has been of commercial interest since the end of the cold war .
The sector has been growing by 10 % each year , and contributes to the creation of jobs .
If the European Union does not want to miss the boat , the Commission and the Member States need to promote the competitiveness of this industry .
My group is not really thinking of sector-specific support , but of stimulating joint research and cooperation .
Satellite systems are the way to break into the globalization of the information society .
But in Europe , investments are primarily made in regional terrestrial networks .
What is more , the European satellite industry works too much in isolation , without much interaction with the industries which produce computers , networks , software and peripherals .
As a result of this , the satellite industry is losing an increasing market share to the United States .
More cooperation and merging between companies , and political support for technological development , are necessary , as well as tackling risk management .
Mr President , we in the Green Group in the European Parliament have felt obliged to put forward five amendments to this report by Mr Desama in order to clarify , and in some paragraphs also to strengthen , certain points of principle as far as the European Union and space are concerned .
Firstly , is Mr Desama not using the wrong word when in sentence b of the preamble he says we shall ' conquer ' space ?
To my ears the word conquer has the wrong associations .
It should be about us exploring what space has to give and nothing else .
The word conquer is used for ideas in a military context , that something shall be conquered .
But that is not what this is about , it is about us exploring , because that should be the idea of the EU 's space policy .
Secondly , as far as large international cooperation projects in space are concerned , on the question of the Casini space project and its ' sweep ' past the earth , we think the European Parliament should call on the ESA and NASA to cancel this planned ' sweep ' past the earth for safety reasons , since the probe is in fact equipped with 32 kg of highly radioactive plutonium . Several reports from Parliament in the past have said that this is dangerous on safety grounds .
This probe is going to pass the earth at a distance of 500 miles and at a speed of 68 000 km / h .
I think we in the European Parliament should prevent that .
Thirdly , in paragraph 10 , as well as saying that we should not use the space programme for military research , it should be added that we should also not use nuclear material in space .
Fourthly , we must do much more research on solar energy than we have done so far .
This is something on which the ESA has come a long way , and we could go further in this research .
Mr President , Mr Desama 's report largely covers the field of scientific , ethnological and financial problems by usefully - in terms of our own education - emphasizing not only the communication from the Commission , which is the least important , but also the resolutions adopted by the European Parliament between 1979 and 1994 .
The density of this report is an advantage because it enables us to focus our comments .
Allow me first of all to state two preconditions .
The first is that there still seems to be a strong temptation to compare European space policy with that of the United States , in particular by comparing public commitments and by noting the private sector 's contribution .
Perhaps we should remember that the United States is one single state , albeit federal , and that the European Union is made up of fifteen countries , with all the cultural differences that this entails , as well as differences in terms of representative role and weight in science and technology , in research and development relations , and in priorities .
The second observation is that it seems difficult to separate the components of a dynamic discourse which specifies spheres of cooperation and spheres of competition - in terms of healthy competitiveness - as well as policies of partnership , in particular with the United States but also with Russia , on the question , for example , of very heavy launchers , or with emerging countries such as India , China or Brazil .
That said , I would like to mention the need to strengthen the social dimension of European space policy .
We know that the technological orientations are not neutral .
The current debate relating to manned flights is not simply a debate on the question of whether , on the one hand , we should choose a combination of robots and humans or , on the other , the " fully automatic ' . It is also relates to the problem of the outlook we are giving to society for the coming decades .
The question of application is therefore essential , and the question of social utility crucial in itself .
If we make progress in earth observation it is to improve our awareness of the balances in the ecosystem and of the need to conserve them .
If telecommunications develop , it is primarily in order to combat isolation and to make progress in the area of distance medicine .
If remote sensing expands , it will be because it is a tool for town and country planning .
Finally , if navigation develops , it will be because the oceans are a favoured place for geostrategic issues .
A former head of division at the European Space Agency reminded us that there is a one to fifteen ratio between , on the one hand , the market for satellite launchers and on the other , land-based facilities and employment .
For my part , I see that in Guyana and in Kourou , all along the road , there are billboards proclaiming , " Kourou , European space terminal ' .
I can assure you that the one to fifteen ratio is not born out by the facts , nor by the land-based facilities , nor by employment .
It is probably not the case for other space bases either .
I think we must look for an integrated programme .
The social conditions in our countries demand it .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Desama 's report illustrates the different approach to space travel on either side of the Atlantic .
The number of employees in this sector alone - 200 000 in the USA as compared with about 40 000 in Europe - tells its own story .
The growth of the commercial sector in Europe is certainly impressive .
But technological advance and the development of new activities in the field of space research will certainly not be financed by the commercial sector .
We can be absolutely sure of that .
I support the idea that European space policy should be regarded in its entirety , something which is advocated in the report .
I wish to emphasize that science and the technology of manned space travel are of vital importance , and we should not merely restrict ourselves to their commercial applications .
It is therefore essential that the Fifth Framework Programme should focus on the funding of space research for the benefit of the information society , earth observation and navigation .
The British or Austrian Presidency could demonstrate its receptiveness to the technological development of Europe by convening a separate meeting of the European Council , in addition to that of the ESA-Council of Ministers , in order to discuss the theme of a European space policy , as recommended by the rapporteur .
The urgent need for European industry to improve its competitiveness makes space policy a compulsory subject for the European Council .
Earth observation is particularly important in this respect .
When employed in a responsible manner , this activity will stand our citizens in good stead .
It is a science which guarantees progress in many areas , including environmental research .
The need for intensive public funding is therefore obvious .
It would be foolish to think that earth observation will sooner or later be nothing more than a commercial operation .
Here Europe is on the point of losing out to the United States .
The European Union must therefore not slacken its pace but must rather make earth observation a key part of its space research policy and to this effect should devise and submit a well thought out action programme .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start my comments on Mr Desama 's report on Europe and space by thanking and congratulating him for the enormous amount of work he has put into this within the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
Along with some of our colleagues , in spite of certain lobbies , fashions and , above all , caution , he defends the industrial and technological interests of Europe , its research and its appropriations , not to mention the safety of our energy .
As a member of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , I very often come into contact with these issues during the writing of my own reports and during my own work .
I am , furthermore , working at this moment on industrial competitiveness in Europe , and I know the importance of public appropriations for research and the importance of space in our operations , our strengths and our European industrial hopes .
As a European , as a socialist and as a Frenchman , I therefore unreservedly support all of Mr Desama 's proposals .
Firstly , on the need for the revival of investment ; on the delays and the catching up needed in some areas ; on the need for concentration of the industry ; on the place of the Fifth Framework Programme for research in its operations ; and on the strengthening of our technological and economic potential in order to improve the technological competence and the financial capacity of the space industry , both military and civil .
I also obviously support his requests for the utilization of the space industry in the protection of man against natural disasters and other major risks .
Finally , like him , I am aware of the actions necessary to control and eliminate the pollution caused by space debris .
Yes , Madam President , I will say once again that it is a good report , and very important for Europe .
Let us hope the proposals will be voted for , taken up and followed through .
I would like to finish as I started , by insisting that European public financing of this sector must not be reduced .
Do not forget that the Chinese launchers are largely financed by the Chinese State .
Without going that far , we must avoid distortions caused by competition and therefore the European Union must not withdraw .
Simply put , it is better to concentrate our efforts , better to target our objectives and not miss the small firing window in front of us .
Let us never forget - I am finishing , Madam President - that if the European space industry is flourishing commercially today , it is because , in its time , there has been some true political and public will , particularly in France .
This will , and these appropriations , remain just as necessary today in order to prepare the space industry for tomorrow .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as a Christian Democrat and member of the Group of the European People 's Party I naturally welcome the report which has been presented by Mr Desama and Mr Malerba because like my colleague Mr Ferber I too perceive that it contains elements from our contributions in committee .
Of course , I also welcome the excellent collaboration which has taken place with the Commission , in this case with Mrs Cresson , Mr Bangemann and Mr Kinnock , on the subject of guidance systems

I believe that the small interest groups to be found in this House - here in this Chamber , in the Intergroup on space travel and also in the space-travel Task Force , which has been formed from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy - will develop into a major movement , and that the fascination which emanates from space travel will , I hope , attract greater attention both within this House and indeed from the wider public outside .
On the way home this evening you have only to gaze at the clear , starry night sky and at the wondrous full moon to be convinced of the fascination of our universe .
Unfortunately we are meeting here in a windowless room and cannot appreciate the magnificence of it all .
I do not want to repeat what has already been said .
It has all been said already .
I believe that the most important issue for the future - to be dealt with in the next report , which has already been submitted ( and of which I am the rapporteur ) - namely the position of the European aviation and space industries , will provide us with answers to the global challenges we have to meet .
How big should our factories be ? What should we be manufacturing in them ?
What sort of businesses do we need as Europeans in order to remain competitive in the global marketplace ?
I think we should point out clearly that in future the development of guidance systems and aircraft navigation systems , which have already been touched on , and the work of successor organizations to GLONASS and GPS , will constitute a valuable contribution from the European Commission .
We eagerly await an action plan which will allow us to make a start on these projects this very year .
Let me close with the following remarks .
Mention has been made of the problem of space debris .
In this context , we really should find a European scrap materials company capable of dealing with the problem of orbiting scrap , and we should also raise a warning finger to the various attempts being made by a number of people to have their own ashes scattered on the moon .
Moon-dust is strange enough on its own without being further altered by the addition of the cremated remains of human beings .
I do not want to see our moon becoming the favourite stamping ground of Mr Malerba .
I really believe that this particular subject merits our attention .
Madam President , the UN is now taking ten years doing research into natural disasters partly with the aim of developing satellite charting applications for the prediction , charting , and avoidance of natural disasters , and to aid relief and rescue operations . It is appropriate now to declare EU support for this work .
As Mr Desama stresses , the space programme must be seen in its entirety . It involves scientific and technological considerations and civil and military applications .
However , I do not believe we should support civil and military notions of inhabited space , as manned flights are tremendously expensive , and are not any more important for Europe than unmanned flights equipped with robots and automated equipment .
The concept of living in space is , besides , a long way off , as we are only now starting to prepare for the first international space station .
It will presumably only come together in the first half of the next millennium , and the possibility of building stations on other planets is still a very distant one .
It is especially important for the small European countries that satellites are not too large .
The risks of big , long-term projects are also very great , and the results only begin to show after many years .
It would be better to put more money into smaller carrier rockets - booster systems - and small-scale satellites .
Every European country would be able to contribute to projects like these .
Furthermore , with small booster systems we will get reasonable results in the shorter term , and money will not be spent on mere scientific exploits .
The role of the Fifth Framework Programme for research funding is important and necessary .
The framework programme must be granted appropriations for space research , for example by evolving operations that are connected with the information society and remote surveying .
Madam President , my Commission colleagues and I welcome the excellent report by Professor Desama and Mr Malerba on our 1996 Communication on a European Union policy for fostering applications , markets and competitiveness for our space industries .
The report properly reflects the sustained interest which this Parliament has taken in space policy issues over the last 19 years .
Some would argue that it is a pity that there has not been such widespread and determined commitment from other quarters over that period .
The report also has the virtue of asserting the importance of an effective European role in the variety of activities that are needed to ensure , in the words of paragraph 6 of the report , that our Community and industries can ' boldly go ' towards development which is commensurate with modern needs and opportunities .
That , very obviously , is in our economic , industrial and security interests , and as several Members of this House have pointed out in the course of this very good debate , it will also help to improve the quality of life of people everywhere in a very great variety of ways .
As our Communication and this report made clear , responding to the challenges of developments in space policy will require leadership and vision , and everyone involved in national governments , industry , research and in the European institutions needs to be imbued with a sense of urgency .
The difference in the scale of activity in Europe and the USA is illustrated by the fact that just 39 000 people are employed in space-related activities in the Union - a fifth of the number currently employed in similar activities in the United States of America .
The fact that in satellite navigation alone there are reliable estimates of a global market that will be worth US $ 50 billion within the next seven years should inspire an avid desire to exploit the possibilities of growth .
Clearly , space issues involve a very wide variety of interests and institutions , and the role of the Union and the Commission is not to substitute for these different interests but to help to provide a vision around which they can organize and combine efforts .
To that end we will continue to use regulation and legislation .
We will exploit external relations activities to promote European interests bilaterally and in international bodies , a dimension which , as Professor Desama has made clear , is obviously crucial since these markets are , by definition , global and not European , and we need common standards .
We will further employ research and development resources in the framework programmes and in the telecoms trans-European networks and , of course , we will provide the modest support that is available for infrastructure development through the trans-European networks ' budget .
As the House will know , the primary contributor to space research and development is the European Space Agency , whose annual budget for this specific area is equivalent to that of the whole of the European Union 's framework programme .
Community research and development work in this area therefore needs to be closely targeted on Community priorities , and it needs to be complementary to the activities of the ESA and of Member States .
Together with my colleagues Edith Cresson and Martin Bangemann , I am therefore committed to ensuring that the Fifth Framework Programme will focus on supporting activities in the three main areas dealt with in the Commission 's Communication and , indeed , focused on in the report being considered by the House tonight : satellite communication , navigation and Earth observation .
One of the key points in the report now being considered is that the private sector should not be expected to substitute for public money in the development of major space-related technologies .
I strongly share the view that there must be a continuing and substantial public investment in those areas that reflects their strategic importance to society as a whole .
It is also clear , however , that , as in many other cases , there is a need for imaginative forms of public / private partnership , partly to mobilize complementary sources of financing and partly to improve the quality and the costeffectiveness of projects by bringing in private-sector expertise .
Meanwhile the action plans which the Commission Communication promised on each of the three main policy areas are under way .
Indeed , as honourable Members will know , and as Professor Desama said , the one on telecommunications is already available , the Earth observation plan will be available later this year and I am happy to say that the satellite navigation action plan , for which I have responsibility , will be produced later this month .
That document has two main aims : the aim of catalysing a firm political commitment from Member States for a European contribution to satellite navigation so that the private sector can have the confidence to invest in the future , and , secondly , the aim of demonstrating that the European Union is in a position to take the action necessary to turn vision into reality and make secure practical progress - not a moment too soon , several honourable Members could justifiably add .
As many honourable Members here will be aware , there are several sensitive areas to deal with , including financing , the question of how the European contribution should relate to the existing United States ' and Russian military base systems , and what forms of organization we need in order to run and to regulate the European component of satellite navigation .
I look forward to discussing that action plan in this Parliament , especially in view of the support given to a European approach to satellite navigation in Professor Desama 's report .
The Commission fully shares this Parliament 's commitment to an active and comprehensive European policy for space , with the European Union and its institutions promoting a forward-looking European perspective and cooperating with Member States and other institutions to make a reality of the vision which is increasingly shared .
I thank this Parliament for its continuing efforts to stimulate and to guide that vision and I express the gratitude of the Commission and particularly my colleagues , Mrs Cresson and Mr Bangemann , for the quality of this report , and my gratitude to those who have compiled it .
Thank you , Commissioner Kinnock .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
New Rule 79a of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the report ( A4-0006 / 98 ) by Mr Fayot , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on inserting a new Rule 79a on the procedure for delivering opinions pursuant to Article 109j of the EC Treaty .
Madam President , I am raising a preliminary question to this debate , in accordance with Rule 128 of our Rules of Procedure .
In fact , the proposal for a decision in the report and the amendments of the Rules of Procedure included are inadmissible , both for reasons of procedure and for reasons of substance .
On the level of procedure , the text proposed to the House is not in keeping with the text adopted in committee .
In fact , the text we had adopted in committee reads as follows , at the end of Paragraph 2 : " Parliament will then vote on the recommendations , with no amendments ; there will be a single collective vote for this proposal ' .
The text submitted to us today is , " Parliament will then vote en bloc on the recommendations , with no amendments ' .
Thus this totally different text is , moreover , an amendment - Amendment No 11 - which had been removed by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure as it was an oral amendment .
Article 150 has therefore not been respected .

On the substance , the proposed text takes up once again the current drafting of Article 80 , Paragraph 1 , of the Rules of Procedure , which provides for an assent but not for a consultation of Parliament , whereas Article 109j of the Treaty provides for a parliamentary consultation and not for an assent .
That is why I am raising this preliminary question .
Thank you , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
The rapporteur , Mr Fayot , will now speak against the motion .
Madam President , I request the rejection of this preliminary question for two reasons .
The first concerns the text proposed to the House .
According to Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , it is not the same as that voted for by the Committee .
In effect , the Committee voted for the addition by saying that Parliament would vote en bloc and it was clearly stated , at the time of discussion and decision by the Committee , that this addition should be integrated into the text .
This is therefore exactly what has been done .
As regards the second argument , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy says that it is a question here of an assent text , but the Committee on the Rules of Procedure was not of this opinion .
This discussion has already taken place in committee ; that is why the text presented to you corresponds perfectly , in spirit and in letter , to that which was voted for by the great majority of members of the Committee .
I therefore ask the House to reject this preliminary question .
( Parliament decided against referral back to committee )
Madam President , Article 109j of the Treaty defines the procedure by which a decision will be made on the countries to participate in monetary union .
It will be enforced on 1 and 2 May 1998 .
Given the importance of the political issue , it is essential that the institutions involved in this procedure act with the utmost clarity possible .
The solidity of monetary union , along with its credibility in the eyes of the financial markets and the public , depends upon the transparency and rigour with which key decisions are made .
The European Parliament will have a role to play in this procedure .
The Treaty foresees , in Article 109j , Paragraph 2 , last subparagraph , and I quote : " The European Parliament is consulted and conveys its opinion to the Council , which will meet at the level of Heads of State and of Government ' .
It is not for me to comment here on the quite specific nature of the whole of the procedure .
But I would like to underline that Parliament intervenes on two occasions and that , in my opinion , this double intervention constitutes a whole , from a political point of view .
The first intervention takes place when Parliament expresses its opinion on the reports of the Commission and the European Monetary Institute , which will be ready on 24 March 1998 .
This first intervention is " good policy ' , since Parliament , through public debate on respect for convergence criteria and on the whole of the monetary situation , gives a guarantee of democracy to the process .
On this subject , there is an agreement between the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament .
This first stage enables Parliament to establish a detailed report in which normal parliamentary rules will play a full role .
There will probably be a vote on the conclusions on 30 April , or even earlier , but in any case sufficiently close to the weekend of 1 and 2 May 1998 to be available for the Ecofin Council on 1 May .
If this first intervention on the part of Parliament is not anticipated in the Treaty , then the second , on the contrary , most clearly is , as I emphasized at the start .
It is , in fact , obligatory and it must therefore take place according to a procedure that must be marred by no uncertainty , due to the risk of invalidating the whole of the process towards monetary union .
It must , furthermore , take place within time constraints the like of which apply to no procedure currently anticipated in our Rules of Procedure .
It has therefore been necessary to improvise , and amend the Rules of Procedure by introducing a new procedure .
These constraints are not born of our imagination , but they have been imposed on us as a precondition that cannot be ignored , following the exchange of letters between the President of Parliament , duly mandated by the Conference of Presidents , and the Presidents of the Council and the Commission .
They are the result of a political will to sort everything out during the weekend in question , whilst the financial markets are shut from the Thursday evening to the Monday morning .
For the success of the operation , it is an essential condition .
In this way , Parliament will not have access to the recommendations of the Ecofin Council until the morning of 2 May .
Given that the European Council is being held that afternoon , it is physically not possible to use the procedure of a written report with amendments .
The vast majority of the Committee therefore opted for an oral procedure , without amendment , with a block vote on the list of countries to take part in monetary union .
The text adopted is absolutely clear and unequivocal and is not open to any debate on procedure .
I am therefore convinced , Madam President , that the text we are proposing to Parliament is in complete accordance with the wishes of the vast majority of our Parliament to bring this extraordinarily complex and important task of completing monetary union to a successful conclusion .
Madam President , the deadline for submitting amendments has been extended until this evening , even if the political groups had at their disposal , and I wish to emphasize this , the text of the amendment last Tuesday afternoon , after the vote of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure that same afternoon .
I was told , at 7 p.m. this evening , that only one amendment had been introduced .
This amendment is an amendment by the Green Group requesting , instead of a block vote , a separate vote on each country on the proposed list of monetary union participants .
As rapporteur I must oppose this amendment because Parliament cannot , at this stage , start giving out individual marks to countries agreed by the Ecofin Council .
I think that if Parliament wishes to do so , it can do this during the first stage but , once at this stage of the procedure , to want to comment separately on one country or another would only confuse the political message we have to give .
Madam President , I request that the House kindly approves the text as proposed by the vast majority of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , and I would like to end by highlighting the excellent collaboration of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure with the Legal Service , but above all with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The Conference of Presidents had asked us to deal with this amendment of the Rules of Procedure together with this Committee .
I would like to thank in particular the chair of this Committee , Mr von Wogau , and also Mrs Randzio-Plath , chair of the Monetary Sub-Committee , for their very interesting contributions .
Once again , I ask that the House kindly approves in its majority this amendment to the rules .
Madam President , I will be brief .
I congratulate Mr Fayot on his report .
The Socialist Group , of whom I am the spokesman , will be supporting it in its entirety and without amendment .
It was necessary to amend our rules to incorporate our ability to be consulted , swiftly and speedily , on opinions pursuant to article 109j with respect to economic and monetary union .
Mr Fayot 's report is a mean , lean and green report . It is short , sharp and to the point .
Parliament will debate on the basis of an oral report by its responsible committee .
It will then take a single collective vote on the recommendations with no amendments .
This will enable Parliament to speak with a sharp , clear voice and at the same time frustrate those prepared to use all means possible to hinder Europe 's forward march .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by saying that speaking for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs as well as for the PPE I both welcome and support the rapporteur 's report .
Within the Group of the European People 's Party and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs there is a large majority in favour of the Fayot report and I would like to express my own personal thanks for the cooperation shown by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
Why do we need to amend our Rules of Procedure ?
Because , for one thing , the process we use to make this resolution is of enormous importance , and , for another , we are going to be in a situation which is relatively new to us .
What does the Treaty stipulate ?
It stipulates that the European Parliament is to make known its position on the Finance Ministers ' proposal .
However , this proposal will not be drawn up until the evening of 1 May .
As a result of this , a written procedure will not be possible and we shall be obliged to state our position to the Finance Ministers ' proposal at this special sitting of the European Parliament on 2 May , which will presumably take up the whole morning .
For this reason , we have opted for a two-part procedure .
On 25 March , the European Monetary Institute and the European Commission will submit their recommendations .
On this basis , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs will then draw up a report giving all the possibilities for the submission of amendments in committee .
The European Parliament will subsequently adopt an initial position at its part-session of 29-30 April .
As Mr Fayot has already said , this position is not expressly provided for in the Treaty , yet neither is it expressly ruled out .
At the same time , the national parliaments of the various Member States will also be adopting a position on the proposals of the European Commission and the European Monetary Institute .
When these possibilities have been exhausted and Parliament 's position has been made clear , we shall examine the proposal of the Finance Ministers and make our position on it known by verbal process .
In view of the fact that we previously had a period of one month in which to prepare our position by a truly democratic procedure , I consider it entirely justified that we should concentrate on voting either " Yes ' or " No ' to the Finance Ministers ' proposals .
This is a process which on the one hand will satisfy all the democratic requirements , and on the other will also ensure that the European Parliament properly discharges its duty in this historic situation .
Madam President , I cannot be as enthusiastic as the previous speakers .
My group will of course support the report , but we have to ask ourselves if we as Parliament are not giving away a little bit too much by saying that this is right .
We are having a first debate on the basis of a report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , but as Parliament , we will then still have an important vote on Saturday 2 May .
It is a special article for a special occasion , because I cannot see us using it much thereafter .
We can ask ourselves what will be the use of this Parliament 's recommendations , and we may assume that the Council will take note of these .
But must we really restrict ourselves by saying we will vote for or against , and we will not be able to make any amendments ?
I find this all the more regrettable , because we can only work with oral recommendation in the present version of the Fayot report .
I would prefer to have seen this oral recommendation as optional .
We will also consider whether we will have a separate vote on this .
We know that one Member States meets all the criteria for membership of EMU , did not enter a condition in the Accession Treaty , but yet does not want to participate .
Formally we should really say that this invalidates the Ecofin Council recommendation , as this country will not be included .
We will nonetheless be in favour of starting EMU , but are not able include the qualifications that this country should actually belong .
I regret this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the weak position of Parliament within the legislature is the main flaw in the EU 's democratic structure .
This deficiency also lies at the heart of a further problem , namely the failure of our citizens fully to accept European integration .
In view of this deplorable situation it must seem absolutely incomprehensible that Parliament of its own accord should opt for a further curtailment of its rights .
Here I am in no way underestimating the urgency of the situation , and the special circumstances which mean that Parliament very quickly has to adopt a position on the recommendations of the Ecofin Council .
However , it is quite unjustified that we should forgo a written report on this matter and spontaneously remove the fundamental right of the Members of this House to submit amendments in plenary session , as well as having to vote en bloc .
This is tantamount to Parliament cutting its own throat .
It seems to me to be very important that Parliament is able to adopt a discriminating position prior to the final resolution of the Council on the introduction of monetary union .
I therefore implore this House , politely yet forcefully , to support our amendment and allow a split vote on the recommendations of the Ecofin Council , so that we can vote individually on this issue .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European Radical Alliance will also vote in favour of Mr Fayot 's report , thanking the rapporteur for the speed with which we in the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunity have carried out what seemed to be in the general interests .
I told that Committee , and I confirm it now in Chamber for it to be put on record : I think that , in these proceedings , obviously faced with a series of general contingencies and in the interests of the Union , we have gone beyond the limit of the autonomy , the independence of the rights of the MEPs and Parliament which are guaranteed by our Rules of Procedure .
We have certainly tried to take into account the requirement that these proceedings should be swift and enable the Union , without upsetting the markets , to take a decision that contemplates Parliament 's opinion , but , in doing so , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy is basically seeking to interpret it but , in my opinion , he is exaggerating when he says that some rights have been violated - we actually have fewer guarantees of rights , certainly on two or three points .
That is why , when voting on Mr Fayot 's report , I believe that , in the trialogue and in the dialogues we are having with the other institutions , the President should assert our wish for fair cooperation , and should , however , also inform all the other institutions : for example , Council should be told clearly that Parliament is also prepared to do this provided Council is prepared for other forms of cooperation , such as cooperation with the Committees of Inquiry or with other sectors deserving fair cooperation , the cooperation we are prepared to provide and which we would also like to see from the other institutions , from Council and - if Commissioner Kinnock will allow me - from the Commission as well .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report proposed to us by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , is legally questionable and politically inappropriate .
I have given two reasons in a minority opinion , which appears in the report .
On a legal level , I maintain that the opinion requested from Parliament is different to an assent .
The opinion that is requested by article 109j of the Treaty , an opinion given on an Ecofin Council text , in this case , conveyed to a Council meeting at the level of Heads of State and of Government , must be pronounced by Parliament on the basis of a written report including a preamble , a proposal for a resolution and a right to amendment , which is the same whether within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy or within this House .
It is not possible to disregard this without deliberately violating article 109j of the Treaty .
I was told : Parliament will sit and give its opinion at the stage of recommendations to the Commission , but the Commission is not the same body as the Council of Ministers .
The text that it will draw up is legally different .
The opinion that Parliament will give - which is a non-obligatory opinion - is legally different .
The report is politically inappropriate . It is inappropriate because Parliament - and it is paradoxical that our group should end up defending the rights of Parliament on such a serious matter - in reality refuses to exercise the authority it draws from the Treaty .
Technical arguments do not exist .
You can find a procedure permitting Parliament to have its say .
How can you imagine that such a serious decision as the implementation of economic and monetary union can be carried out on the basis of an oral report ?
How can you imagine that MEPs , either together or individually , would not have the right of amendment ?
How can you imagine that the representatives of the people of the Member States of the European Union are not able to comment on each one of the recommendations that the Ecofin Council 's conclusions will cover ?
They want to gag Parliament .
We will not accept this , and we will use all the legal means possible to enable us to gain satisfaction in this matter .
Madam President , I found the last contribution rather surprising because anyone who has observed the process of economic and monetary union over the last 7 ½ years knows that this House has followed the whole process very closely .
Anyone would think that the debate that we are going to have on 2 May is the first and only time that Parliament has ever looked at the question of economic and monetary union .
We debate it every month in the Economic Committee .
We debate it at least every other month in this Parliament and we have done so for the last 7 ½ years .
I think that some of the contributions today show that those people who have spoken simply do not understand the process that we have undergone since 1990 when stage one of EMU began .
There are two opportunities for the European Parliament to look at the process of EMU .
The first will be in the report that Karl von Wogau writes for us where he will look in detail at the information that comes from the European Monetary Institute and the Commission .
Parliament can then make all of the political points that it needs to make .
It can build into that report all the new ones that it wants to incorporate .
We can debate at length in the various committees and in Parliament all of the aspects of the convergence criteria - the effect on employment , the effect on the external exchange rate .
All of these other points can be debated and I have no doubt that the groups that seem so quick to run for further legal advice will take part in that debate .
But the most important thing for us to do , having passed the von Wogau report during the Brussels plenary session on 29 and 30 April , is to realize the historic decision that we then have to take on 2 May .
What the Rules Committee and Mr Fayot have done - and I would like to thank him on behalf of the members of the Economic Committee ; I would like to join with Karl von Wogau in thanking him and his colleagues - is to provide an opportunity for Parliament to give its historic seal of approval , after all the lengthy and detailed debates that we have undergone , and make that historic decision .
If there are political groups in this Chamber who choose to try and make cheap political capital out of 2 May , we will not forget them in this House and I certainly hope that people in Europe do not forget them .
Madam President , let me first say that I think Mr Fayot has produced a very elegant solution to a very difficult problem .
In fact I believe this is the only possible solution given the pressure of time under which we have to work .
However , I would still like to complain that through this accelerated procedure we are turning our opinion into a formality which in practice cannot result in anything but an approval of Ecofin 's recommendation .
As the situation stands , I believe it would have been better almost if we had not given any opinion at all before the Council 's decision , quite simply for the simple reason that I am afraid this is going to be seen and represented as an empty gesture from the European Parliament and not as a real exercise of Parliamentary power .
I am also afraid that it is going to strengthen the impression that the whole EMU project has a very dubious , if not to say bad , democratic basis .
That is of course not something which Mr Fayot can control .
His report and solution are the only possible ones , and I can only hope that as many of us as possible vote for the report tomorrow .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Amendment to Rule 75 of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the report ( A4-0400 / 97 ) by Mr Ford , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on amending Rule 75 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure ( Delegation to Conciliation Committee ) .
Madam President , I promise I will not take anything like five minutes for my report .
As you said , this is a report on amending Rule 75 of the Rules of Procedure , on conciliation .
It has been argued in the past in this House that Parliament has not been punching its full weight with respect to conciliation and its role in the Conciliation Committee .
Following a referral by the President of Parliament to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , the Committee has looked at the matter , and it is not our view that Parliament 's representatives have in any way been lacking in their efforts to make Parliament 's position clear on the Conciliation Committee and , as it were , to ensure that Parliament has the maximum possible say on that important committee .
However , it was clear that there could be a number of small procedural changes in our rules which would actually help Parliament 's side of this work .
Members will see in front of them three proposed amendments to the procedure , one of which incorporates two small changes .
Firstly , with respect to Amendment No 2 , we propose changing ' may appoint substitutes ' to ' shall appoint substitutes ' because there have been problems in the past when groups have not had named substitutes available .
The second amendment removes restrictions on substitutes actually attending meetings when a full Member has attended for part of the time , in other words we would follow the same procedure as laid down at the moment in our committees on the Conciliation Committee .
Thirdly , we are proposing that the meetings should be not in camera , but merely not public , which would allow the participation of representatives from other institutions and , on occasion , the substitutes who may be called on later .
Finally , we call on the Conference of Presidents to lay down procedural guidelines because we think that there are other points which are not the purview of the Rules Committee which could aid the functioning of the Conciliation Committees .
I urge Parliament to support these changes to the Rules for now and to come back and look at this matter after the next European Parliament elections to see if further changes are required .
Madam President , it is a great pleasure to rise in support of Mr Ford 's report .
These are only small amendments to the Rules of Procedure , but they are highly significant .
They will put Parliament on an equal footing with the Council in the conciliation procedure itself .
The Council , up to now , has had an advantage in that the Treaty specifies that the Council or its representatives attend the conciliation meetings and in practice , when necessary , in cases where meetings have gone on longer than expected - as they often do in conciliation , with extra meetings called at short notice - the Council has been able to change its representatives .
We in Parliament have tied our hands somewhat in not making full use of the possibility of using substitute Members in the Conciliation Committee .
Very often it is necessary to change representatives at the last minute because of the very nature of negotiations that take place in conciliation .
These small changes will make it possible for Parliament to do that and thereby place us on an equal footing with the Council in the Conciliation Committee .
It is timely to introduce that change at this very moment because the Amsterdam Treaty changes the procedure under the Codecision Procedure of the Treaty - the Codecision Procedure which is actually the culmination of Parliament 's legislative powers .
Amsterdam will make it impossible to adopt any legislation that falls under the Codecision Procedure without the explicit agreement of the European Parliament .
Most codecision , even now , does not require conciliation .
The two readings in each institution suffice to reach agreement .
But where the matter does have to go to conciliation , under the Amsterdam Treaty agreement in the Conciliation Committee will be necessary in order for legislation to be adopted .
Under Maastricht it was possible for the Council to opt out and unilaterally adopt its own text , challenging Parliament to reject that text .
That will no longer be possible .
Therefore the significance of the Conciliation Committee is enhanced still further .
It is absolutely right that at this stage we get our procedures into line to make sure we can take full advantage of that .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report .
The Group of the European People 's Party will be supporting it in its entirety .
Since it is late and there are few of us present I can be short and brutally frank .
It is my view that the European Parliament spends too much time wishing it had more power and not enough time effectively implementing the powers it has .
There is a symbolic and institutional importance in what Mr Ford is doing .
He is making it easier for us to make coherent and consistent use of the powers we have .
That is a genuine contribution to closing the democratic deficit .
It is not as intellectually and politically seductive as all the things we talk about in the Committee on Institutional Affairs but perhaps in the long term it is going to be even more effective and even more important .
So not merely for administrative and technical reasons but also for political and institutional reasons , we in the Group of the European People 's Party will enthusiastically be supporting this report .
Madam President , I offer my congratulations to Mr Ford and to the other speakers in this heated debate .
My contribution to the air of unanimity will be to agree with everything that has been said so far .
Conciliation and codecision were long fought for by Parliament and were a recognition of Parliament 's role .
They were a significant step forward .
Generally speaking the Council 's attendance at these meetings was good , whereas , for whatever reason , Parliament delegations have sometimes been poorly attended .
This rule change both facilitates and encourages greater participation .
As Mr Ford explained , the logic behind it , the reasoning and the very clear wording put pressure on political groups and oblige them to provide a substitute so that Parliament will be better represented and can play a full part in all the debates .
Attendance will be better as will decisions .
In the end , for parliamentarians , it will be seen as one of the best reports to come before Parliament so far this year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.05 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , yesterday there was an unfortunate accident in Asturias , Spain , which caused the death of a miner .
I raise this matter here because the stoppages and strikes in the Asturian mining industry may get worse , because tension is rising .
The European Union is involved in this , because the underlying problem in the conflict is that the European Commission has not accepted the plan which had already been negotiated between the Spanish Government and the unions .
Mr President , would you please ask the Commission to give very careful thought to what is happening in Spain , because I fear tension is rising .
I would like our sympathy to be expressed , and also a call to the Spanish mining unions and Government to remain calm . However , the Commission must realize that it has to respect what has already been agreed between the unions and the Spanish Government .
Otherwise , because of the geographical distance between Brussels and the areas in question , it will seem as if the Commission is hiding behind an authoritarian attitude .
Mrs Garcia Arias , we read about this distressing incident in the newspapers today .
I have made a note of your comments .
Mr President , to be brief I will just say that I completely agree with what Mrs García Arias just said .
Those of us who live in Asturias are very concerned about the Commission 's attitude to the mining plan signed by the Spanish Government and the unions in Asturias .
When you pass on our condolences , could you please also tell the European Commission how worried we are about what is happening .
The conflict may get worse , and who knows what that might lead to .
Mr President , concerning the Minutes , page 15 , the issue raised by Mr de Vries and Mr Martens .
I see Commissioner de Silguy in the House and I wonder if he is now prepared to make a statement on what is happening or at least consider the request from Parliament to make a statement .
Will he make a personal statement today or will President Santer inform the House why it is important at this time of great unemployment in Europe that Commissioners should hold two jobs ?
Mr McMahon , since we are approving the Minutes , I should inform the House that with regard to the Commission 's position on the issue of whether its Members have the right to take on political commitments when they are also Members of the Commission , the Commission has advised me that its President is proposing to make an announcement during our next sittings , on 28 and 29 January in Brussels .
Consequently , the request of Mr de Vries and of Mr Martens , with which the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Confederal Group of the European United Left- Nordic Green Left agreed , will be granted . This announcement will be made in Brussels .
Mr President , I seem to have been missed out of the Minutes as the last speaker on Item 11 , the White Paper on Railways and Rail Freight Freeways .
I would be grateful if my name could be included in the list of speakers .
Mr President , I simply wish to return to the matter raised yesterday by Mr de Vries which you have dealt with .
I hope the Commission will use its discretion to make such a statement .
Mr President , I was present at yesterday 's session but I forgot to sign in .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
The euro , the capital markets , the consumer and EMU
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0383 / 97 by Mr Friedrich , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission on the impact of the introduction of the euro on capital markets ( COM ( 97 ) 0337 - C4-0443 / 97 ) -A4-0338 / 97 by Mr Ruffolo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the Commission 's working paper on external aspects of economic and monetary union ( SEC ( 97 ) 0803 - C40265 / 97 ) -A4-0417 / 97 by Mr Stevens , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on electronic money and economic and monetary union-A4-0415 / 97 by Mr Pérez Royo , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the euro and the consumer .
Mr President , the introduction of the euro raises two fundamental problems : that of its internal value and the stability of prices within the European Union ; and that of its external value and the stability of its exchange rate .
The second aspect is the subject of this report . It then examines the foreseeable consequences of the introduction of the euro on the markets ; the problems it raises for the EU 's exchange policy ; the prospects it opens for a new phase of international monetary cooperation ; and the specific problem of the use of dollar reserves that may be considered surplus .
With regard to the first point , it is not possible today to have a clear idea of the market reactions to the introduction of the euro , particularly in the short term .
Opinion is divided today between those who believe the euro will acquire the characteristics of an international currency capable of rivalling the dollar right from the outset , owing to the extent and power of the economic area it represents , and those who anticipate that it will have to face a phase of distrust and debility owing to the heterogeneity of the area .
Any forecast is not only difficult , but useless ; as the credibility of the euro will be connected with EU monetary policy to a large extent , it is far more useful to concentrate on this .
The report makes a distinction between two viewpoints in this connection : the short and medium term , and the long term .
It refuses to raise the question of EU monetary policy in terms of a choice between a strong euro and a weak euro , as this is a false problem .
The real problem is to ensure a stable euro , without artificial reinforcements and without attempts being made in the opposite direction to promote the competitiveness of the European economy through the weakening of its currency .
A stable and credible euro , providing a stable balance for the public finances , will enable interest rates to be controlled and therefore the development of investment to be facilitated , reabsorbing the surplus savings that have so far been used to finance public deficits , thus promoting a broader rate of growth .
Naturally , the stability of the exchange rate depends on American monetary policy and unforeseeable external shocks .
This poses two problems : that of promoting close monetary cooperation with the United States in our reciprocal interests , and that of ensuring a clear responsibility for the exchange policy within the European Union .
On this second point , the report notes that there is still an area of institutional ambiguity .
In the long term , it is to be hoped that EU monetary policy will facilitate the gradual ascent of the euro from European regional currency to world currency with the same dignity as the dollar .
This will depend on the extent to which the exchange rate between the euro and the dollar reflects the fundamental economic relations between the two areas , and the extent to which it is used in currency and financial transactions by operators outside the European Union .
The third question relates to the implications of the euro on the international monetary system .
The elimination of a substantial part of international trade and currencies and the introduction of a totally new currency will radically change the world currency landscape by simplifying it to three fundamental currencies , which will open a totally new chapter in the history of currency , with high risks of volatility and conflict but also with great opportunities for cooperation .
These opportunities may be collected in a new agreement that promotes a more systematic framework for world currency . The report suggests that the European Union should adopt a political initiative to this effect .
Finally , with the introduction of the euro , a substantial part of the dollar reserves held today by the European central banks will probably become objectively available .
So it is a question of choosing between a policy of overprotecting the euro that would decree the sterilization of these resources , and a policy of wise functional use of the objectives of developing and extending the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are 352 days left before the start of the third phase of EMU .
So far , the successive phases of the timetable fixed in the Treaty are being achieved on time . Today we can say that in all probability the euro will begin to function on 1 January 1999 under the conditions laid down at the European Council in Madrid , and eleven Member States will participate in this third phase right from the outset - that is , virtually all of them except those that have chosen not to do so .
That means that from that date the euro will become the common currency for about two hundred million European citizens .
Their attitude to the single currency is crucial in ensuring the final success of this enterprise .
Throughout the different phases of EMU , its protagonists have been fulfilling their commitments : the Member States have prepared their convergence programmes ; the Commission and the Council have carried out their supervisory tasks and elaborated regulatory instruments ; the European Monetary Institute has been set up and has started to work properly ; Parliament has made the euro one of the priorities of its debates ; industry , the credit institutions and the capital markets are getting ready for the new situation which will be created when the euro is introduced .
Nevertheless , a whole set of unknowns exists in relation to consumers , who are the euro 's end users .
Money or currency is not just an economic concept , but is also symbolic and social - a fundamental part of life within society . The ultimate users are the citizens , who are used to their national currencies , and who are very diverse , having varying levels of education , and a wide range of habits and customs relating to money usage and methods of payment .
For these citizens - for consumers in general - the introduction of the euro raises a series of problems : use of the euro during the transitional period ; exchange between national currencies participating in the euro during that transitional phase ; finally moving to euro notes and coins at the end of that phase ; the continuity of contracts , especially the so-called accession contracts with telephone and electricity supply companies , etc .
In tackling these questions , we have tried to favour the views of consumers , as conveyed to us by their representative organizations . In some cases , amendments have been presented to reinforce this position , and we are willing to vote in favour of them .
Our starting point must be to stress the importance of the change which will happen on 1 January 1999 .
Although notes and coins will not enter circulation until three years later , in 2002 , the big change will already have taken place in 1999 .
We need to use the transitional period to ensure that the introduction of the euro is efficient , and to get consumers used to thinking in euros .
From 1 January next year , it will be possible to use the euro as a means of payment , by cheque or credit card , or in the form of electronic money . We need to promote such usage and guarantee that it does not involve additional costs to users .
One particular concern is the question of exchange charges or commissions in the final conversion to the euro .
We think it should be clearly established that conversion will not be subject to charges or commissions .
It has to be said that the Council 's ruling is ambiguous on this point , and therefore in our resolution we ask that the Commission should propose the appropriate amendment to make this clear . This is a question that has repercussions not just for consumers as such , but also for the very credibility of the new currency .
Similarly , we propose that precise rules should be established for dual pricing in the final phase .
In conclusion , I should like to stress something which has often been repeated in this Parliament : the success of the euro as far as the European people are concerned depends on them seeing the single currency as being linked to progress in the functioning of the economy , in their own wellbeing , and in solving the basic problems which worry them - starting with unemployment .
I should just like to finish by saying that I am confident that this is the spirit which will dominate our debate on this report and the others we are considering this morning .
Given the fact that he is the rapporteur , I shall now call on Mr Stevens to speak .
He was delayed , which is unusual for him . Members of this House must be here when they are called upon , otherwise this will create problems .
Mr President , I apologize for being delayed .
I was held up by an interview on this report and my watch was wrong .
This report is about the limitations of technology which is , perhaps , appropriate .
There is a curious coincidence that the timetable for Europe entering the single currency coincides with a technological revolution in the provision of financial services and , indeed , perhaps even in the definition of money itself .
The advent of electronic money is as big a revolution as the single currency itself .
The question which my report has looked at , but I fear not resolved , is whether these two processes could be combined .
There is obviously a huge prize to be gained from doing so .
European businesses are going to be investing very heavily in information technology for the introduction of the euro .
It would be logical to combine that investment with a further step forward towards electronic money , either in the form of Internet money or smart-card electronic purses .
From the point of view of the citizen , the difficulties of moving from their national notes and coins to the new euro notes and coins might indeed have been reduced by creating conditions whereby notes and coins scarcely matter any more , with money largely being held in electronic form .
In addition , in the case of electronic smart-cards , there would be the possibility of having a calculator function for citizens , to allow them to see the German mark or French franc equivalent of the new euro amounts that they see in the shops in front of them .
Of course , electronic money has a whole range of other implications for central banking and for banking supervision .
However , the opportunity that undoubtedly exists in this area is one that , I regret to say , the Commission , the European Monetary Institute and national governments seem very reluctant to take up .
They seem to have concluded that the shift to the single currency is such a big step for our citizens to go through that to complicate the issue with a technological revolution is altogether asking too much .
They have concluded that the pace at which electronic money is likely to come into European economies is not sufficiently fast for it to be a factor by 1 January 2002 .
They are probably right in that assessment if they adopt a passive attitude towards this development .
However , I would say that if they had adopted a more active attitude and recognized the huge potential of this technology the story might have been different - but so be it !
The function of my report , therefore , is a rather modest one .
What was initially envisaged as a spur to action by the Commission , the Council and the European Monetary Institute should now be regarded merely as a warning shot .
The euro is going to revolutionize the European economy .
It is going to massively increase the competitive capacity of our economy in global terms , but the introduction of electronic money has that potential too .
The pace at which Europe becomes an electronic market-place is going to determine the pace at which Europe becomes a true information society .
And ultimately , Europe 's competitive position in the world is going to depend on how fast we do that .
So I feel an opportunity is being lost here .
I , myself , believe that the rather modest calculations of the pace at which electronic money is going to come into the economy may well prove to be mistaken .
If you look at Internet money in the United States that has come through much more quickly .
My task is the modest one of warning our partners in the Commission , the Council and in Member State governments that this interface between the introduction of the euro and the advent of electronic money is something which we have to watch very carefully .
I hope that my rather pessimistic assessment is not proved correct by events .
Mr President , with the interests of the EU primarily in mind , the creation of the euro may also be of great significance to the other areas of the world .
This may be the case , for all the indications are that it will be a widely established currency .
Already today , around 30 % of world payments are made with all the various European currencies .
But the significance of a single currency will certainly be greater , with an added attraction , apart from payments , of financial applications and the formation of reserves by the issuing banks .
This is in line with the growing use of the main European currencies in recent years , with the simultaneous weakening of the world prevalence of the dollar : from 50 % to 42 % in payments between 1990-95 , from 67 % to 40 % in financial applications between 1981 and 1995 , and from 76 % to 6.5 % as a reserve currency between 1973 and 1995 .
The prospects open to the euro are thus an additional reason for making the EU take responsibility , making it important for it to be a strong and stable currency with the correct balance , avoiding penalizing our exports by overvaluation , while , if undervalued , it would lose credibility and have inflationist consequences .
In view of the desirability of its world-wide acceptance , we need an immediate broad dissemination campaign in the various areas of the world , a point to which I would particularly like to draw the Commissioner 's attention , as we suggested in the report we made to the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
The European campaign is obviously important , but we cannot put off a world campaign , accompanied by other appropriate measures .
This campaign and these measures cannot be uniform , in view of different situations , with the overall numbers mentioned in the report on the general use of the euro saying little on that account .
More specifically , we should not , for example , confuse areas such as non-euro Europe and a large part of Africa ( which by fact or law forms part of a large euro area ) with Latin America , North America or Asia , where the prospects opened in the fields of payments , financial applications and the formation of reserves by issuing banks are in some way significant , as is the intention already shown by the Bank of China of holding 30 % of its reserves in euros , in a continent where the yen does not take priority .
Measures aimed at all areas of the world are therefore important .
To conclude , the prospects being opened up on a horizon where the euro will give Europe a greater role , in its interests and in the interests of the world economy , are significant .
Mr President , I am addressing Mr Friedrich 's report , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
I would like to congratulate the Commissioner for the work he has accomplished , and perhaps even more congratulate the Giovannini group which , it appears to me , has comprehensively staked out the ground covering the question .
Mr Friedrich is putting forward an ambitious , long and substantial resolution .
So much the better !
There are few legal questions raised in connection with this report .
The problem of continuity of contract was already settled by the regulations which we examined some time past , and the report now basically deals with regulations to be adopted , either by the national authorities of the Member States , or by professional organizations .
Hence , our comments relate mainly to the wider legal framework which is to accompany the introduction of the euro and which , in the financial markets field , clearly has to deal with the issue of European company statutes .
It is high time that this question should come out into the open , and along with it , mutual investment fund organizations , and at a later date , tax harmonization .
As regards consumer protection - we are dealing here with paragraph 23 of Mr Friedrich 's resolution and this subject was of course touched on in the report from Mr Pérez Royo - I would like to come back to you , Mr Commissioner .
You know that I am very concerned about the protection of consumers against fraud , but I am just as opposed to confusing consumers , and I believe it is important to give incentives to Member States to introduce efficient structures for small claims settlement .
Furthermore , it will be unavoidably necessary , at one time or another , to get back to work on the problem of repressing criminality through the third pillar , or by means of conventions .
Now that the euro is off the launchpad , we should be looking at this .
I would therefore like to hear your views .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs for their work .
I joined this Parliament in 1989 and I was Parliament 's first rapporteur , along with Mr Cox , on economic and monetary union .
We have travelled quite a distance in terms of the technical work to finally complete this important project .
If you look at these reports and the work that we have undertaken on economic and monetary union , despite the difficulties that we have had , including the economic downturn in the early 1990s , we have now reached a point where the momentum behind economic and monetary union is unstoppable .
If you look at the biggest players in the financial services sector they have based their strategic decisions over the past few years on the assumption that EMU will indeed go ahead .
We have seen recently a wave of mergers and restructuring that spread throughout the financial services sector .
In the private sector as a whole there has been large-scale investment in the updating of information technology systems and the retraining of staff .
All this marks the transition to economic and monetary union on 1 January 1999 .
This demonstrates that when the European Union sets itself clear targets and when it sets itself realistic timetables , we can achieve great things in this Europe .
Since it started its first phase in 1990 the EMU project has had clear targets .
It has had a manageable timetable and , of course , that is why we will achieve the single currency on 1 January 1999 .
In less than four months , the Council will take that final important decision , and as a Parliament we have to look beyond that decision of 2 May and the start of the EMU on 1 January 1999 and set ourselves a new agenda within the European Parliament .
It is no good sitting here self-satisfied with the fact that we have created the single currency ; we have to see how we apply that single currency and what role it is going to have in our lives .
Today I would like to set out some of the priorities for my group over the coming years .
We need to learn an important lesson from the financial turmoil in south-east Asia .
A currency must be stable and we must be able to demonstrate its stability .
Therefore the pact for stability and growth is extremely important indeed .
We in this Parliament must make sure that it is applied rigorously so that we can protect the stability of our currency .
Secondly , our group wants to see greater steps made in economic coordination .
I would say to the Commissioner today , because I know that his services are working on the annual economic report at the moment , that we would like to know exactly what the new annual economic report will look like .
What will the broad economic guidelines look like in terms of building this new strengthened economic coordination ?
We would like to have a dialogue with you over the next couple of weeks to ensure that the broad economic guidelines for the future are what we actually require in this new European environment .
We want to ensure that the European Bank is independent .
No one in this house would challenge that , but there is no reason why an independent bank should not also be accountable .
We need to apply ourselves very carefully , particularly in the context of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report , to how we make that bank accountable .
It is our job here in the European Parliament to do that .
That means , President , and I say this to you because you are a member of Parliament 's Bureau , we need to restructure the committees of the European Parliament .
We need a Banking Committee in the European Parliament that deals with financial services and which will deal with the European Central Bank in the same way that nations like the United States of America have a powerful Banking Committee .
We in our group will pursue this over the next few months .
What will be the role of national parliaments in this whole new environment ?
Will we be so arrogant as to believe that we do not need to have a relationship with national parliaments ?
We need at least informally to build a relationship with national parliaments and I will be taking steps in the next few weeks to do this , hopefully with colleagues from across the Chamber .
We should set up a European Economic Forum where national parliaments and Members of this European Parliament can meet to monitor carefully economic coordination and the role of the European Central Bank .
I hope that some in this room will join in that endeavour .
My last point is in relation to the citizens and the consumer .
We have done the technical work but we have not yet sold the message to the public .
Our job as a European Parliament , your job as a Commission and the job of the Council is to make sure that between now and 1 January 1999 , and particularly 2002 , the citizens accept and welcome all the work that we have done and the creation of that single currency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , I wish to address the excellent report by our colleague Ingo Friedrich .
The Commission 's proposal is based on the principle that market harmonization , which will accompany the introduction of the euro , is a subject of great interest for the financial markets .
This proposal has come at just the right time , and I would here like to congratulate Mr Friedrich for the contents of this report .
In paragraph 11 , the resolution rightly raises the fact that dividends and redemptions of pension funds , life assurance and property funds are made in local currency , which means that a substantial portion of the funds must remain in the country of origin according to the principle of congruence .
In reality , thanks to monetary union , the whole of the monetary space of the EU will become a single territory .
This considerably enlarges the field of action for invested capital , and it is at this point that the full scope of the challenge faced by the EU with regard to the United States arises , as regards the capital markets and the future of the savings and investment sector at the global level , both in the medium and longer term .
It is vital for the future of Europe that the Member States , for example , re-examine the question of a strict , quantitative limit to be placed on the value of their pension funds , in the run up to the introduction of the euro .
If I take the example of France , a tool such as the internal market for financial instruments is visibly of particular importance .
The MATIF , which is one of the most important futures markets in Europe , if not the most important , should be able to continue to develop and compete with the futures market of the United States .
We need also to bear in mind the determining importance of the euro with regard to the monthly scheduling of debt .
On the other hand , the internal capital market , now euro denominated , depends clearly on the continuing good quality of the loans already issued , which is ample justification for the stability pact , whose purpose is to guarantee repayment of loans already contracted to lenders at constant value .
Mr Friedrich 's report specifically deals with the impact of the introduction of the euro on the capital markets .
In the light of the recent problems affecting NAFTA , one can draw the conclusion that limiting oneself to a free-trade area can lead up a blind alley .
This shows that the Community 's approach , one of an integrated economic and monetary space , on the basis of a whole set of precise and coordinated policies , is quite justified , an approach indefatigably advocated by Commissioner de Silguy .
We need to regard EMU both as a logical follow-up to the single market , and also as a teaching tool , popularizing European integration and enlargement .
For the western European countries , the euro represents the dynamism associated with the completion of the ordered competitive market place .
The decisive initiative here is membership of monetary union .
Monetary union also assumes - and here I have in mind our eastern European friends , who are all called on subject to certain conditions to join the EU in the longer term - that pan-European convergence will be the result both of international flexibility and of the planned approach to economic and monetary union adopted by the countries of Europe who have been able to overcome their scepticism and have resolved to go down that path to the future .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party I wish to address the report by Mr Ruffolo .
The Union has come through quite a long period of introspection in economic terms as we have sought to create the required convergence for monetary union .
This report has come forward now that we are on the threshold of achieving our objective and it is entirely timely to ask what should be the external purpose of and role of the euro .
One thing is very clear : the new European monetary area , though it is wholly open to trade , will have a very different degree of openness to the separate Member State economies .
In fact , it is in that context , in a global market , that the euro perhaps offers its greatest potential to Europe for the future and to the single market in particular .
With regard to the exchange rate , I agree with the rapporteur .
A central issue for the external role of the euro is stability .
In that context , the role of politicians is to look at economic fundamentals in the real economy ; the role of politicians is to achieve an appropriate level of convergence ; the role of politicians is to define what is the desirable level of price stability internally .
But when those elements are set , it is the role of the Central Bank to call the monetary policy mix , and we need not at this stage reopen old debates .
The unknown quantity in regard to the external value of the euro is clear : it is the speed and extent to which the euro has the market-base capacity to become a reserve currency and what the implications of that would be in feed-back terms for internal policy , which at the moment is conjectural .
In summary for the Liberal Group I would say , as between the politicians ' role and the Bank , let us render unto Caesar what is Caesar 's and unto the Bank what is determined in the Treaty .
Mr President , I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that we face a revolution .
Its elements consist of what we speak of here today , the advent of the euro and electronic money .
To these , I would add two more : the growing trade taking place on the Internet , which might cause problems for individual states to collect taxes and thus fund the welfare state ; and the fact that the year 2000 might cause some computer systems to fail .
All these factors together will bring about changes in the behaviourial patterns of the economy .
There is also the psychological question .
This will certainly be something that companies , the public sector and educators will have to deal with .
Hence , there are many unknown factors which can endanger the EU economy .
That is why I support totally Alan Donnelly 's proposal that there should be some kind of Banking Committee in Parliament to discuss these matters .
It would also be important as a factor in improved risk awareness , because there is a special need for risk awareness in this area .
Mr Friedrich mentions something in his report that may raise our hopes on this issue : when the national currency risk disappears , so too does one factor that affects differentials in interest rates .
This may have a stabilizing effect .
Finally , I would like to say that the EU must now dare to create a counterweight to monetary union in the shape of a common economic policy , particularly in the area of taxation , but also to be able to defend the European economic policy model .
It will differ , obviously , from other regional models .
It would thus be very important to create mechanisms to ensure that the European partners , at various times in their recent history engulfed in recession , do not get into inordinate economic difficulties .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am particularly addressing the Stevens report .
There is virtually nothing to stand in the way of the take-off of electronic money in Europe , except the deafening silence and " wait and see ' attitude of political and economic decision-makers in Europe .
I therefore congratulate the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and its rapporteur , Mr Stevens , for this initiative , in which he has reflected on what could indeed be one of the great challenges of tomorrow 's society - the control of electronic money .
In the light of the two revolutions which are currently causing a radical upheaval in European financial practice - and here I mean the introduction of the single currency and the development of digital moneys of account - how can we not conceive of the introduction of new forms of payment , and more particularly , of the re-definition of money and currency itself , and of the role of the banks and the supervisory authorities ?
In the last few years , the maelstrom affecting the telecommunications sector has profoundly changed banking .
Electronic banking has become part of day-to-day consumer practice in Belgium , with the massive use of the ' Proton ' card .
The same will soon be true of France , with the electronic purse sold by the Post Office .
As my colleagues have already said , we can but be delighted at the move from the magnetic strip to the on-board chip card , whether disposable , re-chargeable , or re-programmable .
The virtual purse should have a tremendous future ahead of it , as the advantages it presents are many and varied .
It works both for customers and for European retailers . It also has the advantage of providing users with greater security , by supplying the virtual account with money transferred from the account-holder 's credit card .
Disclosure of the number of one 's carte bleue -style banker 's card can be avoided , and there will be no need to dispose safely of the ticket issued by the cash dispenser when money is paid out .
But while Europe is currently in the lead of on-board chip technology - as the rapporteur reminded us in his introduction - is it not true that the very sinews of electronic money are the manner in which it is to be controlled and supervised ?
Contrary to the rapporteur - and here I am referring to Paragraph C - I believe the commercial battle will rage on the Internet rather than in the field of the virtual purse , for the simple reason that the whole thing is at present firmly American orchestrated .
Is there not a tremendous risk that the national banking authorities , or the future European Central Bank , will be stripped of their supervisory power by the telecommunications multi-nationals over the next twenty years ?
Even now as we reflect on the question , our governments are staying quiet , and major manoeuvres have already begun on the other side of the Atlantic , alliances are being struck between the major American multi-nationals in the multimedia field and the main global institutions specializing in bank card-mediated and processed banking transactions - the alliance between Netscape Communication and First Data , or Microsoft and Visa International , for example . They have but one objective , which is to bear down on all of us , Europeans that we are , with their hegemony .
In the United States , the multi-nationals , with the support of the White House , have long since understood that control of the cyber-economy , by means of technological mastery , will give them victory in the only battle they seem to care about - the information revolution .
I am sounding the alarm while we still have time . The proper operation of the single currency , the competitiveness of the European Union , and the stability of our European financial system , are so many reasons for governments to take urgent measures .
Mr President , this report , which is brimful with optimism , should not blind us to the fact that the introduction of the single currency has forced our countries to adopt the policy of austerity , a policy which was welcome after the years of budgetary laisser faire and which - particularly in Belgium - led to astronomical public debt .
But this austerity has severely penalized the most disadvantaged , those for whom the euro provides no prospect of improvement in living standards .
At the same time , if we are to believe the promises made last summer by the President of the French Republic to the Prince of Monaco , the Council and the Commission are seriously envisaging granting the Principality the benefits of the euro - at a time when the Principality is promoting tax evasion on a gigantic scale , to the detriment of the interests of the Member States - without there being any requirement on the residents of Monaco to make the slightest financial effort .
Such a gift to the wealthy would be an act of immorality and an insult to the financially disadvantaged , who will have to continue to tighten their belts for a very long time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a year from now we will be living in the euro era .
This should be a golden era in which international currencies are linked together in a climate of monetary stability .
I agree with Mr Ruffolo , the rapporteur , that it will be very difficult to achieve balanced and stable monetary relations in the short term . Nevertheless I believe , as the crisis in Asia has made very clear , that we will very soon have to create political control mechanisms in the world , to help ensure that the real economy is not jeopardized by turbulence on the currency markets at the cost of workers and the economic development of world prosperity .
That is why I believe European monetary union can make a contribution not only to achieving a reasonable situation as regards competition between today 's world currencies , but also to developing international monetary stability and also normality in the significance of world currencies to each other in relation to trade and economic conditions .
So the European Parliament and the European Commission are right in attaching great importance to stability and to the international dimension of the euro .
I deeply regret that until now the Council of Ministers has not made it clear that the European Union will speak with one voice on monetary matters in the euro era .
We cannot have a monetary union and yet continue to voice differing views in international financial organizations or at G8 or G10 meetings .
We have already had painful experiences of the downside of this , during the Uruguay Round and also in the World Trade Organization .
We should not repeat this mistake in monetary matters .
I hope , therefore , that the role of the Commission will be enhanced in view of the international dimension of the euro .
Moreover , the European Parliament has rightly demonstrated in today 's debate that it is important not just to want European monetary union , but also to carefully prepare the way for it . This is necessary to allay people 's fears , fears easily exploited by opponents of European monetary union by creating the impression that monetary union is actually monetary reform , leading to concerns about the value of their money and their purchasing power .
By preparing the way , we must make it clear to people that EMU involves bringing together equally sound currencies , so that we can pay all over the European Union with equally sound money .
And this will reassure citizens , who are worried about the stability of their money and who want to see their savings and income safeguarded , that their concern is being taken into account in the run-up to EMU .
That is why it is so important that we as a European Parliament should take up arms for consumer protection as part of the debate on EMU .
It is also high time the Commission brought forward a further euro regulation , to ensure that there is no cost to the consumer in converting from national currencies to the euro , that any kind of conversion fraud or abuse is ruled out , and , above all , this regulation should provide for dual pricing .
We really must take our citizens with us on the road to EMU , not stir up their fears .
This will only be possible if , during the euro 's introductory phase and during the phase when the euro and national currencies are used side by side , it is really possible to check and to understand the cost of goods , services and even charges for public services , both in euros and in the national currency .
Commissioner , the European Parliament requested this last year .
I think it is in the interest of a successful monetary union , which will be judged not only by the reaction of the markets but also by the reaction of our citizens , that the Commission should finally present us with a regulation of this kind .
After all , the euro is for everyone , and we need to speed up the process through European legislation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to continue where Mrs Randzio-Plath left off , that is on the issues dealt with in Mr Pérez Royo 's report , the euro and consumer protection .
I think it is right for the Commission to pay sufficient attention to consumer protection from the Commission 's point of view , but we must not overshoot the mark .
Mrs Randzio-Plath , you yourself know as well as I do that if dual pricing is to extend - as suggested in Mr Pérez Royo 's report - from the beginning of the third phase , that is from 1 January 1999 , possibly on an optional basis initially , but then if this is not satisfactory , backed up by the force of a regulation , this will of course have a big influence on costs in commerce and may push them up .
So I should like to sound a warning note about the extent of consumer protection .
Paragraph 14 of Mr Pérez Royo 's proposal , which is right on many points and which I generally fully support , asks the Commission to establish regional observatories .
What kind of suggestion is that ?
Do we need regional observatories ?
Anyone suggesting this , and they may indeed get a majority for it in the vote at noon today , has failed to understand that the EU regulation under Article 235 of the EC Treaty already deals with all matters of civil law : continuity of contracts , the conversion from ECU to euros at a 1 : 1 rate , rounding rules and so on .
I believe that wherever there is competition , and that is the case in commerce throughout Europe , and wherever suppliers have to prove themselves on the market , there will not be any funny business , because consumers would soon notice .
I am rather unhappy about the idea of everyone engaged in commerce being labelled as potential criminals and all consumers as potential idiots .
Every consumer will have only one conversion rate from his or her old national currency to the euro .
Just one rate !
Consumers will be told that rate on 4 May 1998 , and there is no question of that being settled by some voluntary arrangement .
There will be pocket calculators with an extra button - they already exist , in fact .
So that simply will not be a problem , and I am willing to bet that within 48 hours , perhaps just 24 hours , consumers will have caught on to the conversion rate , and nobody will be able to hoodwink them after that .
There is one exception , namely monopolies , especially public sector monopolies .
In that area we will have to watch that the introduction of the euro is not used to sneak in price increases .
But , necessary as consumer protection is , we must not overdo it .
Mr President , first of all I want to congratulate the various rapporteurs on their reports .
I believe that the success of economic and monetary union will largely depend on the way in which our citizens are prepared for the introduction of the single currency .
We have only to talk to our constituents to recognize this .
Our people have concerns .
There is therefore a need to ensure that the euro is explained and that any misunderstandings are dealt with .
This obligation is naturally on the Union and the Member State governments .
I call on the Commission today to agree to , and to finance , a national and European ' euro hotline ' to protect consumers ' and business ' interests as we embark on this great initiative .
It is essential that information , training and education campaigns are put in place for all our citizens as well as businesses .
European citizens need to be convinced that the single currency will not be against their interest , nor that of their country .
They need to be reassured that the euro will strengthen our economies and that it will demonstrate the real strength of Europe in the world , resulting in lower interest rates which will put more money into our peoples ' pockets .
On the introduction of the euro it will be essential that there is an assurance that the cost of introducing it will not fall on the consumer .
There must be a rounding down in favour of the consumer .
When prices are converted consumers must also be shown how to easily calculate the conversion from the Member State currency into the euro .
Dual pricing is essential and should be introduced prior to January 1999 .
It is important that consumers become accustomed to the pricing before 2002 .
It is vitally important that counterfeit money be detected , including the use of counterfeit coins in machines .
One of the distinctive advantages of the euro is that it will enable consumers in my country and elsewhere to compare the prices of goods and services , including tourism products .
The cost of a holiday in the west and north of Ireland indeed will show up very favourably .
It will also help cross-border sales .
I believe that the euro will provide a positive boost to competition .
It will ensure transparency in pricing ; it will ensure exchange rate and interest rate stability ; it will stifle currency speculation and will stimulate growth in employment .
I believe that the national authorities must ensure that there is adequate and intelligible information on the real cost of introducing the euro , together with adequate information for consumers in order to guarantee competition and to detect and stop unjustified price rises - hence my call for a ' euro hotline ' .
In conclusion , as I have already stated in this House , the euro notes must be friendly to the visually impaired .
There is an obligation on all of us to ensure that .
I would like yet again to clear up one thing . I understand that it is impossible , in one minute , even for an orator like you , Mr Nordmann , to develop your thoughts .
However , I have repeatedly requested the political groups not to allocate their members one minute of speaking time .
I regard this as a matter of dignity .
Unfortunately , you are given one minute of time and we are in a difficult position , both you and the presidency .
We also have a programme which is not being adhered to .
But one minute must not turn into two minutes .
Mr President , all four reports under debate are characterized by a general euphoria about the introduction of the single currency .
However , we must not lose sight of the fact that our effort to promote and secure the euro as an international currency and to ensure its stability on international markets is being carried out in the context of the implementation of austerity programmes , strict monetary discipline , the dictates of the stability pact and , finally , in the context of total upheaval in the jobs market and the dwindling of workers ' security and social rights .
At the same time , developments on global money markets simply confirm the intense anxiety regarding the economic progress of those countries that do not conform .
The Commission is under an obligation to study the repercussions and the powerful side effects on the weaker economies , such as in Greece for example , but also in other countries outside and inside the euro which are more vulnerable to international speculative pressures .
The workers and people of Europe cannot accept having to mortgage their future for the sake of the euro and the aspirations of European credit finance capital to obtain a hard currency in order to win speculative games on the capital markets of the world .
For this reason , Mr President , they will react , and for this reason account must be taken of their anxieties .
Mr President , we need to say something here about the economic substance of the revolution which we are signing up to on all sides .
I have in mind the immediate de-localization of credit money , whose localized vulnerability we are currently witnessing .
The fact that credit money is now being jeopardized all over the world by the present crisis in Asia is just one indication of this .
We are thus witnessing a new degree of separation of monetary cycles from the real economy and from the primary income that can only be derived from that economy , and accordingly also from the material reproduction capacity of economic structures as a component of a complex world society with increasingly global problems and planet-wide responsibility .
This is the context in which we are preparing to introduce the euro .
Mr Ruffolo , a stable and credible euro will not , in the medium and long term , be a consequence of monetary policy , either solely or even primarily .
It will be determined by the credibility of the European Union , by which I mean here the extent to which it can find democratically workable answers for the future .
I am still not convinced that the neo-liberal plan for a revolutionary micro-economy society which Mr Stevens has presented to us , which tries to turn all interaction into buyer / seller , creditor / debtor or quite simply market-related interaction , is the right model to guarantee this future capability .
We cannot just see our citizens as consumers .
Mr Donnelly , we know that the plan has now become unstoppable , and that the euro will be introduced .
What is at issue now is what is still possible , even if Luxembourg I and Luxembourg II have only yielded unsatisfactory results , by revising the conditions for the introduction of the euro .
I can only describe this in headlines here .
We need an effective European employment policy .
We need economic policy coordination which amounts to more than generating paper but instead establishes a real framework and sets real objectives .
We need to end all forms of dumping and competition for the location of investment projects in the internal market , whether it takes the form of taxation , environmental standards , social security arrangements or subsidies .
We need to allow the European Central Bank and also the European Central Banking System to establish themselves as part of a wide-ranging social and economic policy process .
In other words , instead of a micro-economic revolution , we need the courage to introduce greater democracy , especially in economic and social policy , so that our citizens , who are now becoming more active , are given greater power and fresh perspectives .
Mr President , this Parliament might be able to make a good impression with this debate on EMU .
In an economic sense Europe is flourishing , after all .
The number of nations forecasted to join EMU has never been so high .
For Italy , Spain , and Portugal , membership is on the horizon .
France and Germany have to pull out all the stops , but will manage , as they are indispensable EMU participants in a political sense .
The jubilant mood about EMU is very understandable , but also very dangerous .
It is politicians , civil servants and bankers who primarily feel that way .
But Dutch voters think differently : 47 % of them expect it to be delayed , while only 18 % expect EMU to start on 1 January 1999 with a large group of countries .
This means an enormous gap exists between the decision to be made on 2 May 1998 , and what the people think the decision will be .
Those who think EMU will go ahead because there is proper economic convergence are wrong .
Formal Treaty criteria are met .
But in reality , there are big differences in economic and conjunctural developments .
Nor by any means are all results in the sphere of public finances based on structural measures .
EMU will not take place as a result of convergence having been achieved , but because important politicians have thrown their lot in with it .
Four German professors recently made public their opinion on this point .
They warn of unstable exchange rates if the euro loses its credibility as a result of the participation of economically weaker countries .
The effects on employment are also painted too rosily .
They will be positive for prosperous regions , but for weaker regions a negative effect is more to be expected .
Likewise , other economic risks of EMU are ignored .
If these become manifest , then EMU has a problem .
Faith in the euro will be tested .
It will be difficult as an MEP to explain why the euro is good for the European consumer .
Mr President , my comments are limited to Mr Stevens ' report .
I consider the initiative underlying this report to be extremely valuable , but it should not be viewed simply in connection with introducing the euro .
Europe is a leader in the field of smart-card technology , and we must exploit that situation .
Increased use of electronic money would be a further step in the information society , and would have a positive impact on our citizens ' lives .
The versatility of smart-card technology could also be used to rationalize administration in the public services sector , allowing substantial budget savings to be made in the medium term .
It would have extremely important consequences if this Parliament initiative boosted willingness to cooperate within the Council , and if the various national initiatives in the field of smart-card technology at least became compatible .
Promoting electronic money is an investment in development in tune with the spirit of the times .
So it is even more amazing that this technological revolution in the payment systems our citizens use has so far scarcely featured in the overall strategy for introducing the euro .
Developments in information and communications technology will also soon have an impact on the way we use money .
Progress in electronic payment systems affects the very idea of money , and we shall have to face up to the consequent fiscal , legal , economic and even political challenges .
I accordingly welcome Mr Stevens ' report .
However , it would be helpful if at least part of the budget set aside for advertising the euro could be used to prepare our citizens for the imminent technological change in our money system .
Mr President , in 11 months time 11 countries will enter economic and monetary union here in Europe .
The goal of our single currency aspirations will be scored by this first team of 11 players with four countries on the substitutes bench , limbering up , ready to join the fray later , perhaps before the next World Cup in 2002 .
But even at this eleventh hour there is much to do to ensure that the goalposts are up and not moved , that the pitch is level and fit for play and that the ball is hard enough to score goals for Europe right from the kick-off .
These four reports before us today deal with some of the last-minute anxieties and hopes .
The Pérez Royo report rightly identifies concerns of some of the single currencies-watching spectators .
Consumers will need to be assured , for instance , that once the ball of the single currency is in play , the double pricing in the euro and in the home money is the rule , not the exception .
If retailers are not prepared to help customers orient themselves to these historic changes , then Parliament should blow its whistle and be prepared to legislate to ensure double pricing .
So too with potential conversion costs associated with the advent of the euro .
Whether we are talking of phase B where national currencies might be exchanged , or phase C where the new euro coins could be exchanged for dying denominations , charging the man or woman on the street or boulevard for exchanging currencies will be a disaster , especially since we have sold the euro to the citizens as the currency which eliminates such wasteful exchange costs .
We must guard against just such an own-goal .
In addition , it is imperative that the public authorities monitor closely the change over to the euro .
Suspicions by the consumers that the euro will be used to mask price hikes must be zealously tackled and tripped up .
There are many older people in Britain today who recall 1971 decimalization as a time to cry foul against the ticket touts making money out of those unfamiliar with a new currency .
I hope that the Commission will agree to draw up proposals for regulations concerning cost reconversion of such coins and notes .
If the Pérez Royo report deals with the near future , Mr Stevens ' essay on electronic money treats of a future which is fast moving towards us .
Using smart cards and electronic purses will soon be second nature to us all .
Perhaps , as the rapporteur has argued in earlier debates , acceptance of EMU might have been promoted by linking it to new technologies like electronic money .
Less sound is his proposal that a single private sector organization might have been entrusted with the responsibility for issuing such encrypted money .
Whatever the future of such developments , Parliament should insist from the issuers of electronic money , as with a bank or other institutions , that the requirement of public confidence , interoperability and the continuing stability of the financial systems should be met by the competent authorities .
With reference to the Ruffolo report on certain external aspects of the euro , I would corroborate the rapporteur 's concern regarding the external representation of the European Community on bodies like , for instance , the IMF .
Clarification of the responsibilities between Ecofin and the Central Bank is required sooner rather than later .
One concluding comment : the current severe disruption of the Asian financial markets makes it all the more imperative that EMU is launched on a solid basis .
A stable euro will be good for Europe and good for the world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to refer to the Friedrich report and congratulate the rapporteur for dealing with one of the most important areas of institutionalization of the capital market .
At the moment , it is fragmented and there is competition between each of the European financial markets , and between these and the world financial markets .
This report indicates that the introduction of the euro in stock exchange transactions and listings as from 1 January 1999 will solve all the problems and distortions which exist between the various investors of the Member States of the Union , and marks an important stage in the harmonization of the process of establishing the European market .
It is a very optimistic report because not all the problems of the financial markets will be resolved .
We do not fully share this nominal and formal view , but we share the idea that the various convergences must exist .
And in fact legal and tax barriers still exist that cannot be overcome , as the report recognizes and which , on that account , cannot mean that only the euro can overcome them .
With regard to the tax barriers , we wish to point out that each country handles and wants to continue to handle internal taxes and the respective collection systems for withholding at source or , finally , solely on the basis of their needs to attract public loans , through State securities or debentures .
Will the euro answer this question ?
I think not .
They will say : " It is a result of the rule of unanimity ' .
Will it be ?
Since when have common interests been unresolved , even if consent and unanimity are required ?
What is happening , and this report does not deal with this issue , is that each of the countries attracting investment raises its interests above those in need of it .
When these objectives are met , the aims of this report will then be achieved .
Mr President , electronic money is a serious issue and it really deserved separate consideration rather than being lumped in a general debate about the euro .
I am pleased that Mr Stevens and the Group of the European People 's Party eventually felt able to accept the Liberal amendments , which were endorsed by the committee , because without those changes , it was doubtful whether we would be in a position to support his report today .
This report comes at an important time in the development of electronic money .
The new technology , already under development in many Member States , is the subject of discussion within the Commission , the European Monetary Institute and the Member States .
But by adopting his report now , before the other institutions , the European Parliament can send a strong signal that the development of electronic money must not be impeded by excessive regulation and incompatible standards .
The purpose of my amendments was to send that signal and to remove anti-competitive elements present in the rapporteur 's first draft .
The report now provides a regulatory framework which will ensure the confidence of the public in electronic money , the stability and the soundness of issuers and the smooth functioning of the single market .
We must ensure that such a framework allows all appropriately regulated entities , banks and non-banks , to issue electronic money on a competitive basis , and does not restrict competition through a franchise system or by limiting the market to banks alone .
Interoperability will be a crucial factor in the development of electronic money .
We must ensure that different electronic purses and smart cards are based on interoperable standards , to prevent fragmentation of the market and the development of an anti-competitive cartel .
Finally , a regulatory regime must not interfere in pricing policies .
If companies have invested in the development of this money , they must not be obliged to issue products for free .
The market should determine the pricing , leaving customers free to choose .
With those provisos , I am happy to endorse this report .
Mr President , I have three comments to make .
Firstly , with the euro , crises and disturbances in the economy are going to spread more rapidly on the capital markets , and Europe risks having an Asian situation .
Secondly , democracy is being eroded .
Elected politicians are being converted into lackeys with the task of serving and facilitating movements on the capital markets .
We are getting a system which nobody will control and which will never control itself .
Thirdly , this debate shows a massive conformity of views .
What kind of parliament is it where 95 % of the debate consists of eulogies to one and the same idea ?
There is no room here for a deeper critical scientific analysis .
This orthodoxy is frightening in view of the fact that all attempts from 1873 to 1993 to create these kinds of currency structures have led to depression and then collapse .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the prior question has not been dealt with .
Before coming to technical aspects , we would need to be assured that the peoples of Europe really wish to join the euro .
This would require national referenda in all countries on a reform of this importance , if only out of respect for the electors .
Furthermore , the consequences of the extension of the deutschmark to the former East Germany are only too visible in the shape of unemployment in the East and rising taxes in the West , at enormous cost down the years .
This is what happens when a single currency is imposed on two countries which differ in competitiveness .
And I am not talking about the moral aspect of this experiment , the scorn of the East by the West in a society where money is the measure of all things .
The scenario risks being the same in Europe .
The countries in which companies have competitiveness problems will experience rising unemployment .
The more productive countries will sooner or later have to sign up to giving a minimum of assistance in solidarity payments , and taxes will rise .
Changing the denomination of the currency will also hit the consumer 's pocket with inflation .
In eastern Europe , the creation of national currencies in Estonia , Slovakia and Slovenia or in other countries was experienced at the time as a liberation .
It enabled these countries to move over to the market economy in the best conditions .
Curiously , in western Europe , people are doing the opposite .
However , the sound monetary health of Switzerland or Norway demonstrates all the attractiveness of national currencies .
In a word , it serves no useful purpose to get into a technical debate without resolving the prior question of the creation of the euro in principle , a question which can only be truly settled by democratic debate , in the form of the organization of referenda .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , albeit to the displeasure of the extreme right and its allies , the euro is now into the home straight .
In a few weeks , everything will be in place , and in one year the euro will be the legal currency for more than 200 million Europeans .
This is the reason why today 's debate is very important , and I would like thank and congratulate our rapporteurs for their work and contribution .
Like Mr Friedrich , I believe that we have to permit a complete integration of the financial markets .
But I also say that it is necessary to harmonize the tax and legislative framework , and take care that we do not restrict ourselves to giving satisfaction to speculative markets .
As regards ourselves , which must be a prime concern , we need to favour direct investment , which generates employment , while we need , if not to eliminate , at least to reduce the tax breaks and havens which are in the very heart of our Europe .
This is one of the conditions of acceptance of the euro by citizens .
As regards the euro and consumers , I agree with the proposal from Mr Pérez Royo on dual price display , but I would like this to happen as soon as possible , and the system to be introduced in as short as period of time as possible .
Still on the question of the citizen and the consumer , I support the very firm and very clear demand for home currency to euro conversion to be free of charge to the citizen .
This requires careful supervision , as we have heard from certain banking quarters that there was a real temptation to make their customers pay for this service .
With regard to the Ruffolo report , on behalf of the defenders of European industrial competitiveness , which is the dossier on which I am currently working , my sincere wish is that everything be done to avoid an over-valued euro , which would have a negative impact on employment .
Of course , the politicians will not be fixing parities , but the decisions that we shall be taking may have an effect , whether upwards or downwards , on the exchange rate .
Furthermore , I am of course in favour of democratic control of the European Central Bank , and hence at the very minimum of control by the Ecofin council on the exchange rate policy .
Finally , regarding relationships between money and new technologies , which is the subject of Mr Stevens ' report , I wish to say that I too wish and hope that this will lead to a reduction in the time required for the minting of coins and printing of banknotes , and hence to the bringing forward of the date of 1 January 2002 .
Three years is really too long .
Before concluding , I would like to take advantage of these reports to ask Mr de Silguy , who is present , to outline to us his position on the consequences of the Asian crisis , as regards the prospects for growth and the euro timetable .
Does he not believe that the crisis might bring the timetable forward ?
Does he still think that we can wait until 1 January 1999 to fix the euro parity , when the euro zone and monetary parities will be fixed on 2 and 3 May ?
It would be nice , Mr Commissioner , if you could say something here to us all , and not just to the radio and television stations where you feature so frequently .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have already heard a lot of words , and we shall hear a lot more this morning and this afternoon .
This Parliament 's Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs and its Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy have done some excellent work in recent years .
The insight shown by the chairmen has always made it easy for us to deal with representatives from the financial sector , those with an interest in policy affecting finance and also with associations , including consumer associations , trade associations , and so on .
The information we have acquired is exemplary by the standards of this Parliament , and the general accessibility of today 's debate is important if it is to lead to positive decision-making by the middle of this year .
I think we can allay people 's fears here .
There is nothing to be gained by frightening people , either by what we say here today or through the attempts of the professors in Germany to frustrate the introduction of the euro .
What we say and do today must serve to build up trust .
We have four reports before us .
The report on the euro and world markets and the Ruffolo report have become highly relevant because of the turmoil in south-east Asia .
I believe that we must press for a further , more thoroughgoing debate on monetary , interest-rate and subsidy policy in the context of the world economy .
It is in our hands what we do here in the European Union , and must do because of the Maastricht Treaties , and we do it gladly . Developments in south-east Asia have affected our labour market and competitive situation for years , and trends there in subsidy , low interest and monetary policy have cost a great many jobs .
We have not paid enough attention to this topic , and now we are deeply involved , as we are having to pump massive amounts of money into those markets - both from Europe and via the IMF - in order to avoid even greater turmoil , if that is possible now .
Quite a lot has already been said about the Pérez Royo report .
Werner Langen made it very clear in his speech what consumers want and the respect we should have for their wishes . But he was equally clear - and I am sure Mrs Thyssen will support him in this - about the steps we must take to inform our citizens .
It is important that with 50 % state participation and the options open to Member States over the next three years , they should make dual pricing clear now .
I also consider it highly important , as stressed in the Pérez Royo report , that standard quality paper and printing should be used to reassure consumers that there is a minimal risk of counterfeit banknotes .
This a serious issue on which we can ask for action .
Mr President , the joint debate on these reports presupposes the citizen to be a Europhile , but to my mind this is not by any means yet the case .
It is true that the introduction of the euro is the crowning glory of the internal market .
It is true that with the euro Europe has gained itself an important role on an international plane .
It is true , competitive relationships will be clarified and the consumer will be able to take advantage of this .
But the rapporteur , Mr Pérez Royo , rightly pointed out that success as far as the people is concerned depends on the public 's perception of the euro , and the wellbeing it adds to their lives .
What I pick up from discussions with people is that they see the euro primarily as a technocratic measure which politicians , us in other words , want to push down their throats .
So , Mr President , the issue at the moment is primarily the information of the public .
The public already finds globalization difficult , as well as loss of identity .
Proper support of the euro process by the national governments is an absolute must .
The success of the euro offers the opportunity for very necessary and increased political cooperation within Europe .
Failure may mean chaos and an end to harmonious common cooperation in several areas .
In other words we should stick to the criteria , informing the public , and taking them along the euro road , especially those , like myself , who enjoy or will soon enjoy pensions .
Then I will be able to recommend the euro to our citizens with confidence and enter the twenty-first century as a Europhile , although we might need a euro hotline , as suggested by Mr Gallagher .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will limit myself to the Pérez Royo report .
My colleagues have already discussed other points , or will do so .
In his meritorious report Mr Pérez Royo has pointed out various facets related to the euro and the consumer .
The Commission meanwhile , in its statement on the practical aspects related to the implementation of the euro , has promised to make a number of proposals .
Commissioner , I quote two important points which still raise questions and have not been given an adequate response , namely dual pricing and the cost of conversion .
As far as dual pricing is concerned , I would like to know what stage decision-making is at .
The Commission was to determine before the end of 1997 whether there was a need to introduce a common regulation in all participating countries .
I agree with those who think that dual pricing must not be imposed in a compulsory fashion .
Let the market do its work ; leave room for flexibility , voluntary agreements , or codes of conduct .
Mr Commissioner , I have a second question .
To what extent will the banks charge conversion costs to the customer ?
On this subject this , too , the Commission promised to determine before the end of 1997 whether either a common regulation or national legislation is desired , or on the other hand whether the issue can be left to market players .
Could the Commission prohibit charging for possible conversion costs ?
Our preference would be for the banking sector to formulate a code of conduct itself .
I would like to thank the Commissioner in advance for his reply .
Mr President , one of these reports is dedicated to consumers .
And , despite the justified concerns it reflects , the report does not clarify how consumers will not have to bear the costs .
It seems right that consumers should not be asked to bear them but , as these costs will exist and will be substantial , who will bear them ?
It is not enough not to want the consumers to bear them , and to approve resolutions containing this religious statement .
Nor should we forget that consumers are mainly employees , and in this process it is more important to study the impact on actual wages and on the transparency resulting from better comparability .
There is a whole problem of credibility and trust that is well equated in the explanation of reasons when the warning is given that people may have the idea that the euro is just for the rich , or that it will only be of use to them , whether at consumer or company level , with the small and medium-sized businesses having greater difficulties with regard to administrative and accounting management and managing the costs of introducing a single currency in several countries .
On the other hand , no serious thought has yet been given , at least here in Europe , to the consequences of introducing the euro in the countries and regions with monetary areas set up as a result of motherland / colony relationships , even extended to former colonies of other motherlands , as is the case with the CFA area and Guinea-Bissau .
One final point : we are late in devising an offsetting mechanism that could deal with disproportionate shocks , necessarily different from those created by the IMF , which has consequences worldwide and is usually unaware of the causes and makes them worse .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the introduction of our new single currency calls for optimal accompanying monetary-policy measures . We must also bear in mind the impact on the capital markets of all the relevant parameters , and make due allowance for the effect of the external aspects of economic and monetary union .
But in addition , and most importantly , we must make the euro as acceptable as possible to the people of Europe .
The euro will be all the more acceptable if it can be made obvious how it is going to function . In this respect it is particularly important to ensure in the capital market that profit distribution and repayments - in the case of pension funds for example - are subject to workable investment principles .
We also need to take account of the competition principle , according to which a major part of funds has to remain inland , in the European Union - I am thinking of the Friedrich report now - and all the more so right now , because investment in the European Union is more important than ever , if we are to get a grip on our employment situation .
That is a priority .
Quite simply , that is how the euro and the future of our money economy will be judged .
The money economy cannot just be something abstract .
Furthermore , the consumer policy aspects are also highly important .
The introduction of the euro should not cost consumers anything during the transitional phase .
Conversion costs - in both senses of the word - should not be charged to consumers .
The continuity of existing contracts must be guaranteed , and accompanying measures are needed for this purpose .
One of the key accompanying measures is dual pricing .
Dual pricing also requires a legal framework , a regulation .
This kind of regulation is necessary to provide consumers with transparency and means of checking .
It is not a question of not being able to trust the market , it is a question of getting consumers to trust the euro , and the force of law has a part to play here too .
We also need to encourage people to feel good about the single currency .
This will provide credibility and will also contribute to the reputation that our institutions , particularly the European Central Bank , need to have .
If stability is to be achieved , it will require many accompanying measures , but above all enormous sensitivity .
That is the essence of the political challenge .
It cannot just be left to the money technocrats !
Mr President , a very important debate is being held this morning that highlights the active role played by the European Parliament in this stage of development of the final , definitive stage of economic and monetary union .
I would like to raise a few points , which to a certain extent relate to the excellent reports presented by Mr Friedrich on the capital markets and Mr Ruffolo on the external role of the euro .
I want to start with a question : is it enough to establish the objective of stability as the fundamental mission at the basis of the independence of the future European Central Bank , to insist on the requirements of accountability to have a good system of governing the European economy ?
There is no doubt that monetary policy interacts with the rest of economic policy and is conditioned by it : it interacts in particular with fiscal policy , budgetary policy , tax policy , with what we can call the non-monetary government of the economy .
And so the basic subject we have before us is that of the future system of economic governance for the European Union in economic and monetary union .
I believe that the decisions taken at the recent Luxembourg Summit , generally in favour of the formation of the socalled Eurocouncil , are going in the right direction and summarize the requirement for a non-monetary government authority for the economy , which to a certain extent matches the monetary government of the European Central Bank .
This will be a system based on two independent economic-policy authorities , which are inevitably interconnected in the link that exists within the economic policy in general in a system such as the European one .
Not only that , they will be two authorities with the same dignity and authority that have to establish the need , particularly for the Eurocouncil , to speed up the solution to several basic issues presented . Economic and monetary union consists of two essential sides , like a medal : the monetary side and the non-monetary side .
Within the latter , I will point out the subjects relating to the internal market , the need to speed up the implementation of the so-called action plan , and the tax subjects .
From this point of view , the decisions taken by the Ecofin Council on 1 December are very encouraging and I think the European Parliament will have the opportunity to come back to these and stimulate further progress .
To conclude , I would just like to mention one aspect that interacts with the point raised by Mr Friedrich , that is the agreement on a directive on the taxation of financial income for non-resident natural persons , a subject of fundamental importance to enable the future capital market to operate appropriately in the presence of the euro .
Mr President , I welcome the main thrust of the Pérez Royo report because it recognizes that real and tangible measures must be implemented to protect consumer interests in the run-up to the introduction of the single European currency .
May I say from an Irish perspective that we do not want to see the errors which arose when decimalization was introduced in the early 1970s and when there was vast confusion all over the place .
While I recognize that the actual euro notes and coins will not be put into the pockets of the 340 million consumers until the year 2002 , time is still of the essence with regard to the European-funded information campaigns which need to be orchestrated in this regard .
In advance of the date of 2002 many banking and commercial transactions can be carried out using the euro denomination .
The European Commission , together with the national governments , must fund information campaigns relating specifically to the pricing of products in both the euro and the currency of the host Member State in the run-up to EMU .
Dual-pricing campaigns must be part of this process , and such campaigns must take place in all key supermarkets and shopping outlets across Europe .
Finally , the prices of products should be displayed with the price denominated in euros and in the national currency .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the external aspects of economic and monetary union are often overlooked in the discussions on the euro .
Wrongly , because the external implications of EMU will have important consequences for both the EU and for our direct partners , as well as for the entire web of international economic monetary relationships .
The euro will undeniably play an important part as an international currency , and will create more balance within the international monetary system , especially in relation to the dollar .
EMU will enable the EU better to offer resistance against external shocks such as the ones caused by speculative capital flows .
EMU means an important step towards a new and more balanced international monetary system , from a unipolar to a multipolar system , in which the European Union will be able to play a leading role , and , it is to be hoped , will actually do so .
EMU will give the European Union a greater responsibility within the international financial economic organizations .
Concrete interpretation of this , within the IMF and the G7 amongst others , is therefore urgently required .
Finally , I would like to point out the danger of wishing to regulate and frame too much in advance of the start of the third phase of EMU .
In particular the market , influenced by a convincing and effective macro-economic policy , must determine the rate of the euro , rather than our advance management of it - a rate which has a positive reverberation in the outside world as well as on Europe 's economic position and its global , economic and monetary cooperation and stability .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ten years ago the political will for this ambitious project of the euro came into being .
During the past years economic convergence has improved rather spectacularly , despite sometimes difficult conjunctural effects .
Today we are on the eve of a transitional period which may be important and of great significance for the credibility of the new European currency .
For the present , the ball will soon be in the court of the national governments .
They will give the new currency more credibility by not only issuing new loans in euros , but by converting the outstanding national debts as much as possible into the euro .
Secondly , the euro will offer an answer to several countries who would like to differentiate reserves more .
I am not saying that the euro will take the place of the dollar , but I am saying that the euro may become an important factor of diversification .
Thirdly , it is clear that the sum of the reserves of the participating countries is greater than the sum necessary to support the European currency .
I therefore support Mr Ruffolo 's request that the European Commission should look into how these surplus reserves might be best used .
Fourthly , during the transitional phase everything has be to be done to inform the public .
The time of uncertainty will be over once 2 May has passed .
We must direct all resources , all budgetary resources that we have for information , towards informing the public about the introduction of the euro .
Fifthly , an important role awaits banking , which in the recent past has proved in my country , too , not to have earned any trust in its behaviour towards the customer .
I therefore do not rely on market forces , as Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens and Mr De Clercq just said .
I think that the European Commission and , if necessary , the national Member States must make legal provisions and guarantee free conversion of national currency into the euro .
Lastly , the introduction of the euro offers new opportunities and perspectives in a broader sphere .
Let us try today to make a start on European coordination , as agreed on 1 December . Let us use this beginning of economic coordination to map out one route which may incur the risk of the disadvantages and consequences of the crisisridden Asian markets today .
This is the first test case , as far as I am concerned , for better economic coordination which has to be linked to the introduction of the euro .
Mr President , the smaller the amount , the higher the costs are .
This summer I was on holiday with my daughter in Italy , and she changed 100 schillings in a money-changing machine .
It gave her 9 , 600 lire .
When we got back to Austria , I gave her back the money , rounded up to 10 , 000 lire .
Commissioner , just guess how much money she got from the Austrian machine - she got exactly half , just 50 % !
I think this sort of thing costs a lot of money in tourism and in other areas .
When you consider that we have about 50 % more bank employees than in America , and at higher staff costs at that , and that all this is partly necessary to grapple with the whole area of foreign currency exchange and risk , then we will certainly have to keep an eye on our banks in Europe and consider what banking supervision arrangements we shall need in future .
The fact that the banking system has been one of the main reasons for the crisis in the ASEAN states means that we need to be particularly attentive about a healthy banking system in Europe when we switch to the euro .
At the end of the day , the larger the amounts are , the greater the risk , and I believe that one of our chief tasks should be to limit that risk .
If you consider that between 1985 and 1995 the dollar led to the loss of some 1.3 million jobs in Europe , according to a study by the Austrian Institute of Economic Research , then you will appreciate just how important a single currency is for us .
As for the strength of the euro , I have to say that it is perhaps stronger than many exporters would like .
Mr President , I will focus on Mr Friedrich 's report , and on behalf of my group I can say that we agree with Mr Friedrich that it is conceivable that , once the euro has come into being , Europe will have the second largest bond market in the world .
So there are opportunities for Europe in this field .
But it is not enough to observe and note this .
Particularly in the area of condition-creating policy , the Union will still have to initiate a great deal , for example , in the sphere of company law , regulations for accounting , and stock market rules .
It is truly scandalous , and I have said so before in this Chamber , that we still have not managed to bring about a statute for businesses .
Enormous effort has also been made by the Davignon Committee , and yet it continues to drag .
Finally , I , like Mr Friedrich , would like to call for attention to be paid to pension funds in the various Member States .
As a result of existing obligations whereby they have to invest the largest part in the country of residence , opportunities are missed .
I will personally call for attention for this point in my report to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the Green Paper on pensions .
But here , too , I believe the European Commission will have to take action to make the Member States see that they can no longer hang on to outdated policy on this front .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the euro must be strong and dependable .
Confidence of the markets is not enough .
We need the confidence of the people .
That means better democracy and monitoring of the Central Bank , which is responsible to the democratically-elected bodies .
Major companies in Finland will be switching to the euro at the start of the third stage .
Already 64 % of the larger Finnish concerns have said they are getting prepared for the switch .
But the situation is more problematic for small companies .
Only 7 % have begun preparations .
And the situation is even less promising in the service sector .
The SME sector is Europe 's most important employer .
The SMEs , however , do not have the resources to create new information systems nor always the staff skills or money to acquire them .
The Commission should therefore produce an advice pack for them .
In order that the costs of transition do not overburden the taxpayer , the introduction of the euro must not mean consumers having to pay for it .
The euro may be the project of the century , but it seems to be making a very sleepy entry among Member States .
Education and information on the euro is absolutely essential for ordinary people , and it has come late in many areas .
Confusing and inadequate information has led to an image of much dithering and secrecy , and in times of mass unemployment this has increased opposition to it .
Memories of massive postWar devaluation lead us to regard money seriously .
It is more valuable the less there is of it .
That is why the information on the new money must be solid and comprehensive .
I suggest that every Member State has a popular-style series of programmes on television , to follow on from the news , showing the latest on the euro .
It cannot be possible that the appeal of a common currency is harder to get across than the absorption rate of babies ' nappies .
I agree with Mr Pérez Royo that the electricity , gas , water and telephone companies must get involved by stating their customers ' bills in euros as well as local currency .
We cannot , however , suppose that commercial companies , for example , - and I do not mean supermarkets - would be able to train up staff members as experts on the euro , as has been hinted at here .
That is the duty of the government , and it is obviously ours too .
Mr President , the introduction of the euro will obviously bring about change for all market players , and we are convinced that the positive effects will amply outstrip the negative ones .
We should not worry too much about the positive effects , but we should explain them to the public .
A great deal still needs to happen on that front .
As far as the inconveniences are concerned , we have to make sure that they remain as few as possible , even if they are principally a transition issue .
In order to succeed , we have to inform the public , but we also have to realize that information is indeed necessary , but not enough . We must realize that we need a legal and balanced framework , a framework which ensures that notes are not counterfeited ; that conversions take place at the right rate , and according to the right method of calculation .
We have to make sure that the introduction of the euro does not affect the continuity of contracts , that the period of concurrence of charter money in different denominations is as brief as possible , and that information is given in such a way that the consumer knows there are reasons to be confident .
Most of the issues , Mr President , are arranged by law , but unfortunately , not optimally .
My group is convinced that accession contracts should not deviate from the continuity principle .
We have therefore submitted an amendment in which we ask the Commission to submit a proposal to amend Regulation 1103 .
I would be interested to know if the Commissioner is prepared to consider an initiative to this effect .
Then there is the issue of dual pricing .
The polarization of the interests of the consumer on the one hand , and retail trade on the other , is in our opinion not realistic .
These interests run much more parallel than some people would have us believe .
It is out of this philosophy that we have submitted Amendment No 8 , an amendment in which we ask to wait and see for a bit - wait and see until after 1999 to see what the markets will do spontaneously .
Then , on the basis of actual reactions from the market players , we will be able to determine what is needed , whether we need detailed regulation for dual pricing , and if so , how we can make these fit the realistic needs of all the players .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs for several excellent reports with regard to the introduction of the euro .
Indeed , the euro is coming .
It heralds a new era and it certainly is the biggest economic project the world has ever seen .
For this reason clearly its success is extremely important .
All of the reports have one common theme . The theme is that it will greatly benefit the users , whether these users are consumers , businesses or simply those involved in the operation of currencies in the international financial markets .
Mr Stevens ' report in particular looks at the introduction of new technology and offers one solution in the form of electronic money .
This will make it easy for people to be able to move around the European Union with electronic cash and this enhances one of the principles of the Treaty with regard to free movement , in particular labour mobility .
It will provide for safe and secure cash and it will also aid industries such as the tourism industry , which is one of the fastest growing industries in the European Union .
It is a major piece in the economic jigsaw and will unite Europe as never before .
It will improve the operation of the single market and stabilize the EU economy , particularly where there is turbulence in the global financial markets .
It will also foster an era of new economic cooperation and I would like to see introduced , along with this , the concept of democratic accountability .
I agree with my colleagues who have talked about the introduction of a banking committee , because we need a dialogue with the European Central Bank , we need surveillance and close monitoring of the European Central Bank , and we need the European Central Bank to be accountable , so that Parliament can offer advice .
But I , along with my colleagues , believe that we must never compromise the independence of the Central Bank , otherwise the financial markets will turn on the euro .
We have a huge opportunity , and a huge prize is on offer .
Let us take that opportunity and take Europe into the twenty-first century and bring prosperity to the European Community .
Mr President , we have heard four very interesting reports on a subject of fundamental importance .
The future credibility of Europe will be staked on the euro and the arrival of the single currency .
The single currency is both a means and an end to make the citizens understand that they form part of a community in which they can travel , buy , move and so on , thanks to the single currency .
The rapporteurs have to face practical problems , and we thank them for their speeches .
There are other problems which have not yet emerged and which the single currency will inevitably clarify better in the next few months , if not in the next few weeks .
The euro is a peaceful end-of-century revolution ; it is an essential condition for providing a uniform and collective economic system which the European Union has to use as a great means of making its function understood .
There are practical problems obviously connected with the functioning of the relationship between those circulating the euro and the final user , who is the citizen , particularly as consumer .
It has been recalled by other colleagues that it will be in the banks that the citizens will discover the euro , but particularly in the commercial distribution system . It will be in the shops , supermarkets , restaurants and travel agencies that he will encounter the euro , and he will have to have a commercial contact there - a small businessman , an assistant - prepared to explain , and enable him to understand how the euro operates .
And so we will have to work together to provide information for the consumer and training for business .
In the same way , we should not make the citizens bear any bank charges in switching from national currency to European single currency .
Finally , we would like to recall several aspects that are connected with the operation of the single currency .
It is in the commercial system that the euro will be most widely circulated and known by the citizen as a consumer . Business will have to deal with the requests for information on this great monetary innovation in brief , clear , concise terms .
We should therefore enable the small or large trader to provide clear answers , otherwise the cost of introducing the euro will end up becoming disruptive for all parts of the economic system : industry , production and consumer .
What we want to avoid - and indeed must avoid - is that the final cost of introducing the single currency should fall on the consumer alone .
Commissioner , I would just like to emphasize again that in the course of this debate all the speakers who have called for dual pricing in the interests of consumer protection have in no way been suggesting that the interests of consumers and the interests of small and medium-sized companies and individual retailers should be played off against each other .
Although we consider it fundamentally important that practical and inexpensive arrangements should be put in place with a minimum of red tape , the Commission also has a duty to protect consumers .
Mr President , I asked the Commissioner a very specific question , and I do not believe I received a reply .
I asked specifically whether the Commissioner is prepared to take an initiative to amend Regulation 1103 of 11 June 1997 .
This regulation makes a number of provisions on the introduction of the euro .
It establishes the principle of continuity , but it does leave space for accession contracts which deviate from this principle , for accession contracts which affect continuity .
We have problems with this .
We submitted an amendment to this effect .
Parliament requests that this regulation is amended , and I would be grateful if the Commissioner could tell me if he is prepared to take an initiative in this direction .
I think it is absolutely vital if we want to keep or win the customer 's trust .
Mr President , I have taken good note of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's comment .
I am in agreement with her on the objective and , I hope , on the means to achieve it .
I would like to respond to Mrs Thyssen .
I believe that today we need to realize that , firstly , the regulations on the legal status of the euro - adopted unanimously - are in my opinion beyond all amendment , as there would be no unanimous position within the Council for any amendment .
Secondly , I note that there is convergence of opinion from all quarters regarding the satisfactory nature of the regulations , and on the necessary guarantees they offer in terms of continuity of contract .
Thirdly , Mrs Thyssen , if this raises a problem with regard to unlawful contractual clauses , I believe I have said that I am ready to look into a modification , or an adaptation of the consumer protection directives , in such a way as to ensure the transparency of contracts , and the prohibition of unlawful clauses contained in them .
If you have practical problems , do not hesitate to lay them before us in writing .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Votes
Madam President , I have to say that concerning paragraph 17 , the Greek translation contains certain errors which I would ask the Parliamentary services to correct .
The same is true for paragraph 31 .
The Greek translation of the text must be corrected .
Consequently paragraph 17 and paragraph 31 require a corrigendum as regards the Greek translation .
I would also like to make an oral amendment to Article 33 to correct an error there : in paragraph 33 the text that the Members of this House have says : " I remind you that the aforementioned joint agreements between rail companies ' must contain provisions ' ... ' . I would ask that this be corrected to " must not contain provisions ... ' .The Committee on Transport and Tourism voted on the text as I am proposing it to you now , that is " must not contain provisions ... ' .
Now the text says " must contain provisions .. ' , which totally changes the sense of this sentence .
I therefore propose orally that paragraph 33 be amended by adding the word not .
In English it is " must contain ' while it should be " must not contain ... ' .
Mr Sarlis , we have all understood , and in all languages .
Simply , when you say to us that it is just a question of adding a negation , everybody is fully aware of the fact that this totally changes the way we are going to vote .
I would like to know , and Mr Wijsenbeek will certainly enlighten us on this point , whether this is a correction , that is to say , whether what should be submitted to the vote does effectively include the negation , and that therefore the text that we have has no negation simply as a result of an error , or if this is an oral amendment , the aim of which is to introduce the negation , in which case the oral amendment is a very substantial one .
I am in total agreement with the rapporteur .
Are there any objections to taking into consideration the oral amendment of Mr Sarlis , supported by Mr Wijsenbeek ?

( Parliament accepted the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
The report embraces the deregulation and liberalization of access to the railway infrastructure .
There is no way that we can support the political line which the report depicts .
Deregulation would adversely affect employment , reduce efficiency , damage ' public service ' interests , destroy a supportive division of costs between rural and city consumers , and adversely affect the legal employment position of the personnel concerned .
As Social Democrats , it is totally impossible for us to support such a political alignment of society .
Railway transport is a social service where the profit motive should not be everything .
With its White Paper on the revitalization of the railways , the European Commission is returning to a philosophy which is dear to its heart : only immediate and unconditional liberalization will ensure the viability of the rail sector .
We cannot subscribe to such an analysis .
Competition must not be an absolute criterion , or an end in itself .
At the time of the publication of the White Paper , very strong reactions were heard in condemnation of the determined pursuit of free-market objectives by the Commission .
In my view , the report which is submitted to us for our scrutiny has not taken legitimate measure of the concerns of professionals in the rail industry .
This report recommends liberalization by stages - as has been done in the air sector .
However , this approach is not appropriate .
By forcing the pace of liberalization - even if it is staged - there is a risk of damaging the rail sector rather than revitalizing it .
The Commission must - in collaboration with the interested parties - undertake an assessment of the application of the basic directive before envisaging its modification along more free-market lines .
Finally , I am concerned at the absence of provisions relating to the social and labour relations dimension .
In ten years , the sector has lost 500 , 000 jobs .
To accept the principle of liberalization , as set out in this report , would only increase job losses .
For all these reasons , I can only condemn this report .
The report by our colleague Pavlos Sarlis is a serious one , but I can absolutely not subscribe to the proposals that he is submitting to us today .
Indeed , I do not believe that the future of rail transport requires increased liberalization .
The example of Great Britain in this field shows us the hard and stark reality of liberalization for passengers , in which the only objective of the private companies is profitability , at the expense of a universal service reduced to the purely notional , and which will be completely sidelined .
Creating a European network of railways by liberalizing them is in practice to take them just a little bit further away from the less favoured regions , whose lines are not very profitable , and ' breaking up ' what little remains of proper town and country planning .
A network is only properly European if its branches stretch out across the whole of Europe , and not simply into the rich and profitable areas .
If we do not go in the direction of an extensive and widely accessible service , we shall be condemning rail transport .
How can we imagine that private companies could commit the colossal amounts of investment which appear necessary for the future high-speed networks without passing on the cost to the users , and without eliminating the lines which are in book-keeping terms less profitable .
Finally , while I cannot vote for the report in its current state , I ardently desire the introduction into it of the obligation of service to all regions of the European Union , and for the respect of national special features and statutes , so that the railways become a true public service , enabling the all-round improvement of the environment , by reducing the preponderance of road transport .
As a French socialist , I cannot vote for the Sarlis report , just as I cannot approve the European Commission 's proposal .
Indeed , we grant an essential priority to the development of the railways , particularly for social and ecological reasons , and for reasons of planned use of space .
That being the case , how can immediate or even staged liberalization be accepted , which would inevitably bring with it its load of redundancies and exclusion ?
This is a purely economic vision , which absolutely fails to take into account the human dimension , and in this respect I cannot accept it .
The SNCF is just beginning to climb out of the abyss , and this is certainly no time to push it back down again .
Can we still take the risk of increasing the unemployment figures in Europe ?
I am raising the question , but in my view the reply is clearly " no ' .
The report raises several important structural issues relating to railways and transport as a whole within the EU .
It is quite clear that railways must be expanded and improved to be able to meet competition .
There is everything to gain by increasing rail transport in EU countries , in terms of both freight transport and passenger transport .
On the other hand , I do not think deregulating the market is the best solution to the current problems of rail transport .
Instead I believe that people should put some concrete action into all the empty words about favouring the railways which we are always hearing from the Commission and the Council .
Turn these empty words into action by , among other things , greatly increasing financial support so that railways get as much financial support as roads , and by letting road transport pay for all its costs - including environmental costs - as we in the Green Group have previously proposed .
Railways are a superior form of transport when you want minimal environmental impact , particularly where freight transport is concerned , and the cost of the railways today would be easily recovered if you included what it costs to restore the environment after all the pollution from road traffic .
Despite the alarming loss of jobs on the European railways ( around 500 , 000 in ten years , one third of total employment in the sector ) ; despite the fundamental role this means of transport may play in the preservation of the environment ; despite the loss of importance of the railways , with the increase in options available , with the increase in unfair competition from road transportation and with the lack of investments , at national and Community level , that have made it impossible to improve or renovate infrastructures , that have disregarded management adaptations to the new requirements and allowed the quality of services rendered to decline deliberately ; despite indicating the situation and some of these causes , the Commission wants the " strategy to revitalize the European railways ' to study and speed up the privatization and liberalization of the sector .
The Commission does not propose to attack the causes , nor is it thinking of proposing any alternatives .
It is not paying attention to the social consequences of the direction it wishes to take , although it admits that unemployment will get worse .
It is basing its strategy on the enthusiastic support given by the great patronage of the sector , eager for the enormous profits in sight , broadened with the prospect of the Union 's expansion eastwards .
It is advocating the immediate amendment of Directive 91 / 440 / EEC , refusing to make the balance , to permit not only an accounting separation between the management of the infrastructures and the management of the transport , but also a legal separation speeding up the privatization of transport operation - the profitable sections of the current railway companies .
It does not wish to reflect on recent experiences of privatization of the railways ( in Thatcherite England ) where , along with unemployment , no improvements in quality have been recorded and public services have got worse despite the fact that the private companies have received subsidies for their respective implementation .
The Sarlis report , in turn , limits itself to supporting the strategy of the White Paper .
It does not study or propose alternatives that might pass through an increase in public investment at all levels , an increase in cooperation from the national companies in the establishment and operation of high-speed passes and in an improvement in the quality of the supply .
The Sarlis report limits itself to introducing phasing into the Commission 's privatization strategy and advocating further social measures to reduce the disastrous consequences on employment .
In this context , we can only vote against the report and reject the strategy proposed by the Commission , hoping that it will not be approved by Council .
It is satisfying to note that the corresponding committee has succeeded in reaching a sensible and balanced line on the Commission 's White Paper on a strategy for an efficient and modern railway system .
It is gratifying that Parliament and the Commission are already united from the outset in wanting to ensure the survival of the railways .
The railways are now on the verge of losing the fight against cars , lorries and buses .
But Europe cannot afford to lose rail as a means of transport , out of consideration for the environment and because of the increased freight transport between the EU , eastern Europe and central Asia .
First , I would like to congratulate Mr Sarlis for his report .
He has put his finger on a number of problems which should prompt reflection by all interested parties .
It is important to push on with the railways policy inside the European Community , and well beyond .
It is absolutely necessary to accelerate rail transport if it is wished to develop it as a means of transportation .
For this reason , there are ' freight corridors ' , and I am delighted that , for once , some of the European railways have been able to get ahead of the political world , by creating ' freight corridors ' .
As we now discuss this report by Mr Sarlis , some of these ' freight corridors ' are already operating between Belgium , France , Luxembourg and Italy , with extensions towards Spain , and it should be pointed out that a similar agreement between Germany , Austria , the Netherlands , Denmark and Sweden has been signed .
It should come into force in a few months .
This new approach of collaboration between railways presages well , and I would like to congratulate the managers for their courage .
I hope they will receive the support of governments and also the trade unions .
I continue to believe that the White Paper on the revitalization of the railways recommends a liberalization which I cannot accept .
When you read that since 1985 , 500 , 000 jobs have been lost in the railways , and that the intention is to eliminate still more jobs , I think we have reached a point where the railways , till now a very dependable means of transportation , see their safety put at risk .
On the other hand , I regret that the Commission has limited itself to a sketchy outline of the repercussions of restructuring .
I even believe that the Commission considers these repercussions as a lesser evil , when compared to the possible alternative of continued deterioration in the sector .
Consequently , the Commission passes over in silence the fact that the repercussions risk being very different in the various Member States , as liberalization benefits companies working in environments where the social benefits of the workforce are curtailed .
The result will be a substantial flight of rail business away from the countries where the levels of social and worker protection are high .
I therefore believe that the Commission should provide for support actions for liberalization in the EU rail sector , with bottom-up harmonization of conditions of competition , and in particular of social and labour conditions .
In spite of these comments , I shall vote in favour of Mr Sarlis ' report .
Mr President , I am supporting this report today as it can help our railways survive and prosper into the future .
This is vital not only for those who work in the rail sector , but also as part of our efforts to move freight traffic from our congested roads onto more environmentally friendly rail .
The report strikes a sensible and fair balance between granting free access to railways for companies operating international freight business , and ensuring decent working conditions and training for staff .
The report is also right to call for equal VAT treatment for all forms of transport , so that rail gets a fair chance to compete for transport business .
In future we should also ensure that there are connections between the various freight freeways so that a genuine network for international freight can be created .
Our economy , our environment and the jobs of our railway and transport workers can all benefit if we act now to ensure the viability of rail freight business .
Desama Report ( A4-0384 / 97 )
I would like once again to congratulate our colleague Claude Desama for the quality and readability of his report , for the pertinence of his analysis and for the interest of his proposals .
There is no doubt that we are at a turning point in space activities , and hence for our European space industries .
From a pioneering epoch we have now moved straight on into an era of commercial warfare , where the strategies deployed offer financial risks associated with opportunities for profit in equal number .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that increased synergy between the various players in the space industry is imperative .
Faced with American and - in the longer term - Asian competition , it is important that we move towards greater concentration in order to maximize the enormous investment required for research and development in this sector .
It is also important not to reduce public funding of research , but rather to increase it .
The future depends on our political will .
I share the declared determination of Claude Desama to include in his report the necessary environmental dimension of space technologies , both in terms of prevention of natural disasters , and in terms of cleaning up space debris .
In this field , the awareness which came to the fore at the Kyoto summit has attracted a great deal of attention , and it now behoves the European Union to take the lead , both in competitiveness and in environmental terms .
The generations to come cannot but be grateful .
Space and associated fields can make a useful contribution .
The European Union , in space as in other fields , must go in the direction of renewal and modernity .
To go forward , we must be able to anticipate .
It is important that , right now , the proposals put forward by Claude Desama should be rapidly put into practice .
Space projects should not be carried out if they require the use of nuclear material , if they could involve effects on the climate through the destruction of the ozone layer or problems with waste products in space .
Friedrich Report ( A4-0383 / 97 )
Sweden has decided not to join EMU , even though it qualifies for membership .
This is a decision which we support .
The single currency project is an immense gamble being made with the employment , social security and welfare of the citizens as the stake .
The Commission communication on the impact of the introduction of the euro on the capital markets , like the European Parliament 's Friedrich report , is somewhat disappointing , as it deals with this vast subject from a rather over-simplifying technical angle .
No-one doubts that there will be problems ' redenominating ' debt in euro , in ensuring the continuity of benchmark indices , in harmonizing market conventions and in altering the values of securities . But there is no doubt either that the technicians will be able to solve these problems .
We would have wished that the documents submitted to us today contained a wider vision of the impact of the introduction of the euro on the capital markets .
It is clear that if the single currency is introduced on schedule , the work of the professionals in the financial industry and in the operation of the capital markets , and the centre of gravity of the financial marketplaces , and the European financial landscape itself , will all be changed .
Of course , this will not mark year one in a new era of the European management of savers ' investment portfolios , as some pretend .
For many years now investors have been diversifying their investments , and OPCVM mutual funds have ensured that diversification is within the grasp of each individual .
Many owners of investment portfolios , even on a limited scale , now own European SICAV mutual funds .
What is true , on the other hand , is that the introduction of a single currency can be a spur to financial innovation , and make diversification a little easier , by eliminating exchange risks and providing an incentive to the levelling down of legal and tax differences between markers .
For this reason , I was expecting the European Parliament 's report to contain , as in the past , glowing demonstrations of the ability of a wider and more liquid capital market to reduce the cost of borrowing , for example .
No such thing !
If we try to adopt an even broader viewpoint , we are forced to the conclusion that the financial innovations and economies of scale in the management of the capital markets , after the introduction of the euro , will be of little interest if , at the same time , the economy falls to pieces .
That is the real question .
We need to guard against the illusions fostered by the technicians , as reflected in the Commission communication and Parliament 's report .
When all is said and done , monetary union will make us more losers , in terms of new rigidities and economic turbulence , than we are gainers , as a result of technical simplification .
From today 's report and the subsequent debate it is clear that engineers and economists are working flat out to solve the practical problems caused by the structure of EMU .
This is in spite of the fact that the idea of a single currency is unwanted and very abstract for the people of Europe who are instead concerned about social welfare and the possibility of establishing an environmentally sustainable society .
The only right thing to do would be to immediately stop the process and instead initiate an in-depth debate with the citizens .
Changing to a single currency is an issue of such magnitude that it should definitely be the subject of a referendum .
Because the above-mentioned reports concern the - in our opinion - mistaken introduction of a single currency , we cannot vote for them .
In conclusion , I would like to say that we share the view of the Swedish economist who compared watching the introduction of the single currency with standing on the quay and watching the Titanic sail off into the distance to its fate .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for the report by Mr Friedrich concerning the impact of the introduction of the euro on Europe 's capital markets .
When EMU is implemented it will create the third largest stock market after the USA and Japan , which will therefore be a very attractive market for investors both inside and outside the EMU area .
The report mentions that there will be a flourishing share culture as a result of the euro .
The Danish Social Democrats are able to support the report , but point out that Denmark is not taking part in the third phase of economic and monetary union .
Economic and monetary union is a high-risk project .
The EU is not an optimal currency area , and the economies of the different Member States are far too different to be able to implement a single currency .
The single currency is also more of a political project than an economic one , leading to increased centralization in the direction of an ' EU State ' .
There is also a high risk that EMU , with its one-sided preoccupation with fighting inflation , will lead to increased unemployment and increased regional imbalances .
In the accompanying resolution , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party has said no to participation in EMU .
Against that background , I have abstained or voted against the four reports on the euro .
Ruffolo Report ( A4-0338 / 97 )
Madam President , I wish to speak more generally on the problem of the euro at a time when , in a world market , the currency will be regional , and even so not completely regional , as Great Britain at least will not be participating .
In other words , we will be dealing with continental currency , a sort of monetary Anschluß , and I would remind you that , in the case of the Anschluß , there was at least a referendum .
Currency is rather like Buddhism , it is a small vehicle for the transmission of information .
In this particular case , the euro will be a vehicle for conveying information for a society of 17 million unemployed people , 50 million impoverished people , on an ageing continent which is subservient to the United States . Just look at the World Trade Organization .
How will the euro change the position of the European Union in the world commercial negotiations of the year 2000 ?
Basically , Mr de Silguy is a little bit like the Africans : he confuses the symbol and the symbolized .
If you are a consumer of powdered rhinoceros horn , your virility is not thereby improved .
The symbol may be heightened , but not that which is symbolized .
The euro , at root , may in hormonal and media terms prompt a degree of fantasticism . But in economic reality , nothing will change .
It is interesting to note that this report reinforces our argument in Sweden against joining EMU .
Economic and monetary union is going to lead to increased demand for a more common financial and tax policy .
In paragraph N the report raises the need for a coordination of tax policies , and in paragraph 8 it talks about the harmonization of tax obligations .
We are convinced that a coordination of the common financial and tax policy would result in the Scandinavian model of universal welfare losing out to the Christian Democrat policy of a low tax burden to provide a ' freedom of choice ' which is only going to benefit the well-off in society .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the report by Mr Ruffolo concerning the external aspects of economic and monetary union .
The report points out the desirability of conducting a monetary policy which moderates long-term interest rates without weakening the demand for price stability .
The rapporteur has stressed that the value of the euro against the currencies of third countries shall correspond to the real intrinsic value .
The Danish Social Democrats support this report , but point out that Denmark is not taking part in the third phase of economic and monetary union .
Stevens Report ( A4-0417 / 97 )
Madam President , the Stevens report draws our attention to the twin revolution facing the European financial environment in the years ahead .
One of these revolutions , under the control of the authorities , is likely to be the single currency .
The other , and spontaneous , revolution is electronic money .
This second revolution , a private enterprise initiative , could rapidly gather pace if it were given an appropriate regulatory framework , as the services it will render in everyday life are great .
A single chip card can make everyday payments in several currencies , and provide a number of other functions .
In fact , however , the two revolutions are , in the eyes of the European authorities , far too ambitious an undertaking if pursued simultaneously .
It was too risky , as they saw it , to fundamentally change citizens ' habits , and make so many demands on people as to provoke rejection .
The authorities therefore preferred to concentrate all efforts on the single currency , even at the expense of a delay in the introduction of electronic money .
This choice appears to be highly regrettable , as the developed countries are at present locked into ferocious competition for leadership in this market .
Europe has a great deal going for it .
It is even at the cutting edge of smart card technology .
But in the absence of mobilization by the authorities , we risk being overtaken by the Americans .
There is worse to come .
If we had encouraged the development of electronic money , we would have realized that it provides an answer to the many questions that the single currency is intended to solve , notably problems of foreign exchange for people travelling from country to country .
While eliminating the practical difficulties of handling many currencies , including currencies well beyond the euro zone , the electronic purse would ensure the continuing flexibility of national exchange rates , which in our view is indispensable if our economies are to adjust flexibly , which is precisely what the euro is intended to prevent .
Hence , the single-currency mistake may well delay the revolution in electronic money in Europe , for the sake of a single currency which will , with hindsight , be seen for the illusion it is .
Since Sweden is not going to participate in the introduction of EMU , we have decided to abstain from voting on this report .
The introduction of the euro will greatly benefit consumers , leading to greater competition and ultimately lower prices for goods and services .
It will also obviate the need for currency transactions and costs .
Greater efficiency in financial transactions will also be inevitable .
As a consequence , the single currency provides an ideal opportunity for the greater use of electronic transactions and smart cards .
I therefore welcome Mr Stevens ' report as a useful contribution as to how a proper regulatory framework can be established to ensure a smooth transfer for the introduction of electronic money on a Europeanwide basis .
However , it should be acknowledged that despite the benefits of the single currency , some consumers are considerably apprehensive .
The one way to assuage these fears is to ensure in relation to the use of electronic money that the most stringent safeguards exist to prevent fraud and abuse of privacy .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for John Steven 's report concerning electronic money in the countries which take part in the third phase of economic and monetary union .
The report deals with the problem of who should have permission to issue payment cards with electronic money within the EMU area .
The view in the report is that institutions other than banks should be able to issue these payment cards , which shall , however , be done according to specific rules which the Commission is being asked to draw up .
The report stresses that the European Central Bank together with the competent authorities should keep a close watch on the electronic money market in Europe .
The Danish Social Democrats agree with the above points of view , but point out that Denmark is outside the third phase of economic and monetary union .
Pérez Royo Report ( A4-0415 / 97 )
This report does not mention the great risks consumers are being exposed to by a single currency in an area which is not optimal .
Nor does the report mention the high conversion costs which the introduction of a new currency involves with regard to the conversion of vending machines , computer systems etc .
It is clear that it is the consumers , the citizens , who will have to pay for all this in the form of higher prices and taxes .
The Pérez Royo report presents the consumers with a balance sheet of the costs and benefits of the euro , but is short on inspiration .
In practice , the personal benefits are apparent only for persons living on national borders ( some 40 million out of around 370 million across Europe ) and for people who frequently travel as part of their work .
For others , who go abroad on average once every five or six years , the savings on foreign exchange appear to be of less interest .
The same applies to the ' easy comparison of prices of goods and services in the various Member States ' , as the Pérez Royo report puts it .
Although a degree of acceleration in cross-border purchases with the euro can be expected , we should not lose sight of the fact that the financial and other intermediaries are already well acquainted with price differentials between countries , and exploit them insofar as they can .
Finally , the report cites a third advantage : the low interest rates resulting from a sound monetary policy .
On this point , the sales pitch needs to be rewritten , because this benefit , although attractive at the time of Maastricht , seems to be somewhat off the point today , when interest rates have fallen to a very low level .
Overall , however , the euro will certainly be an incentive to competition , and the consumer , at least initially , should gain .
But it should not be forgotten that , as far as the consumer is concerned , the balance sheet does not stop here .
On the one hand , the consumer is being asked right now to give up his or her national currency , at some personal cost , something which apparently had not always been understood .
On the other hand consumers , who are also producers , and unfortunately sometimes unemployed , wonder what will be the impact of the euro on the overall economy .
On this point , the claims which were so enthusiastically made at the time of Maastricht , when we heard promises of millions of jobs , are being prudently watered down .
Very serious economists are publishing cautions against the risk of disorganization between countries , and increasing unemployment , as a result of the euro .
It is therefore likely that the closer we are to the switch-over date , the more citizens will raise questions , and the more they will express their qualms .
The difficulties imposed on them by the transition period may well be a focus for all their discontent .
The European Council in Madrid decided in December 1995 on the scenario for the move over to the single currency .
These demands are before us now , as we prepare the citizens of the European Union to the best of our ability .
As the rapporteur has emphasized , we have every right to expect many benefits from the single currency , and one in particular : increased transparency in the pricing of the various goods and services in the Member States .
This transparency should result in an acceleration of competition , and as we hope , a fall in prices .
On the other hand , consumers who go to another Member State will benefit from the elimination of foreign exchange costs .
Even so , we must be conscious of the fact that introducing the single currency raises a number of questions about the way it is implemented .
Moving over to the euro will actually result in fundamental changes in the lives of each and every one of the consumers in the Union .
It is within a context of some scepticism from our fellow citizens that we enter the most delicate phases of the introduction of the single currency .
We must bear in mind the emotion and affection felt for their national currency by citizens in their respective Member States .
It is fundamentally necessary to ensure that the euro does not , in this period , become a scapegoat for all the evils in our society , and here I am thinking in particular about unemployment .
The fact that some may , during the transition period , have access to the euro on the financial markets and in the stock market , at a time when other citizens are unable to do so , may give rise to a certain frustration , and the feeling that there is a two-speed currency .
The report before us today lays particular emphasis on the directions we need to go in , and on the measures which are absolutely essential .
Firstly , emphasis should be placed on the critical components of education and training in all sectors of social life , beginning with schools , universities , consumers ' associations , associations of older people , etc .
Secondly , like the rapporteur , I believe that the dual price display system of the euro alongside national currencies should be introduced as soon as possible in the retail trading environment .
We should accustom our citizens to think in euro terms .
Thirdly , during the transitional period we need to pay close attention to keeping down expenses related to currency conversion between national currencies .
In this respect my wish is , as has been emphasized by the rapporteur , that the Commission should propose regulations laying down that the conversion of bank notes from national currency into euros should be cost-free for citizens .
As a symbolic act of unification , the euro requires of us European parliamentarians , more than ever before , to be out in the field , as the advocates of a Europe that is on the move .
The report of Mr Perez Royo makes a cogent and convincing case for the introduction of the single currency .
However , the European Parliament does not need to be persuaded on this issue .
It is European citizens at large who need to be informed about the benefits of the euro and we must do more to present the arguments and issues before them .
I am alarmed at the widespread ignorance and lack of preparation that exists , including in my own country and especially among SMEs .
We must rectify this immediately .
I agree with Mr Perez Royo 's proposals , especially the early introduction of dual pricing in retail outlets and the use of ' dual billing ' by major service providers and banks .
Educational institutions also have a role to play , and I believe we could do much more by way of providing information in our schools and colleges .
Consumer confidence is vital to the success of the single currency .
However , the message at the moment is that we need to do much more if we are to achieve this .
We in the Swedish Left Party have voted against this report .
We are opponents of EMU and the introduction of a single currency .
We think the advantages of EMU for consumers which are being pointed out are greatly exaggerated .
We are also opponents of the EMU propaganda which the EU is conducting through its so-called information campaigns .
EMU is an anti-democratic project whose fate should be decided by the people themselves in referenda .
I thank Mr Pérez Royo for having drawn my attention to the many problems to be encountered by consumers when the euro is introduced .
For my part , I would wish to comment on two particular aspects .
The first relates to the expenses borne by euro users from 1 January 1999 onwards .
We all agree in saying that one of the conditions of the successful move to the single currency is to make sure , as soon as we can , that a maximum number of consumers uses the euro in the first stage , which in practice means having a euro-denominated bank account , using euro cheques , making bank transfers in euros from 1 January 1999 .
In Luxembourg , the banks have announced that the necessary conversions of the Luxembourg franc into euros , and vice versa , will take place free of charge .
This is a good thing .
I do not know what is happening elsewhere , but this example should be followed everywhere .
Furthermore , from 1999 to 2002 , the costs of foreign exchange transactions within the union area should be minimal . At all events , the amount should not exceed current costs .
However , it would be good for euro users to be convinced here and now that the new currency is more advantageous than the old system .
Finally , it is important to say from now on that the conversion of national fiduciary currency into euros after 1 January 2002 should take place at no cost to users .
These are the responses which are of interest to the consumer .
Even if the expenses caused by moving over to monetary union are to be borne in one way or another , success in monetary union terms depends on the very widespread exemption of final users from such charges .
The second aspect which interests me is what Mr Pérez Royo says about the strategy with regard to disadvantaged groups .
A good third of the population , if not more , is unaffected by advertising campaigns , the Internet or the media .
Special strategies must be developed for these people .
I welcome in this respect the efforts of the Commission 's Directorate-General XXIV , which has introduced pilot projects intended to develop means of information on the euro for people who are highly disadvantaged , often unable to read and who find it difficult to calculate .
For these people , material intended to be read is no solution .
By the way , attention must be paid to provision for such projects in the Commission 's budget , no later than 1999 .
The ideas developed by Mr Pérez Royo with regard to the dissemination of information on the euro through direct economic practice are essential .
The principle of getting those who actually use the currency involved in the information exercise , at the grass roots of the economy , is also particularly important .
After all the political and rather theoretical considerations , we will need to get down to practical considerations , and be as concrete as possible , in order to anchor the euro firmly in everyone 's consciousness , and to elaborate a new common monetary culture .
Overall , I am satisfied with Mr Pérez Royo 's report .
It makes a contribution to highlighting the benefits from the introduction of the euro which are directly tangible to consumers .
As our rapporteur states so very rightly , the initial benefits will consist of easier price comparison , thanks to the introduction of the euro , so making consumers ' lives easier .
The second advantage will be greater ease of travel throughout the whole of the Union , without the need to go through labourious and , above all , costly foreign exchange transactions .
Finally , the fall in interest rates caused by healthier public finances and by a well-balanced monetary policy will give a vital boost to investment in Europe , which is a source of employment .
Having said that , for a smooth passage to the euro , consumers need to be properly informed , and in particular prepared to think in euros .
In order to do this , Mr Pérez Royo says that , from the outset of the third phase , that is in less than one year from now , companies should be publishing their pay slips in euros , and banks publishing accounts in the European currency .
Similarly , he wishes a special emphasis to be laid on training in schools .
These are ideas which I share .
On the other hand , I permit myself some reserve with regard to the need , via a directive , to impose the practice of dual price display , because of the cost it may entail for some retail outlets .
Of course , I am of the opinion that dual price display will be necessary , to help citizens adapt smoothly to the new currency .
In spite of this minor reserve , I shall vote in favour of Mr Pérez Royo 's report .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the report by Fernando Pérez Royo concerning the euro and consumers .
The report stresses that the changeover from the national currencies to the euro must not cost the consumers anything .
The rapporteur recommends that the conversion of notes and coins in the national currency into euro notes and coins should be free of charge for the citizens .
The Danish Social Democrats support this point of view , but point out that Denmark is not taking part in the third phase of economic and monetary union .
In spite of Denmark 's reservations about EMU 's third phase , there is no doubt in my mind that the euro should be welcomed throughout Europe .
There are many small and medium-sized companies , especially in Denmark , which have problems with the uncertainty which trading between different currencies entails .
But , of course , the consumers and citizens of the European Union also need to get used to using the euro .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur when he calls for better transitional arrangements and , for example , recommends that invoices be written in both euros and the national currencies .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.53 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Transatlantic relations
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0410 / 97 , by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council - Europe and the United States : the way forward ( COM ( 95 ) 0411 - C4-0411 / 95 ) ; -A4-0403 / 97 , by Mrs Mann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on transatlantic trade and economic relations .
Mr President , it is always nice to speak to a big audience .
My short term as a European diplomat in the United States revealed some peculiarities in their relationship to Europe .
Here are some observations .
US foreign policy is based on the fact that Europe does not speak with one voice and acts even less as one country .
No common European policy exists except in folklore .
US foreign policy does not want a strong European involvement in the Middle East or anywhere else despite some verbal assurances .
On the West Coast of the US where I was stationed , China and the Far East were the primary concerns for the US .
Being the only military superpower in the world investing nearly US $ 300 billion yearly in secret and not-so-secret operations , the US wants to retain its military leadership and does not intend to renounce it .
With regard to the economy one can say the following : American business , having heavily invested in Europe , will welcome the advent of a single currency in Europe .
On the other hand , in the US itself protectionist thinking is still rife .
The US intends to keep its dominance in computer software , audiovisual software , films and TV .
The European Union maintains a high profile in Washington and New York but , except for occasional visits to the West Coast , there is no presence there .
Hence the amendment to the Souchet report about a West Coast presence .
It seems to me that few Europeans understand the fragmented nature of American society .
Compare Florida , Texas , Alaska , Minnesota and California ; they are very different worlds .
Last but not least , Americans in general have no knowledge whatsoever of the European Union .
I understand that very well after having experienced the sloppy way in which many of the many Union diplomats in Washington manage their tasks .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , there is no doubt that Europe owes much to America .
Nor is there any doubt however that America owes much to Europe .
As both share the basic principles of the free world , they worked together to defend them and to preserve them throughout the long and dangerous period of the Cold War .
Their relations have not always been honest .
The United States often complained that it was shouldering very heavy burdens without receiving the appropriate understanding .
The countries of Europe often detected a certain arrogance in America 's behaviour towards them .
With the ending of the Cold War , bipolarization and the rivalry between the two superpowers , after the earthquake of 1989 , the need to free Europe and the United States from what has stood in the way of a more open relationship is becoming more and more insistent .
God help us if the United States , as the only remaining superpower , were to step up what the Europeans - and not just the Europeans - describe as arrogance .
The arrogance of power had already been denounced , during the Cold War , by a famous American , Senator Fulbright .
And , quite aptly , it was recently invoked in Washington by the President of the Czech Republic , Vaclav Havel .
God help us if , on the threshold of a new globalized era , the United States believed it had sole responsibility for the whole world , and a duty to play the role of police constable of international order and security .
Because neither is it legally entitled to do this , nor is it possible for it to act in this way .
Fortunately the signs that emerged from the 1995 Summit Meeting in Madrid between President Clinton , Mr González and Mr Santer were that enhanced cooperation between Europe and the US , rather than rivalry and the crushing of efforts , can strengthen the institutions and the conditions of international law and order to everyone 's advantage .
The report we are debating today , after quite some delay , specifies - perhaps in rather too much detail - the issues on which we will be able to judge the development referred to above : the honesty , reciprocity and parity of European - US relations .
And over and above the smoothing out of the current economic problems in which these contrasts are revealed , it will emphasize the tremendous importance assumed by the general framework which must contain long-term efforts for an honourable understanding , from the other side of the Atlantic as well .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the new world geopolitical framework following the fall of the Berlin Wall , relations between the United States and Europe can and should be strengthened .
The United States enjoy world leadership in the four strategic sectors - economy , military power , technological competence and culture in a broad sense , but , both for geographical and for idealogical reasons , their leadership model is based on networks of cooperative and competitive alliances across the world .
The alliance with Europe has been and is the strongest and most stable of all , particularly owing to the common foundation values of our societies : the protection of human rights , the model of a free society based on equal opportunities , market economy and free trade .
It is therefore of interest to the United States that Europe should grow stronger , for example , with the single currency , which is extending eastwards , broadening the area of democracy and market economy .
It is in the common interest that the NATO region should expand in line with the expansion of the Union , increasing the undertaking and the European position in the Alliance , and for positive relations to be established between the European Union and the Russian State .
There is therefore a convergence of global interests between the United States and the European Union , which we can try to rebalance in a more united fashion , and which should not encounter obstacles in the bi- or multilateral disputes connected with specific economic interests of the two parties .
For this reason , the draft New Transatlantic Agenda , enriched by Mrs Mann 's report , broadly indicates and covers the many sectors in which cooperation needs to be intensified .
I would now like to mention two particularly topical points , along with cooperation in the traditional sectors ( the campaign against organized crime , the settlement of commercial and customs disputes and dialogue between companies ) .
Firstly , I would point out the commitment to build the information society together , this as yet not wellestablished society that represents our future : the rules on the networks , infrastructures and accesses , standards , intellectual property protection , electronic trading procedures , and rules on investments and cooperation between companies .
Secondly , I want to mention the commitment to monetary cooperation between the United States and the European Union , all the more so in the now well-advanced stage of the European single currency , to ensure stability for markets and to reinforce the common prospects of growth and development .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the second time in two months this Parliament is adopting a resolution about the relationship with the US .
It is extremely important that we remain consistent in the line of our policy with regard to the US .
In its present form , the Souchet report does not contribute to this .
Quite wrongly , the report concentrates one-sidedly on the problems in this relationship . Instead , we should make use of the opportunities for cooperation , and solve differences of opinion in a dialogue , not through threats .
This Parliament should first and foremost welcome the intensification of the transatlantic relationship . The New Transatlantic Agenda and the joint action plan constitute useful instruments to make this happen .
We must seize the opportunities which these instruments offer .
One voice from both sides of the Atlantic may have a decisive impact .
Where Mr Souchet blames the Americans for the fact that a European security and defence identity does not yet exist , he should really search his own conscience .
Europe itself did not take the opportunity during the Council of Amsterdam .
The Liberals argue for a strengthening of the relationship between this House and the United States Congress on the subject of human rights .
Finally , Mr President , there is the arms trade .
Now that the British Presidency is developing plans to step up common export regulations concerning arms , we should intensify our dialogue with the US in this area , too .
Arms export policy is an integral component of foreign policy .
Individual attempts from both sides to regulate the arms trade will have more chance of success if they are attuned .
I call on the British Presidency to include this topic in the transatlantic dialogue .
To conclude , Mr President , the Liberal Group has submitted a fair few amendments , and I hope these amendments will be approved .
Otherwise we will have to withhold our support from the Souchet report .
Mr President , the overall clarity , depth of analysis and foresight of these reports on the communication from the Commission on Europe and the United States are such as to overcome some of our initial reservations and objections .
We cannot but appreciate the pragmatic , critical approach to the growing imbalance in the transatlantic relationship .
The remedy suggested the urgent need to rethink , on more equal terms and on more serviceable parameters , the great design of a properly functioning partnership between Europe and the United States of America : particularly at the present juncture where the dogma of globalization is producing social and economic upheavals ; the Asiatic flu is turning into pneumonia for the financial markets of the world and the usual formula of privatizing profits and socializing losses through the International Monetary Fund does not seem to work and presents costs unacceptable not only to Europe but also to the United States Congress .
The Souchet report should be highly commended for its criticism of some egregious cases of American unilateralism in many fields that are already regulated by international agreements or where cooperation with other partners should have been the order of the day .
The most ominous case is the arbitrary and unilateral decision by Congress , accepted by the Administration , to cancel a large part of United States arrears in financial contributions to the United Nations and to subject its operations to the control of American institutions like the General Accounting Office ( GAO ) .
This is , of course , the work of Senator Jessie Helms of the Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The main purpose of the amendments we are presenting is to formulate unequivocal European support for the alternative reform of the United Nations promoted by the Secretary-General , Kofi Annan , to preserve independence in the universal role of the organization as enshrined in its own Charter .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , dialogue is certainly one of the most important and finest political tools .
So I can only say how wholeheartedly I support our having the New Transatlantic Agenda on our agenda instead of NATO .
World peace , social justice and economically sustainable development in a world where links are becoming closer every day cannot be achieved by deterrence . Instead , what is needed is careful joint negotiation .
Because of their economic power , the EU and the USA have a special responsibility for wellbeing on this planet .
They are also in a position to take practical initiatives .
But it is not a question of circumventing international fora such as the WTO and the UN , and thus undermining their credibility .
The Helms-Burton affair is an extremely negative example of what dialogue can entail .
The EU should denounce this example , loud and clear , as an example of the extraterritorial application of national legislation .
What we need is legal certainty , not the arbitrary use of power .
The EU should also use the NTA to make it clear to the USA , that economic giant , that on issues like bananas or BSE it is not economic growth or the interests of companies that should count , but the health and social welfare of our people .
The WTO , which is without doubt a fruit of the union of the EU and the USA , certainly needs considerable reform in this respect .
The WTO is in urgent need of social and ecological restructuring in view of its new areas of work , and must be made transparent for all members .
The NTA could do some useful preparatory work in view of the forthcoming ministerial conference .
The NTA should not be a club for major industrialists who dictate the agenda to politicians behind closed doors .
Quite the contrary , it should open up means of transatlantic communication to civil society .
In an era of multinational companies , workers should also be able to communicate , to promote their ideas about education and training , social protection and healthy jobs .
Erika Mann 's report shows which direction we should be heading in , and we shall be supporting it with a clear conscience .
Unfortunately , Mr Souchet 's report on external relations does not reflect our views , in particular the parts concerning crisis management and the use of the armed forces , even if the latter are euphemistically described as peace-keeping operations .
The human rights field could certainly have been given more attention , and not just on the death penalty in the USA .
We hope that the relevant amendment will gain sufficient support here .
Nor can we comprehend why measures such as those taken by the State of Massachusetts to counter human rights abuses in Burma will be prohibited in future - quite the opposite .
State regulation mechanisms relating to human rights must also remain a legal option .
As I have already said , human rights should have priority over business interests .
It is misleading to give the impression that the freedom to choose between 27 different kinds of headache pills is the same thing as the freedom to opt for an affordable health care system with equal and unrestricted access for all .
We shall be abstaining on the Souchet report but very firmly supporting Erika Mann 's report .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to congratulate Mrs Mann and Mr Souchet for these two very good reports .

I would like to say that personally , I rather agree with Mr Bertens insofar as I rather think - and here I differ somewhat from Mr Lambrias ' suggestion - that we owe our American friends a little more than they owe us , at least in the course of the last 40 , 50 or 60 years .
I think it is important to remember that .
I believe - unfortunately I fear this may make my friend Mr Manisco a little more irritated with me than he already is - that we cannot reproach the Americans with their unilateralism .
I believe that , only too frequently , they have found themselves facing important responsibilities alone , and fortunately they were there to do so .
The problem , here again , is that we lack a Europe with the ability to speak with a single voice , a Europe with a single policy .
We saw this again with important cases such as the attitude towards the People 's Republic of China , where the position which still prevails is the pitting of one European Member State against another , and that is the real problem .
I would like to hold Mr Souchet to his words quite literally when he says that we should not hesitate to deal with delicate subjects head on .
I believe - and I think that here Mr Manisco will agree with me - that there is one delicate subject which is of great concern to me and at all events to many of my colleagues in this House .
This is the question of the death sentence in the United States .
My group has put down two amendments , one to Mr Souchet 's report and the other to Mrs Mann 's .
The amendment to Mr Souchet 's report invites the United States to abolish the death penalty , not that the death penalty is incompatible with democracy - I believe that , and we say in the amendment that it is important to emphasize it - but because the abolition of the death penalty would be an extension of the sphere of fundamental rights , and it would be desirable for our American friends to integrate this into their constitution , which remains an example of democracy .
I also believe we owe this to ourselves and to our Parliament .
We cannot allow ourselves to make this sort of request only of the so-called poorer countries , the developing countries : we must also have the courage to make such a demand of a great country such as the United States , and I therefore most vigorously invite Mr Souchet to accept this amendment .
The amendment to Mrs Mann 's report is a little more complicated .
There are ten or twelve states in the United States which have abolished the death penalty , and here we would need to go down a more difficult road , namely to favour not only investment by our enterprises , but also the presence of our institutions and of representations from our Member States , and through these representations from our regions , promote cultural and economic relationships with those states which have abolished the death penalty , in order to make others understand that abolition is a matter of importance to us Europeans .
Mr President , in 1963 President Kennedy spoke the historic words : " Ich bin ein Berliner ! '
They conveyed the flavour of the special relationship between the United States and Europe during the Cold War .
The United States safeguarded the defence of freedom in western Europe .
This automatic identification with our interests is over , although this is no cause for alarm .
The United States and Europe will continue to be closely involved with each other .
Neither economics nor security can do without American partnership .
In order to optimize the relationship with the United States , the following priorities could be set : the New Transatlantic Agenda , especially the lifting of barriers to trade ; harmonization in new areas such as the environment , health and energy ; solving trade differences by both the United States and the European Union whilst respecting the WHO pronouncements ; and finally , drawing the line against evil regimes , without European countries putting their own trade interests first , with the risk that the European Union and the United States are played off against each other .
A greater contribution of European nations to the security of our continent is best achieved by transforming the Western European Union into a European pillar within NATO .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Souchet is presenting us here with good , balanced work .
Its merit is , while keeping to diplomatic forms , to reject the current bond of subservience of our nations with respect to the United States .
This happens infrequently enough in this Parliament for it to be emphasized .
Who , indeed , with the exception of my elected colleagues of the national right , rejects such subservience ?
In France , the self-proclaimed inheritors of General de Gaulle , just as they have rallied to Eurofederalism , now wish to place the French army under US command , at a time when the Soviet threat has disappeared .
They are furthermore followed in this by the communists , who clearly cannot do without foreign supervision .
Thorès and Marchais went to Moscow for their orders .
Hue now goes to Washington .
We , the French patriots , have no trouble distinguishing between the real American nation , among whom we have many friends , and the Government of the United States , which is directed by believers in the ideology of globalization .
This Government , with , alas , the complicity of our own Governments , intends to lay down a new world order in which nations and families would be crushed , and human beings become objects to be cloned at leisure .
To impose this best of all possible worlds , the United States leaders are ready for anything .
They have been starving the Iraqi people for nigh on eight years , and in reality are doing so to preserve their oil interests .
Similarly , it is hardly surprising that Clinton and his administration are supporting the bureaucratic and supranational Europe , which bends to his every diktat .
This federal Europe of the regions destroys nationhood , and is in tune with the wishes of the supporters of the global economy .
Of course , the reality of the relationship between the United States and France is not quite that described by François Mitterrand when he said : ' France does not know this , but we are at war with America , a war without fatalities ' , and added heavily , ' apparently . '
Those hard words , as reported by Mr Georges Marc Benamou and cited by Arnaud Aaron Upinsky in his remarkable work ' The Ortolan Syndrome ' , nevertheless contain a considerable element of truth .
What are we to do ?
Continue the current policy of subjection ?
Certainly not .
But to advocate total separation of the United States and Europe would also be a deadly error , a mistake first made by the United States , whose leaders from 1776 onwards have never ceased to want to sever their links with European civilization .
The Monroe doctrine in 1820 forbade the American continent to Europeans .
Then there was the War of Secession in 1863 .
Today , in addition to its goods , the US is exporting all its worst aspects into our countries , although the real American people reject them : fast food , rap , ethnic bands , and to sum it up in a word , the ' raptaglang ' culture .
However , the two Americas , North and also South , have for 500 years been linked , willy-nilly , to the European nations by a community of civilizations .
Our peoples were those who created the New World , and in particular the Spaniards and Portuguese in Latin America and the French in Canada .
On the other hand , as Dominique Souchet notes , balance must be re-established in our relationship with America . This must , of course , be a relationship of equality , but dependent on a balance within America itself .
America has become a world under Anglo-Saxon domination .
However there are other Americas , with whom we must reinforce our links and help them to free themselves from Washington rule . There is a French America , which has been able to keep its identity in Quebec from 1763 onwards , thanks to its faith and vitality .
There is a Latin America . Permit me to say that with our Latin sisters , Spain , Portugal and Italy , France must take the lead in this policy , which is based on both reason and the heart .
Mr President , the European Parliamentary report on commercial and economic relations between the European Union and the US cannot fail to incite special interest , much more so indeed since it has been elaborated with such great care by our discriminating colleague , Erika Mann .
It is a fact that the new reality emerging from the globalization of the economy and of politics imposes new ways of working together , multilateral agreements and the strengthening of economic , social and cultural ties between peoples .
From this standpoint , no-one has the right to oppose the bridging of the Atlantic , if indeed there is to be a common perception of viable development and social cohesion , promotion of peace and democracy , equality of the sexes , guarantees of prosperity and security in the world , progress in science and technology , and protection of life and the environment .
However , our partner on the other side of the Atlantic does not give a good external account of itself , since it is weighed down by a whole host of deeds from the distant and more recent past which demonstrate that it often contravenes international conventions while at the same time seeking and generally obtaining leonine agreements at the expense of less developed countries .
With great ingenuity on a world-wide scale , the US is still attempting to impose its law and order on third country operations .
I am talking in particular of the extraterritorial Helms-Burton and d 'Amato-Kennedy Acts , which find their best implementation in the economic embargo of Cuba , and this in spite of a world-wide outcry and the condemnation of the US by the UN General Assembly .
However , not only is the United States Congress unmoved by these protestations , but on 11 June 1997 it reinforced even more this preposterous web of legislation with eight amendments that were approved by its part-session .
In addition to the above , it is attempting to dodge the overruling of the commercial policy of the US by the mechanism of the World Trade Organization for the settlement of disputes .
These actions are indicative of the mentality of the US , a mentality which has been recorded in all its international dealings , even with its neighbours , its next-door neighbours , Central and Latin America .
It is clear that the US is accepting and adopting for itself a double system : legislative protection for its own operations and interests , while at the same time demanding respect from others for the rules of competition and the free market .
How can we therefore not be mistrustful of such a partner ?
At a social level the increased polarization caused by the US labour model is driving large sections of the population to become marginalized and the society of the USA , slowly but surely , to become a third-world society .
There has also been another paradox : the rate of unemployment in low-paid work has increased in parallel with the number of those who live below the poverty line .
This is yet another American paradox which we hope will not be exported to Europe as one more transatlantic product among the many which are flooding into the Union .
There is also the issue of the death penalty .
I would like to say that it is impossible for the European Parliament to ask for the abolition of the death penalty in the Gulf States and to vacillate about asking the same of the United States .
Finally , I would like to say that Parliamentary control should be exercised in matters relating to the relationship between and to cooperation between Europe and the United States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank the two rapporteurs for their reports .
I am delighted at the optimism expressed by Mrs Mann , and I essentially agree with her , so I need not repeat anything there .
Anyone who complains about the US should be fully aware that annual trade between the European Union and the US is over $ 250 million .
Just try converting that into jobs !
We are the most important investors in each other 's markets , and the European Union and the US have derived the greatest benefit from the liberal world order .
On the other hand , it is clearer with EU-US relations than in any other area of policy that a Common Foreign and Security Policy for the European Union is of momentous importance .
With all due respect to the efforts made by the European Parliament and by the Commission , be it by you , Mr Bangemann , by Sir Leon Brittan or by many others , the importance of European institutions in the foreign policy of the US is only secondary .
As long as individual EU Member States are competing with each other in the US , and as long as the US has the impression that on matters of substance it is hard for European politicians to speak with one voice on current foreign and security policy , it will be difficult for American politicians to recognize our political will .
Conversely , we have had ample opportunity in recent months to witness the smugness and even arrogance with which the US Congress in particular approaches important decisions on foreign trade policy , without caring a jot about what the rest of the world thinks .
Helms-Burton-d 'Amato is just one example .
But it is not just we Europeans who are shocked by this kind of policy ; the US can also pick on Canada , Mexico , South America or anybody else without meeting any resistance worth mentioning .
Since the collapse of communism , the behaviour of the US has become increasingly high-handed , not least because it has become the only remaining long-term world power and automatically assumes responsibility for solving problems , as if it is expected of the US .
We even call on the Americans for help in solving European problems , because we are so reticent .
We must agree to speak with one voice in future if Europe 's interests are to be defended in the numerous transatlantic organizations .
We proved how good this can be at the WTO meeting in Singapore , but by the time we had reached Amsterdam we seemed incapable of finding an answer to foreign trade problems that went beyond the immediate , and instead fell back on tolerance and experience .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is one of the options , and Mr Donnelly is pushing for some kind of contact between this Parliament 's delegation in the US and the US Congress .
But we really have to ask ourselves if any country or organization has any chance of influencing Congress ' foreign and foreign trade policy , if even their own US President has the greatest difficulty in getting his views heard and implemented .
Experts on the US would say that Europeans ' greatest mistake in the past was to be too respectful and too quick to compromise in various dealings .
I believe that we should realize that with 370 million consumers and with the interests that the US has in Europe we can take a firmer line than in the past and say quite brutally what our interests are , and not be too hasty to compromise , which gets us nowhere fast .
The fact remains that the US and Europe are dependent on each other .
The third world , Asia and Africa need us to take a common stance so that we cannot be played off against each other or approach our responsibility for events there differently .
I hope that both the reports before us will contribute to this recognition , that we can undertake much more together than we have in the past , and that the Commission will succeed .
Mr President , George Washington bequeathed to his countrymen the principle of not allowing anyone to become involved in their internal affairs , and not becoming involved in the affairs of the rest of the world .
This was the famous doctrine of American isolationism from which the Americans emerged for the first time during the First World War , and which they completely abolished with the Second , which resulted in the United States , following the fall of the walls , becoming a world-wide and ubiquitous superpower .
We have often spoken of the imbalance that exists in Euro-American relations .
It is true that the United States takes the decisions and Europe pays enormous bills .
And not only in regions such as Yugoslavia or the Middle East .
The lack of a common foreign policy and the lack of political security in the Union is , to a large extent , at fault , but it can also be blamed on our inability to establish parity of economic relations with the United States , perhaps because there are such great differences between us .
These weaknesses are all underlined in Mr Souchet 's report , which stresses the need for strengthened and equalranking cooperation , as well as the need for there to be a European identity on security and defence .
There is a proper emphasis on Europe 's obligation to express its opposition to the one-sided way in which the new members of NATO were chosen , to the unwillingness of the United States to sign the Ottawa Declaration on landmines , to the undermining of the UN on the part of Congress , to laws such as the Helms-Burton and d 'Amato-Kennedy Acts , as well as to the unwillingness of the United States to accept the decisions taken for the protection of the environment .
The crucial point to which the European Commission is now called upon to address itself is the demand to wipe out this imbalance at all levels of EU-US cooperation , as far as possible of course .
And , if it is unavoidable , at least at this historic conjuncture and until further orders , that the United States must take precedence world-wide - and we do not know what will happen as the next century approaches - at least Europe must at this moment in time be able to have the decisive word in matters concerning its own affairs and play a greater role at a global level .
Mr President , Mr Suchet 's report is in many respects a creditable one , and I agree with much of its content .
The report is , however , less than perfect in that it dwells on the problems we experience in our relations with the US .
For this reason I have drafted , on behalf of the Liberal group , certain motions for amendments , which contain positive and constructive attitudes towards the development of cooperation between the European Union and the US .
On another note , I would like to mention such cooperation in the Nordic regions .
The US and three EU Member States have been collaborating on the foundation of an Arctic Council , and we are now creating a Nordic dimension to EU policy , in accordance with the Luxembourg Summit resolution .
The report before us cannot , however , be improved upon in any fruitful way .
That is why I would , finally , like to express the hope that in future reports we endeavour to get to grips with relations between the US and the EU .
The EU and the US together must take the main responsibility for the future of humanity .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
It has been well thought through , with full regard to the many issues that affect European Union and United States relations .
The collapse of communism in eastern Europe was welcomed by democrats everywhere , not least in western Europe .
We realized that unless international relations were adapted to take account of the situation , it would pose great problems for world stability .
With the end of the Cold War the established order of European and US relations was bound to change .
We are currently going through this change .
At times it is rather difficult .
We should recognize that the goodwill of national governments in the European Union and that of the American administration has ensured that developments have been generally positive .
However , in Europe there remains a perception that the United States continues to dominate the relationship of what should actually be a partnership of equals .
Too often it appears that the US prefers to put self-interest before good relations with the European Union .
This is most obvious in terms of international trade , where we contrast US policy with the determination of other Member States in the European Union to contribute to a fair international trading environment .
The US can certainly do more to build fair trading conditions .
I would hope that we , along with them , can work in conjunction to achieve that .
Mr President , as probably the only Member of the European Parliament with dual residence in the US and in Europe , I would like to sound a note of warning about clichés and the arrogant assumption that Americans understand nothing about Europe .
That may once have been true , but it is certainly no longer the case today .
The basis for improved cooperation between the EU and the US is our common interest in economic policy and security .
That means fair competition in the world market on a level playing field , and it implies special responsibility for exchange rate stability between the dollar and the planned euro .
Poorly planned introduction of European monetary union would result in the dollar extending its present dominant position still further .
The inferiority complex that Europeans feel towards the US , which has repeatedly come through in the various speeches here , cannot be talked away : we can only overcome it by real economic strength and an unambiguous security policy .
As regards linking economic relations with individual countries to their human rights record , we Europeans should not be criticizing this , we should instead join forces with the US .
Mr President , George Bernard Shaw once remarked that England and America are two countries divided by a common language .
I increasingly believe that the EU and the US are two political entities divided by a common political and economic system .
Far too often our relationship is characterized by misunderstandings and confusions .
I agree with Mr Donner that this is perhaps more so from the American side than from the EU side .
We saw this during the enlargement debate where the American approach to the speed and nature of EU enlargement , particularly to the role of Turkey in this , was , quite frankly , extremely simplistic .
I was amazed to hear senior American politicians talk blithely about Turkey joining the European Union , as if it was a very simple matter .
I suspect that part of the reason for Turkey 's total over-reaction to the conclusions of the Luxembourg Summit was that it has been encouraged by some American politicians , at least , to believe that it would get more out of the European Union .
It is for this reason that this dialogue is so important .
I would endorse Mrs Erika Mann 's remarks about ensuring there is an effective parliamentary element to this dialogue , so that we can make clear to each other exactly where we stand .
This is certainly true of the foreign affairs field where the old certainties of the Cold War are now at an end and have been replaced by a situation of much greater uncertainty and insecurity .
Clearly we need closer cooperation , although that cooperation has to be within an international framework .
Some of today 's debate has smacked , quite frankly , of EU-US imperialism .
We should be operating in a security situation which is multinational and international , and not simply bilateral .
Bosnia , more than anything else , showed where things can go wrong , unless we get this relationship right .
It also showed that once we get the relationship right we can actually make considerable progress .
But for that to happen , Europe has got to stop spending so much time developing strong rhetoric and a little bit more time acting in the foreign affairs field .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , like many previous speakers I would like to say that transatlantic relations now have to be seen in a new light .
This is generally recognized , but the corresponding conclusions have not always been drawn .
In this century , transatlantic relations have been notable for the United States of America playing a decisive role in preserving order in Europe .
The question is how the Americans will continue to use their power in Europe and how we can use our own power to become a partner of the US on equal terms .
I consider that the Souchet and Mann reports provide some good starting points .
Things are not as simple as in the past , when the fear of danger in the minds of our two peoples welded together the nations on either side of the Atlantic .
This awareness of danger has dramatically declined since 1990 , and there is accordingly now a danger that minor trade policy disputes will escalate to such an emotional level that they could widen the gap between Europe and America .
For this reason we need to link the great community of values based on the rule of law and on democracy with a renewed community of interests not limited solely to security matters .
That is why I believe that the Transatlantic Agenda , the efforts of the Commission and the American administration and the initiatives that you , Commissioner Bangemann , have kicked off in recent years in the field of commerce and industry , in order to achieve progress towards a Transatlantic Market Place , are all important signs that differences of interest need not lead to a widening of the gap . On the contrary , they demonstrate that in a world based on multilateral trade we see each other as partners on equal terms engaged in fair competition , not as opponents .
We accordingly need not only to develop our ability to act as equal partners through improvements in foreign and security policy , but we also need the US to understand this .
The use of extraterritorial legislation , as with HelmsBurton or NATO , proves that the United States have still not discovered how to play their role as the sole world power in a fair manner . Indeed , it suggests that they think they can now play a dominant role .
It is my belief , therefore , that besides trade policy initiatives , we must also seek to strengthen the means available to us at political level , but not as an alternative to NATO .
I believe that the Washington treaty and its provisions must endure , and that we must ensure that all this complements NATO , in accordance with the new , wider powers of the European Union .
And for the same reason I believe we should take advantage of the momentum generated by the Transatlantic Agenda , the Transatlantic Business Dialogue and the development of a Transatlantic Market Place . We should exploit this momentum in order to enter into an EU-US treaty which binds the US Congress , because only then , if Congress and the entire political machinery in the United States are committed , can we succeed in bringing about such a treaty via a cooperation and consultation mechanism , a treaty that would unite us Europeans and Americans in such a way that we could jointly exercise our values in this world .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on producing an excellent report .
As an Irishman I am mindful of the work carried out by the United States in promoting peace and stability in the world , not least in its support for the peace process in Ireland .
I should like to take this opportunity to commend the work of the United States , and President Clinton in particular , in seeking to resolve the tragic conflict on the island of Ireland .
I have a particular concern , however , regarding differences in agricultural policy between the European Union and the United States , which have served to put European agriculture and European farmers at a disadvantage .
For example , the European consumer is firmly opposed to the use of hormones in meat production and European agriculture has adopted its practices accordingly .
Similarly , there seems to be more vocal opposition to the use of genetically modified organisms in Europe than in the United States .
There are differences of emphasis on the use of biotechnology in food production also .
In addition , the common agricultural policy places certain restrictions on production which do not apply to American farmers .
In the context of the application of world trade regulations , I call for greater transparency in the application of these measures .
America always seems to be very well - if not too well - briefed in relation to what is happening in European agriculture , and I am not always sure if we in Europe are aware of what is happening at all times on that side of the Atlantic .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Mann on her excellent report .
For years and years there have been strong ties between the European Union and the United States .
The bilateral economic ties generate the largest trade flows in the world .
In addition , the Union and the United States are each other 's biggest investors .
The EU represents 58 % of foreign investments in the United States , and 44 % of American investments are made in the European Union .
On both sides of the Atlantic these investments are worth 3 million jobs .
It is a pity , therefore , that there is so little awareness amongst the European and American people of how crucial our cooperation is for their employment , and thus their prosperity .
American and European citizens should be much better informed on the importance of our trade relations for both economies .
Consultation at government level is essential , but without support amongst the public and their representatives - the United States Congress and the European Parliament - this will not produce any results .
That is why parliamentary control by the European Parliament is so necessary .
The building of bridges in the context of the New Transatlantic Agenda , as aimed at and already achieved by the Ties project , involves the public directly in transatlantic relations .
The quality of this relationship has great impact on world trade , now and in the future .
That is why it is extremely important that the Union and the United States settle their differences .
Under no circumstances should the Union accept the extraterritorial operation of US legislation .
I will make this clear again during the talks with the American Members of Congress next Friday in Brussels .
Mr President , of course the different aspects of the relations between the European Union and the United States are not at the same level .
There are aspects such as the commercial or the economic aspects where we can see that the European Union does have a claim . There are aspects such as the environment , where we saw in Kyoto the attempt of the European Union to formulate a separate strategy .
But in central position , in the nucleus of the relations , where we find the political and strategic relations , we can say that the United States is totally dominant and that there also exists American hegemony .
This hegemony is fuelled less by the feeling of power of the United States , by its nuclear arsenal , by its global presence , and much more by the inferiority complex of the European Union which is due to the fact that top-ranking leaders in Europe operate as employees of the United States , by the inability of the European Union to fashion an identity of its own and to formulate a strategy of its own on the basis of which it can have talks with - and not be compared with - the United States .
I agree with Mr Titley that we have seen this recently mainly over the issue of Turkey .
What was the position of the United States with respect to all that happened in Luxembourg ?
To insist that Turkey could accede to the European Union in spite of its lack of democracy , which indeed exists .
What was the position of the United States on the important issue of the Kurdish refugees ?
Total silence , tolerance and the shielding of Turkey .
What was the position of the United States on Greek-Turkish differences ?
The other day we watched in amazement as the representative of the US Government supported the most extreme expansionist ambitions of Turkey in Aegean air space and spoke of Greece 's lack of right to a 10 mile air exclusion zone .
I would like to hope that the European Union will have a stronger presence and , Mr President , I think that the absence of the Council in such a serious political matter shows the seriousness with which the European Union takes this issue .
Mr President , I thought this had been a reasonably well-informed and intelligent debate , until I heard the last contribution .
I would like , particularly , to address the report of Mrs Erika Mann , but to thank both rapporteurs for their work .
I would like to address some comments to the Commission .
The first thing I would like to say to Mr Bangemann is : I think it would be very helpful if the Commission could provide some information packs for all Members of the European Parliament about the New Transatlantic Agenda .
It was established in 1995 and some of us who are very interested in US-European affairs have followed it very carefully .
But I suspect that many Members of this House do not realize the depth of participation and , indeed , the leadership role that the European Union has played in many of these negotiations .
Similarly , on the new Transatlantic Business Dialogue that Mrs Mann referred to in her address , it would be very helpful again if , in that pack of information , we set out exactly what has happened and , again , the important leadership role that the European Union is playing in this sphere , too , and the leadership role we played particularly on the mutual recognition agreements .
That would not have been possible without the leadership role of the European Union .
To those people who seem to say that we are slaves of the United States , I say please read the information and understand the crucial role that we are playing in pushing forward this agenda .
I want to look to the future rather than looking to the past .
We have had a relationship in the past based particularly on security policy .
That will continue with the enlargement of NATO .
But I want to refer to a couple of other issues .
For example , the collapse of the financial markets in the Far East will mean that the stable and balanced trading relationship between Europe and the United States is going to be absolutely pivotal over the next few years .
The Americans , who have perhaps been turning their attention to the Far East - and indeed some investors in the European Union who turned their attention to the Far East - are going to come back and rely very heavily on the stable relationship between the United States and the European Union .
We should use that as an opportunity for deepening the transatlantic business dialogue and also deepening the investment relationship .
We then have the creation of the euro .
Within about 4 or 5 years , 40 % of all invoicing in world trade will be in the euro .
We need to look at the relationship between the dollar and the euro .
What mechanisms are we going to establish in order to have this relationship ?
Let us look to the future and make sure that this is the sort of dialogue we have in the future .
Regarding Third Pillar issues - fighting drug trafficking , fighting international crime - how can we strengthen the dialogue in that area too ?
What suggestions has the Commission to deal with that question ?
I should like to talk briefly about the transatlantic summit meeting .
That is a very special summit meeting that is held twice a year .
We need to find a way of making it even better .
I suggest to the Commission today : please find a way of involving parliamentarians in some dimension of that summit .
There is absolutely no reason why representatives of Congress and the European Parliament should not be involved twice a year in the summit .
If we do that , then it means some of the nonsense that we have had out of Congress on Helms-Burton and the ILSA legislation can be countered because Congress representatives would have to sit at the table and take part in that dialogue .
Let us , in May , invite Members of Congress and of this House to the transatlantic summit meeting in London and make sure this special relationship extends beyond just the Commission , the Council and the administration to involve the legislators , too .
Mr President , the end of the Cold War and the growing strength of the European Union inevitably has led to a redefinition of the relationship between ourselves and the United States .
For historical and cultural reasons there has been a common bond between the United States and Europe , particularly where there was a common foe to fight or a common objective to pursue .
Nowhere is it more true than in the case of my own country where the US has consistently supported the Irish and British Governments in their quest to find a peaceful resolution to the age-old conflict in Northern Ireland .
We in Ireland sincerely appreciate the personal commitment given by President Clinton to the Northern Ireland peace process .
However , as regards the relationship with Europe in general , it must be acknowledged in all truth that it was a relationship of unequals .
In the past , for perfectly understandable reasons , Europe was overly dependent on the United States and , as a consequence , our independence and freedom to act differently from our US allies was seriously compromised .
Any future relationship , if it is to be successful , must be based on a genuine partnership between equals , irrespective of whether the joint action is in the field of world security , peace-keeping , crisis management , tackling the international drug barons or combatting terrorism .
It must be joint action jointly agreed on the basis of mutual respect with full consultation .
The EU cannot simply play the role of a subordinate paymaster .
Furthermore , given the United States policy of reducing its military presence in Europe and other parts of the world , we have to reassess the new European role and responsibility .
We need to develop a European identity in security and defence .
Although a decision on this issue was regrettably avoided in the recent Amsterdam Treaty , we cannot run away from making such a decision for much longer .
A European defence pillar must be established in the context of the Western European Union which should ensure that we have available in the event of a crisis our own military means of intervention , independent of the stance adopted by the United States .
Europe must continue to maintain a warm , constructive and cooperative relationship with the United States .
We must proceed to put in place the institutional mechanisms which will copper-fasten this .
However , we must also feel able to pursue the policies which give Europe the freedom to disagree with our US friends in areas , for example , where we must act to protect European Union trade , not least in the field of agriculture ; or foreign policy areas - such as our differing views on banning landmines , abolishing capital punishment or the role of the United Nations .
Friends should be able to disagree with one another on the basis of mutual respect , while at one and the same time , working together on global issues such as the preservation of world peace , security and democracy and the protection of human rights .
When we can do that then we will have achieved a true relationship of equals .
Let me conclude by paying tribute to the two rapporteurs for producing these reports and contributing to this debate .
Mr President , the transatlantic bridge is showing cracks .
The US , as a federal state with one voice towards the outside world , is awaiting what the outcome will be of the institutional reforms in Europe , and what will become of the euro .
That is why it is a good thing that the rapporteurs , Mr Souchet and Mrs Mann , emphasize active interpretation of the Transatlantic Agenda .
It is clear that the contrasts between the old and new world will come up with increasing frequency in the economic and trade areas , especially when the euro appears to be a success , and the adjustment of the Common Agricultural Policy and enlargement are successful .
The European Parliament resides in Brussels in a building which , in its design , at least to my mind , has clearly been inspired by the Capitol in Washington .
How nice it must be for our American colleagues to be able to have further talks with us in this building about how we can prevent a repeat of extraterritorial legislation .
Why can we not agree here that before the end of 1998 we will discuss with our American colleagues what the future of SFOR in former Yugoslavia should be , or discuss with them and convince them of the fact that allowing European audio-visual cultural products fits in with free global trade ?
The relations between the United States and Europe still constitute a substantial basis for stability in the world .
This relationship can be developed .
I am in favour of Atlanticism .
Having been born before 1950 , I still consider guaranteeing international peace and stability as the most essential element of our relationship .
The Transatlantic Agenda , as worked out in the Souchet and Mann reports , to my mind offers a good opportunity for this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President of the Commission , the debate on transatlantic relations always contains elements of great political interest .
As has been shown this evening , giving transatlantic relations a political , economic and commercial framework which will allow the development of cooperation in as many areas as possible needs to be one of our objectives for the near future .
Nevertheless it is worth remembering , firstly , that the European Union is the foremost commercial power in the world . Secondly , the establishment of the euro should be a stimulus to negotiations on the New Transatlantic Agenda .
Thirdly , against a background of globalization - which will particularly favour the most competitive economies - the European Union cannot forget its obligations to those countries which face difficulties . Nor can it alter its traditional system of bilateral negotiation , cut its cooperation budgets , or shield itself , as the United States does , either as a means of external reprisal or as the result of hypothetical internal pressures .
We all recognize the important role the United States has played in the defence of democracy .
However , that does not mean that their concept of democracy has always been the same as ours . Their legitimate eagerness to help people gain their freedom has sometimes resulted in unusual laws , claiming national security or external threats as a sacrosanct excuse , and leading ( in the case of Cuba for example ) to bilateral relations being placed in a delicate situation .
We have to realize that the European Union has a certain disadvantage compared with the United States when it comes to making decisions in exceptional situations .
It is difficult to implement trade defence mechanisms in response to external pressures , as we have found , but it is not impossible .
As the European Union becomes more widely seen as a political entity , our negotiating position in the international institutions will become stronger . This will be particularly important in the case of the World Trade Organization , which is the body to which all disputes should be referred , instead of trying to resolve them through the back door , with the Europeans always giving in for the sake of pax americana .
The European Union cannot give up and cease to play its rightful role as the world 's most important commercial power .
We should include other - possibly unpleasant - questions in the agenda , such as environmental or social matters .
Finally , I want to congratulate Mrs Mann for her magnificent piece of work . And I should like to remind the Commission that , on our part , the New Transatlantic Agenda should also take account of the development of the whole American continent , to which we are bound by a wide range of agreements , of varying importance , which will facilitate the great Atlantic market .
The United States is also interested in this , and wants to stimulate it . What can never be included in this agenda , but has sometimes been suggested , is the supposed distribution of political power , in the form of zones of influence , so that South and Central America becomes yet another area under the clear influence of the United States .
Mr President , having first congratulated the rapporteurs , as my colleagues have done , I want to say that we are all aware of the European Union 's real importance on the international stage , and of the inadequacies in this area which the Treaty of Amsterdam has not yet been able to rectify .
While we in the European Union are discussing our positions in strict and long-winded procedures , the United States is capable of making an overnight decision and summoning the conflicting parties , whether it is a question of Bosnia or , as is due to happen next week , the main players in the Middle East peace process .
In fact , Mr President , the European Union still provides most of the financial contribution , and most of the overall development aid to the rest of the world - and nobody ( or hardly anyone ) realizes that we do so . The truth is , we are restricting ourselves to the honorable role of footing the bill for the great dramas of the modern world .
However , although we are small in political terms , in the economic sphere , when we act in unison , we are the greatest commercial , financial and industrial power on the planet .
And as other speakers have mentioned before me , this role can be increased following the introduction of EMU , with the advantages it will bring .
I think this fact - our economic strength - should be the basis of our relations with the United States .
These relations must be put into a global context , with a new perspective on the contested objectives , based on the different form in which today 's threats present themselves .
Thanks to the rapporteurs ' hard work , the report describes these objectives perfectly , and I agree with the rapporteurs that they are a little vague .
I think it is time for the European Union 's diplomacy to stop being purely declarative in nature .
On the subject of turning words into actions , I want to mention one of the most revealing cases : the Helms-Burton Act .
Showing the utmost warmth and friendship at all times - as befits loyal colleagues - the United States has been relentless in the banana panel and the hormone panel . Let us not be naive .
Let us act with the same determination as they do , because unfortunately where matters of trade are concerned the only language they understand is the exploitation of all the available legal loopholes .
We have the example of certain mergers and concentrations currently being examined by the European Commission 's Directorate-General IV : the codes of conduct for the computerized booking systems in the case of American Airlines , or the recent dispute between a major energy company within the European Union and the American giant , Arko .
Friends and colleagues , yes , Mr President , but when it comes to defending our interests , we must be as resolute as they are .
Mr President , this is a timely debate because it is at the end of this week that the United States Congress is coming over to Europe for our twice-yearly meetings and a good pair of resolutions , I am sure , will help to give the American Congress some idea of our feelings .
Although I hope they will not take too much notice of some of the rather intemperate remarks that have been made by participants in this debate so far .
However , I think the Americans will take us slightly less seriously if they read carefully Mr Souchet 's resolution , particularly paragraphs 10 , 11 and 14 thereof which refer to a bit of legislation of which I had not previously heard called the Amato-Kennedy act .
May I appeal to the rapporteur to put that right in verbal amendments tomorrow when we vote because otherwise the Americans might think that it is some form of new-style cohabitation between Democrats on the one side of the House of Representatives and the Congress and Republicans on the other side .
Of course cohabitation is not entirely unknown here in the European Parliament .
When references were being made earlier on to hostility on the part of people in the United States towards the European Union , I did not expect to hear quite so much hostility to the United States on behalf of Members of the European Parliament , particularly from Mr Antony who sits behind me and Mrs Ainardi who sits opposite me .
Is this some form of cohabitation à la française I ask myself ?
The dangers that arise from the relationship are ones which have been quite rightly drawn attention to by Mrs Mann in particular .
Those are protectionism , and we are both equally guilty of that , as can be seen by anyone who looks at the reports produced every year by the European office in Washington and by the United States trade representative on European barriers to trade .
The curious thing about those barriers to trade is that they often complain about the same thing , wine for example .
The Americans complain that we will not allow Californian champagne , Californian claret , Californian sherry and so on to circulate freely here in the European Union - quite right too you might say , because after all these are special names which we all very much cherish .
Then if you read the account of barriers to trade by the European Commission office they say : ' Do you know the Americans have the impertinence to produce Californian champagne and Californian claret etc . ? '
It just shows in other words that we are equally guilty of protectionism .
I hope that there will be a sensible conclusion to our debate .
The relationship is vitally important for both sides but , please , a little less arrogance by ' us Europeans ' towards ' those Americans ' .
Mr President , like others I should like to congratulate both our rapporteurs who have contributed excellent documents to this debate .
In making my comments I should first like to look at the historical perspective of this debate .
We have two parallel lines for our relationships with the United States today .
The first - the NATO relationship - is based on political security and has the highest profile .
It is the one which preserves US dominance and where there are significant problems as we come to NATO 's 50th anniversary : for example how we deal with Bosnia , our relationship with Russia , NATO enlargement and arms industry procurements .
All these are difficult questions .
It is interesting that the large part of Mr Souchet 's report deals with economic matters and although NATO is dealt with in the explanatory memorandum , nothing is said about our approach to it in the future .
Erika Mann 's report is much more concerned with the philosophy of partnership , with political and economic matters where the European Union has the capacity to act and where we are , in effect , building a new transatlantic bridge for the twenty-first century .
It is not surprising that those involved in this kind of debate are more optimistic than those involved in the NATO debates .
Secondly , what are the chances for the New Transatlantic Agenda to succeed ?
I would say that they are very high .
We are dealing with issues which affect the political and economic communities on both sides , with the arguments of globalization and with common interests .
The Transatlantic Business Dialogue is moving towards the idea of the new transatlantic marketplace .
The summary by the senior level group given at the EU - US Summit of 5 December is so full of priorities and ideas that I will be surprised if the administrations can make much headway within six months .
There are statements on the Ukraine , climate change , electronic commerce and regulatory cooperation .
It is all to be done and no one quite knows how to do it .
As speakers have said , we shall next be dealing with the monetary dialogue , to try to get a new consensus between domestic and international monetary policies on both sides of the Atlantic .
Lastly , where do we head to next ?
Both EMU and enlargement of the EU and NATO are going to bring a new dimension to transatlantic relations .
Post-Cold War , there is a clear and developing linkage between economic , political and security aspects and policy-making .
Inevitably , therefore , NATO and EU are condemned to have a dialogue even if - as an American ambassador said - they live in the same town but actually on different planets .
We have to have an effective transatlantic partnership in the twenty-first century based on a coherent institutional framework involving greater parliamentary cooperation and the concept of the new transatlantic marketplace .
Ironically , the more that Europe is capable of bearing its responsibilities , the stronger the transatlantic relationship in the twenty-first century will be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 1989 / 90 was a turning point in world politics .
During the Cold War era , we were concerned with managing the status quo - now we are trying to manage change .
All aspects of transatlantic cooperation are affected by the dynamics of this change .
That is why it is right and proper that we are debating relations between Europe and the US here in the European Parliament today .
There are critical questions to be addressed : for example cooperation on security policy or in the field of foreign trade and the world economy .
It is both desirable and necessary that Europe should play an independent security policy role .
But it has never been so clear in recent years as in the Balkans how important US participation is .
The US will also need to play an active role in resolving the conflict between Greece and Turkey and the Cyprus situation .
A more effective common foreign and security policy for the EU Member States is also important here in the context of strengthening transatlantic relations .
We Europeans are also united with the United States by a common interest in open markets and free world trade .
We should work on the assumption that the world can only achieve economic growth and prosperity if we do not revert to the old ways of protectionism and isolate ourselves from each other , but instead open ourselves up to competition and develop our economies in open , competitive markets .
Listening to today 's debate , it is obvious that there is no future for Colbert here .
Our weak point is often that Europe is not competitive enough .
Cultural , spiritual and religious bonds tie America and Europe together in spite of any economic and political tensions .
We should take care to nurture these common roots more carefully in future , because they serve to bind us together and will do so all the more in the future .
A transatlantic community needs to be based on our community of interest , not our conflicts of interest .
If the western world 's societies , and I mean the whole western world , cannot lend each other support based on their varying experience , and tackle the new order of the world economy and world political relations together , then we will be squandering invaluable political , economic , social and cultural energy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are at present witnessing an enormous crisis in the ASEAN states , that is bound to have global consequences .
The question I ask myself is just what rapid action the European Union and America can take in this case .
I believe we need to develop joint mechanisms to stabilize the situation there .
Maybe we can help as quickly as possible with convergence criteria , benchmarking and best practice .
I am afraid that if we do not help speedily , the consequences for us could be dangerous .
The second point that particularly concerns me about relations between Europe and the United States is that Austria put a very valuable art collection , which belongs to a foundation , at America 's disposal .
Now , two pictures from this collection have been unilaterally seized , and I can honestly say that I cannot personally imagine how , if a collection is made available to someone , a collection belonging to a foundation , they can thank you by seizing two important pictures .
Mr President , I just wish to say briefly that I realize Commissioner Bangemann could not give a clear response to my request regarding the transatlantic summit meeting .
I should like to ask that he would at least take the idea back and discuss it with the President of the Commission and the Council , because I see that as one way of changing some of the misunderstandings on both sides of the Atlantic in both legislative bodies .
As Mr Donnelly has rightly recognized , I cannot at this stage commit the Commission as a whole .
However , I am quite sure that he has touched upon a current problem which needs to be resolved now and , as I said , I have no doubt that the Commission as such and the President will be much more open to that request than maybe was the case in the past .
I will convey the message to the Commission , and Sir Leon Brittan will give you an answer to it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Foodstuffs
The next item is the report ( A4-0401 / 97 ) by Mr Lannoye , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposals for Council Directives relating to foodstuffs intended for human consumption .
Mr President , we shall be debating breakfast products at the wrong time , but I think we are all concerned at the quality of these products . I am sure our debate will be of an equally high quality .
I would remind you that the Commission 's objective , when it presented the five proposed modifications , was to modernize two directives dating back to the 1970s , on the basis of a single principle : specifying only those things which are essential to ensure the free circulation of the products in question , in particular sugar , honey , fruit juice , jellies and preserves , and totally or partially dehydrated preserved milk .
This is certainly a praiseworthy objective , provided consumer interests are seriously taken into consideration .
The reflection of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection is that substantial amendments are required to the Commission 's proposals . In this respect , we have based ourselves on two principles .
The first is to get a dynamic of ever-increasing product quality going . The second is that the consumer has a right to correct information , that is , avoiding any misunderstanding over the name of the products , and the adoption of clear labelling .
I am putting my finger on a number of gaps or weaknesses in the texts , which have given rise to amendments broadly adopted by the Commission , the overall report having been adopted unanimously .
The first comment relates to information .
As with chocolate , in the case of fruit juice and preserved milk , we are confronted with a situation of differences in national legislation , particularly as regards the possible addition of vitamins .
As these legislations are different - and should remain so according to the Commission 's proposals - consumers will find themselves potentially , in each Member State , faced with two types of slightly different products which are labelled in the same way , or at least given the same name .
We believe this is not acceptable , and the name should be slightly amended , by the addition of the word ' vitaminized ' , if that is the case .
The second comment relates to the quality of products .
There are a number of apparent gaps in the texts , particularly as regards sugars .
Account should be taken of the technical changes which make it possible to reduce the residual content of sulphur dioxide , which is a constituent which is really not desirable in sugar .
It is possible to reduce its content from 15 mg / kg to10 mg / kg , as is confirmed by the industrial manufacturers .
This second comment also relates to fruit juice .
You know that fruit juice can be either unadulterated juice from the pressing of the fruit , or a juice obtained by rehydration after dehydration .
In this case , the quality of the water added to obtain the final product , known as ' rehydrated fruit juice ' , should be clearly codified , and this is not the case in the proposal .
An amendment from the Committee on the Environment intends to close this loophole .
Furthermore , as regards the possible addition of sugar to fruit juice , there is cause for surprise that no limit value is stated in the proposal .
That is why the Environment Committee proposes setting down a limit value , which is quite simply not to overstep the sugar concentrations which occur naturally .
Finally , I insist on a more important point , as this is the matter of a debate which has already stirred this Parliament on a number of occasions - the problem of honey . In January 1995 , Mrs Lulling 's report on the quality of honey , and the major problem of imported honey , contained a number of requirements adopted unanimously by Parliament .
I would remind you that half the honey consumed in Europe is imported honey , which therefore comes from outside the European Union , under conditions of quality which are absolutely not guaranteed . We therefore believe that for imported honey , labelling should be compulsory and not an option left in the hands of the Member States .
Hence , an amendment has been put forward to this end , and the country of origin must be stated .
Also , we believe it is time to define a serious , analytical method for honey , which we still do not have . Finally , we also believe that the excessively grand term ' baker 's honey ' should be removed , as it applies to a product which is in fact denatured and would be more appropriately termed ' industrial honey . '


These are the two main amendments .

I would like to raise two questions with the Commissioner .
First of all , what does he think about what I consider to be some of the most important amendments - namely Amendments Nos 19 and 28 on honey , and Amendment No 42 on fruit juice ?
Secondly , what is his position on the legal basis proposed , in the knowledge that several colleagues from the Group of the European People 's Party have put down amendments with the aim of modifying Article 100a ?
Personally , this modification is acceptable to me , but all the information at our disposal to date indicates that it is coming up against great hostility from the Commission .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate the rapporteur on his - what shall we call it ? - fivefold report , and I would like to wish the Commissioner a happy New Year .
We would have liked to have wished him a happy Christmas with reference to the chocolate debate , but we were not fortunate enough to see him .
A little belatedly then : happy New Year .
The rapporteur has elucidated the most important amendments very thoroughly .
I would like to ask the Commissioner a question in connection with the legal basis .
In our group we were a little surprised , Mrs Schleicher , that these amendments appeared during the discussion in the plenary session .
But do not worry ; we are not opposed to these amendments a priori , but we do have a question , because this matter has been dealt with principally by this Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Both have come to the decisive answer that in these five cases which we are discussing today , the correct legal basis ought to be Article 43 .
As individual Members of the European Parliament , as members of Parliamentary committees , or as Parliament , we are obviously always in favour of a procedure which is subject to codecision , as this obviously means that the rights of Parliament are better safeguarded . We believe that as the only democratically elected institution , we are closer to the consumer and therefore better placed , we think , to protect the interests of the consumer .
On the other hand , we should also exercise a little honesty .
We must make sure that such an amendment , if we want to enforce it , is legally on tip-top solid ground , because otherwise we might be doing a bit of window-dressing for ourselves , and deluding ourselves in the process .
I am under the impression , Mrs Schleicher , Mr Lannoye , ladies and gentlemen , that this problem is like the one concerning Article 43 or Article 100a .
The problem is that Article 43 is not subject to a codecision procedure , and sadly enough , the Treaty of Amsterdam has brought no solace .
Nonetheless we do not want to condemn the amendments .
If we want to go some way with you , then we would like to receive a legally-founded answer to the amendments from our colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party .
The rapporteur has very clearly explained a number of comments with regard to the amendments .
If you look at the package of the five products , they are not really amendments which have all been inspired by extreme concern for the consumer , protection of the consumer and information for the consumer .
Evidently , this Parliament is not divided over this .
When it concerns the origin of honey products , we definitely think this should be labelled overtly .
If vitamins have to be added , we definitely think this should be labelled overtly .
The cohesion here in this Parliament shows a marked contrast to our lack of cohesion when it comes to chocolate .
Here , the information we should give the consumer is almost unlimited .
When it comes to chocolate , this Parliament is suddenly very modest .
I will keep up the New Year 's atmosphere and conclude that in the country of milk and honey we all agree , but the moment we discuss chocolate we become extra bitter .
My colleague Mrs Graenitz will explain the amendments relating to honey shortly , and for the rest I think we will be able to vote on all amendments in close consultation and in great agreement .
They represent progress .
Let us hope that in addition to the amendments surrounding the legal basis , the Commission will also approve the other amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Lannoye report was adopted in committee by a large majority , and my group supports the amendments before us .
Mr De Coene , you have just reminded us how illogical people can sometimes be .
I think it is human nature not always to be logical .
Nevertheless , I think we should try to proceed logically , and that is why I think we keep encountering a particular fundamental problem more and more often recently . I am referring to the legal basis .
Article 43 is normally taken as the basis for draft directives concerned with the production and marketing of agricultural products , as listed in Annex II to the EC Treaty , and therefore relates to the achievement of Common Agricultural Policy objectives .
Alternatively , there is Article 100a - the codecision procedure .
This legal basis relates to the establishment and functioning of the internal market by approximation of the provisions laid down by law , regulation or administrative action in Member States - that is , harmonization .
Harmonization directives should guarantee the free movement of the products in question .
The Commission proposal which inspired Mr Lannoye 's report is concerned with five products , namely sugar , honey , fruit juices , milk and jam .
These are all pre-processed products derived solely from agricultural products .
Even the milk referred to is condensed or dried milk .
The Commission has taken Article 43 as the legal basis .
We consider Article 100a to be the correct legal basis , even if things have not always been done this way in the past .
But things have also moved on in terms of legal precedents , not least the amendment of the treaties , and , unfortunately , current events .
Because of the BSE crisis , the Commission has undertaken that in future all legal instruments relating to foodstuffs and health protection should be based on Article 100a of the EC Treaty .
It is therefore very much to the point that the Commission proposal on sugar , honey , fruit juices , milk and jams includes provisions on consumer and health protection , namely labelling , the residual sulphur dioxide content of sugar , packaging , flavouring and vitamin content , water quality in fruit juices , limit values for nitrates , sodium , calcium , and so on , and labelling requirements for fruit juices , milk products and jams with added vitamins .
The whole area of Community law on foodstuffs is now dealt with under Article 100a of the EC Treaty .
We are therefore requesting in the strongest terms that the correct legal basis should be taken for this Commission proposal , that is Article 100a , and I would like to ask you again , Mr Bangemann , as a representative of the European Commission , whether you will support this European Parliament proposal .
Failing that , I shall request referral back to committee , if the Commission is not yet able to agree .
We are effectively fighting against Article 43 here , and if we are to change our position , we really need some form of reassurance .
We cannot just stand back and see what happens .
That is our request , and I hope the Commission will not only carefully consider it , but will also act consistently , and thus logically , in this matter .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Lannoye on a good product .
Food is not such a simple matter .
In the proposal from the Commission it says that the directive should be simplified , but simplicity is often opposed to safety .
We know that when markets for all goods grow , especially for food - that is , when food is transported further and further away from the place of production ( one of the ideas of the EU and a free market economy is that this should be possible ) - something else also happens .
The direct information which in former times was linked to the person who sold the food , the person who produced the food , disappears .
Instead , we buy something without knowing what it is , unless it says on it what it is .
Therefore I believe we must find a balance between simplicity and safety which is more on the side of safety than the proposal which the Commission has put forward .
If we do not do that , we take the risk that consumers will not get sufficient information .
I would also like to point out something which is in one of the amendments , namely that regardless of whether a product has been produced inside or outside the EU , it should be subject to the same rules , not least in view of the preceding debate we had in this House .
Mr President , I have requested leave to speak in order to emphasize an extremely important , fundamental element in the report on this food directive , in which the rapporteur gives the Commission a welldeserved rebuff .
It concerns two paragraphs with essentially the same content , in which the Commission wants to establish that ' to avoid creating new barriers to free movement , Member States should refrain from adopting more detailed rules . '
Mr Lannoye , on the other hand , wants to give Member States the right to adopt or keep more detailed rules .
According to Mr Lannoye , it is not necessary for the Commission to approve these kinds of tough rules .
Nor is it necessary to have a number of other limitations contrary to what is said in Article 100a 4 of the EU Treaty , which , through a number of modifications in its new form under the Amsterdam Treaty , has totally lost the character of a so-called environmental guarantee and has shrunk to a kind of limited opportunity for exemption .
But in the Lannoye report something has been drafted which begins to resemble an environmental and health guarantee - that is , a right ( not just a possibility ) for individual Member States to take a lead in tightening rules aimed at protecting health , the environment and consumer interests .
I have decided to emphasize this because it is so important .
I hope this important principle will also have an impact on other EU rules .
Certain shared minimum standards are certainly justified , but to forbid Member States from taking a lead and adopting better rules out of consideration for freedom of movement is a manifestation of the worst side of the EU .
I therefore hope Parliament adopts this report and that it also has an effect on the EU 's official policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , over the last few months I have discussed legislation on foodstuffs with people from a wide range of areas and Member States , and have been unable to find anyone who could see why chicory extracts should be covered by a vertical directive with a different legal basis as compared with jams or fruit juices or sugars .
So I think we need to look at the legal basis a lot more closely than just simply saying that these are products derived from primary agricultural products .
Processing is indeed involved and there is also a supra-regional aspect to this , which recently emerged in the debate in committee on added vitamins , and which needs to be examined in much more detail within the Commission .
I do not think we can allow vitamins to be added to fruit juices or milk products , or even jams , without consumers being given adequate information , nor should there be different arrangements in the individual Member States , because I am sure this has got nothing to do with regional customs or local specialities .
I would like to make a few more points about honey .
For one thing , we must not forget that honey is a natural food and it should therefore be analysed in the same way throughout the Union . Furthermore , the directive should refer to the fact that honey does not just consist of various sugars , chiefly glucose and fructose .
It is possible to create imitation honey using these two sugars , but it would not be the same honey that bee-keepers get from bees .
Beekeepers ' work should be highly rated in the European Union , not only because they are involved with honey production , but also - and I think that Mrs Lulling will have more to say about this - because bee-keepers make an important contribution to preserving nature , and to growing the fruit that we enjoy so much in fruit juices and jams , which would not be possible without bees .
Mr President , the European Union pays for expensive two-page advertisements in magazines , in which it extols the virtues of quality honey marked with an EU Member State as its place of origin . The advert features the question : ' Do you treat honey with as much respect as Saint Ambrose did ? ' .
Saint Ambrose is the patron saint of bee-keepers , because he was a great honey-lover , an archbishop enthusiastic about the industrious activity of bee colonies .
Unfortunately , in preparing the proposal before us today , which is intended to simplify the directive on honey , the Commission has not followed the advice which it has spent so much money on giving to consumers in its adverts in glossy magazines .
Mr Bangemann , your proposals do not accord honey , a natural product , the respect it deserves .
I am very grateful to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and its rapporteur , Mr Lannoye , for incorporating in its report the many amendments which I submitted in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The main thing is that the honey produced in our Member States , a highly nutritious agricultural product , should be protected against lower quality cheap imported honey , and it should therefore most definitely be compulsory to state on the label whether the honey is produced in the Union or in a third country .
Unfortunately , in some Member States there is honey on the market which is up to 80 % adulterated . Furthermore , honey filtering , which destroys genetic fingerprints so that its regional origin can no longer be identified , should be absolutely banned .
We should be listening to the bee-keepers , not the bottling lobby , to make sure that as many bee-keepers as possible are prepared to produce high-quality honey despite the much higher costs involved .
This should also ensure , as I have always preached in my reports on bee-keeping in Europe , that the European Union will have enough bees , which pollinate over 80 , 000 different plant varieties .
I consider it essential that our amendments should be accepted .
They mean that the statement of origin would make it clear that the honey does not just meet a fair number of the quality requirements , but the majority of them .
I have run out of time now and will say the rest when we vote .
Mr President , whenever we discuss food regulations in this House , we end up having to decide what compromises to agree upon .
No doubt that also applies to national parliaments .
I have the impression that we have forgotten something . I mean , we should remember that for thousands of years humanity managed without chemical additives .
It seems , and the debate here has confirmed this , that we have lost something - respect for food .
I have in mind genetic engineering in particular : it seems that we feel we have to play God .
The second point is that food production , and above all production of high and superior quality food , is all about jobs - not just in agriculture , but also in retailing .
This applies especially to remote regions with little tourism .
That is why it is important that the Member States should have the option of giving individual regions special designations , and thus apply a higher quality standard than the general European standard prescribed by the Directive .
It should go without saying that consumers should be able to see all the additives in a product , as well as its geographical origin , both of which must be clearly and unmistakably labelled .
We owe this not only to consumers , but also to those producers who rely on producing quality products which are naturally somewhat more expensive than mass-produced food .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0001 / 98 ) .
As the author is not present , Question No 44 lapses .
Question No 45 by Clive Needle ( H-0988 / 97 )
Subject : Funding HIV / AIDS therapy in developing countries
Could the Commission state its position on recent proposals made by a Member State Health Minister at a conference in Côte d 'Ivoire in December 1997 , to establish a " fund for pharmaceutical drugs for people with HIV / AIDS in developing countries ' ?
Does the Commission agree that such a politically " fashionable ' but potentially disastrous idea has no place in the excellent EU policy guidelines on HIV / AIDS in developing countries , which were recently presented to the European Parliament by Commissioner Pinheiro ?
Can the Commission provide Members with a clear guarantee that no EU support to this scheme will be considered without a detailed analysis of its implications and that the outcome of such an analysis should be put before the European Parliament ?
Mr President , before answering the question , as this is the first time I have attended Parliament in 1998 , allow me to wish all Members a prosperous year .
The recent proposals submitted by a Member State during the Abidjan Conference on Aids held in December 1997 on setting up a fund to improve access to treatment for persons contaminated with the HIV / Aids virus in developing countries have the merit of starting a discussion on a real problem .
In fact , at the moment there is an obvious lack of justice between taking responsibility for Aids sufferers in northern countries , where anti-retrovirus medicines are available , and , at the other extreme , in the southern countries , where most sufferers do not have access to basic health care .
However , setting up a fund of this type raises a series of very important questions that need to be answered .
According to the request put forward by the European Council in Luxembourg last December , the Commission 's services are going to study ways of setting up a treatment solidarity fund under the aegis of the Aids-UN , intended to combat Aids in the developing countries .
The results of this study should examine the various scenarios possible and the respective consequences , as regards both ethics and fairness , and at technical , economic and financial levels .
I wish to assure the honourable Member that the results of this study will be communicated to the European Parliament .
I would add that in my opinion setting up a fund of this type raises three fundamental questions .
The first question is that of the size and access to this fund , taking into account the annual cost of treatment for tri-therapy , which is estimated at $ 10 , 000 - $ 20 , 000 .
The choice of sufferers inevitably raises ethical problems and problems of not discriminating between persons contaminated by the Aids virus .
A second question relates to the ways of gaining access to the treatment , to the extent that there is a real danger in setting up a parallel system aimed solely at Aids sufferers , which would be ineffective and onerous at the same time , and could prove counterproductive for other sufferers with malaria , tuberculosis , measles , and so on .
The third question to be answered is the fact that the long-term efficacy of anti-retrovirus medicines has not yet been fully proven .
Beyond that , the necessary accompanying measures for anti-retrovirus therapy still do not exist in most African countries , such as the provision of laboratories and training for medical and paramedical staff .
For all these reasons , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we await this study that the Commission is going to undertake with some prudence as to the conclusions that might be drawn .
Thank you very much , Mr President , and can I join Commissioner Pinheiro in wishing you and he both a happy New Year .
Can I also thank the Commissioner for what was a very good and full response to that question which went a long way towards meeting the reasons for which it was tabled .
There is concern amongst non-governmental organizations as well as several Members , and we will be partially reassured by your answer about the study .
We certainly look forward to the report returning to Parliament .
I think you are right to be cautious about sudden initiatives of this sort however worthy or well-intentioned and however massive we all know the scale of the problems are .
Can I just briefly ask you : would you further agree that the question here is not whether people in developing countries should have equal access to HIV / Aids treatment as people in developed countries - everybody agrees that is necessary - but how to achieve that end ?
As it stands , the vertical approach in favour of people with Aids as proposed by one of our Member States could seriously jeopardize existing public health systems by creating parallel systems .
That would arguably benefit developed world pharmaceutical companies and shift the emphasis from prevention to treatment .
I wonder , do you see that as being something that the study will give us a clear response on ?
I would just like to stress that broadly speaking the Commission always suggests in regard to the health sector or the health situation in developing countries that we should strive for what we call a horizontal approach .
We try to reinforce the system itself , the training of doctors and other health personnel , to try to develop a flow of medicaments based on the ownership of the country , and so on and so forth .
Perhaps HIV / Aids is the only exception to this approach , mainly because of its relationship with certain types of behaviour .
A recent study undertaken by the Commission , the United Nations and the World Bank found a clear correlation between sexually-transmitted diseases and the transmission of the HIV virus .
That means that education and prevention are perhaps the best way in which to try to reduce the incidence of the disease , at least in Africa .
For all these reasons , we hope that the study which the Commission will undertake together with experts from the Member States and other countries that might help us will be of great assistance either to formulate a new strategy or to confirm the one we have been following .
One thing is certain : if you take into account the current costs of treating a patient of $ 10 , 000 - $ 20 , 000 this would mean , if I am not mistaken , something like over $ 100 million per year just for this which is obviously outside our capacity .
Thank you Commissioner for your response , and a happy New Year to you in the eleven working languages of the European Union .
First of all , can I say that both Mr Needle and myself submitted similar questions to the Council and the Council grouped them together .
It is strange that the Commission has not done the same .
However , coming back to this fund , Commissioner , if such a fund were to be established , would it be new money ?
Because if it is not new money then it is difficult to imagine how it could possibly function without displacing existing funding to equally essential projects .
I would certainly look forward to the study and I hope that it will address this point .
Can you tell me , will it be new money if such a fund is established ?
As far as I know , the fresh money would come from Member States since the Commission budget is well defined , and unless the Members of this House decide that we should have extra funds , there will be no new money available .
At any rate , responses from political leaders in the Member States indicate that they are prepared to put some new money into this fund .
However , at this stage I think it is premature to draw conclusions on whether the fund will be established , its dimensions and the way in which it would function .
I tried to say this in my answer to Mr Needle .
Question No 46 by John Cushnahan ( H-1018 / 97 )
Subject : Single market
What measures is the Commission considering to ensure that there is no further disruption of the single market in light of the recent Court of Justice ruling against the French Government and the recent beef blockade of UK ports ?
Mr President , on 18 November the Commission adopted a draft Council regulation that established a mechanism for Commission intervention to abolish certain obstacles to trade .
This draft answers a request made by the European Council in Amsterdam last June , recording its conclusions on the action plan for the single market .
This draft also answers the concern expressed by the honourable Member in his question as to the follow-up the Commission intends to give to the judgment passed by the Court of Justice on 9 December in the Commission vs. France proceedings .
According to the proposed intervention mechanism , the Commission will ask the Member State in question , by means of a decision , to take the necessary measures to end an obvious , classified and unjustified obstruction to the acceptance of Articles 30 and 36 of the Treaty , seriously hampering the freedom of movement of goods in the internal market .
I would add that , based on past experience , the cases most representative of this situation might be , for example : the untimely and unjustified prohibition of importing products from other Member States ; measures establishing or restoring import formalities , such as licences or technical approvals ; destruction of large quantities of products from other Member States , for example , on the roads , in shopping centres or in warehouses ; or even the immobilization of products by not permitting access to the national territory or movement within it , for example , blockading means of transport at the borders , on the motorways , or at the ports or airports .
By making a decision , if Council approves this regulation , Commission intervention gives binding power and has immediate effects on the legal system of the Member State in question , enabling individuals with grievances immediately to assert the rights they feel they are being denied .
That , Mr President , is the answer I would like to give the honourable Member .
I should like to respond to the Commissioner 's good wishes by wishing him and his colleagues , especially my Irish colleague , Commissioner Flynn and the President of Parliament a happy New Year .
I think you would acknowledge , Commissioner , that the Court of Justice decision against the French Government was a landmark decision which will help you pursue the policy you agreed at the Amsterdam Summit .
I want to ask you a number of questions relating to that .
First , can we have an assurance that when there is any further disruption to the single market , the Commission will act urgently and swiftly to ensure that Member States discharge their obligations to ensure that the single market is not disrupted .
Secondly , what action did the Commission take in making its views known to the UK Government regarding the recent illegal blockade of UK ports which affected Irish farmers , hauliers and exporters ?
Thirdly , what action will the Commission take to ensure that compensation will be forthcoming to Irish farmers , hauliers and exporters who suffered a great deal because of this illegal action ?
With regard to whether the Commission will act swiftly , that is the objective of the regulation we propose .
If we were to follow traditional procedures , it would take such a long time that some foodstuffs would be totally lost .
With regard to events that have occurred in the past , I should like to differentiate between two situations .
The first is where there is a blockade but where the Member State does its utmost to eliminate the blockade .
Then there is no need for the Commission to act .
The second is when there is difficulty in fulfilling the terms of the single market due either to the failure of a government to act or to the deliberate action of a government .
It is in the latter type of case that the Commission acts
With regard to compensation , it is implicit in what I said that compensation should be applied for by private individuals who feel their goods have been destroyed , or whatever .
Thus - if the Council approves our proposal - the fact that a decision has been taken will allow private interests to be directly sustained in court .
It will enter into immediate legal effect in the Member State concerned .
So , compensation is not a matter for the Commission but for the competent authorities in a Member State , and it is they who are required to act .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the proposal for this directive the Commission has drafted has raised some eyebrows in Finland , because it is seen as restricting workers ' right to strike .
The issue here is not only making the common market work perfectly , but also the right of the citizen to strike , which is held as sacred in my country , Finland .
I would respectfully ask the Commission this question : are you endeavouring to have a person 's right to strike eclipsed by the needs of the common market , and do you intend to do so without consulting the trade union movement and in total disregard for the tripartite system - as we call it - of industrial negotiations ?
Mr President , I would like to say that , for the Commission too , the right to strike is inalienable and that under no circumstances could the Commission permit any exception to a fundamental right held by the workers in a democratic state , on account of the single market .
For that reason , I can specifically say that under no circumstances will the right to strike be affected by this regulation , or any other regulation derived from it , for similar reasons .
Question No 47 by Nikitas Kaklamanis ( H-0977 / 97 )
Subject : Blood transfusions
According to press reports throughout Europe , there are fundamental suspicions that Creutzfeld-Jakob disease affecting humans is transmitted through blood and blood products .
Will the Commission say whether the Member States test blood used for transfusions and which Member States carry out those tests ?
Will the Commission immediately propose the compulsory testing of blood to be used in transfusions in all the Member States ?
Before I specifically address the issue of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease ( CJD ) , I want to inform the honourable Member that Member States do screen blood and plasma for a variety of pathogens .
A recent survey conducted by the Commission on the regulation and practices in the Member States of the European Community as regards the suitability of blood and plasma donors and the screening of their donations confirms that all Member States routinely screen for antibodies against the hepatitis C virus , the human immunodeficiency virus type I and II and the surface antigen of hepatitis B virus .
With regard to the increased concern that blood and blood products may transmit the agent responsible for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease , a distinction first has to be made between classical or sporadic CJD and the new variant of this disease , nvCJD , which has been strongly associated with BSE .
From studies so far undertaken , especially in the United Kingdom and the United States , there is no evidence of transmission to patients of the agent responsible for classical or sporadic CJD by blood or blood products .
The advice that has been given to the Commission from the relevant scientific committees , in particular the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products , on the risk of these forms of CJD , is that there are no specific grounds for possible recall or quarantine of batches of plasma-derived products .
However , this issue will be re-evaluated at regular intervals , depending on the availability of epidemiological data and their scientific evaluation .
As regards nvCJD , there are indeed concerns that a new and additional risk may be posed by blood and blood products prepared from donations from infected donors .
Because of these concerns and as a precautionary measure , the CPMP has advised that batches of plasma-derived medicinal products should be withdrawn from the market when a donor to a plasma pool subsequently has been confirmed diagnosed as nvCJD .
Member States are already in the process of complying with this advice .
The United Kingdom also follows the advice of its Spongiform Encephalopathy Committee in this respect .
Moreover , a rapid alert defective product recall procedure is in place in the Community .
In the United Kingdom a risk assessment has been initiated to ascertain the possible transmission of nvCJD through blood transfusion .
This is being carried out in parallel with an appraisal of the operational and scientific aspects of introducing leucodepletion removal of the white blood cells .
With regard to the compulsory testing of blood for nvCJD , I am sure that the honourable Member is aware that at present no screening test exists .
Scientists and industry are currently working to develop such screening and diagnostic tests .
Members of the European Parliament will be interested to learn that an ad hoc specialist workshop on nvCJD will be held on 15 January under the auspices of the CPMP .
This workshop , which will bring together experts in this area , will focus on the infectivity distribution between new variant and classical CJD , the risk of transmission by blood and blood fractions , a review of the published and ongoing work , and the identification of any new studies required .
A report of the meeting will be forthcoming .
The Commission is seeking advice from the Scientific Steering Committee and the Scientific Committee for Medicinal Products , and has already presented a proposal for a Council recommendation on the suitability of blood and plasma donors and the screening of donated blood in the European Community , which seeks to establish a requirement of permanent deferral for persons in whose family CJD has occurred .
In the light of the results of ongoing evaluations and assessments and the advice received , the Commission will give consideration to proposing measures specific to nvCJD , concerning blood and plasma as source materials for medicinal products .
As regards blood for transfusion , however , there is , at present , no legal basis on which binding requirements can be laid down at Community level .
I hope that this unsatisfactory situation will change with the coming into force of the Amsterdam Treaty and Article 152 , in particular .
I am sorry for taking so long , but this is a very sensitive and very important issue .
I wanted to give as full a reply as possible .
Mr President , I should like to wish a happy New Year to you and to Commissioners de Silguy and Flynn .
I should also like to wish for good health for you and all the citizens of Europe .
But you know , for there to be health , wishes and good intentions are not enough : specific measures are also needed .
Thank you very much for your answer , Mr Commissioner , which indeed was very full .
I would just like to remind you that in 1980 there were simply suspicions , as there are suspicions now , that the AIDS virus was transmitted by blood and blood transfusions .
We did not take then the necessary measures that we should have taken . We took them in 1993 .
We are all unfortunately aware of the results of this three-year delay .
This then is my fear .
Moreover I am telling you this as a doctor : although there are only suspicions , as indeed you said , I would prefer that the necessary measures be taken now , which may in the future prove to have been unnecessary , rather then allow to happen what happened with AIDS , when it will be far too late .
I appreciate the honourable Member 's good wishes to the Commissioner .
I have to say to you that , yes , this is a matter that receives our considerable and considered opinion at all times .
We are , of course , as you know , entirely bound by the scientific evidence available to us at any particular time .
But , certainly , preventive measures are being considered and being put in place in the Member States .
We are talking here about the donors , the question of screening , evaluation and testing and also the question of research and diagnostic tests .
All of the matters that would give you concern are being taken on board on a continuing basis , and that is the reason why we are having this very special meeting on 15 January , which will bring all that information together to enable us to do whatever is necessary on the good advice of that committee .
I , too , would like to express my appreciation of the proposal which is on the Council 's table and to which the Commissioner referred .
I have studied this recommendation and understand that through it we shall obtain a ban on people who suffer from this illness being allowed to give blood .
When does the Commissioner think this recommendation is going to be adopted by the Council , and how did the discussion go at the Council 's meeting in November when , according to reports , this question was discussed ?
I also wonder whether the Commission has any estimate of how much risk blood has been found on the European market , blood which must now be withdrawn .
Is the Commission convinced that all risk blood has been withdrawn ?
Thank you , Mrs Thors , I am pleased that you support the meeting that is to take place on 15 January under the auspices of the CPMP .
This will be a very valuable workshop that will bring together the experts in the area and will focus particularly on the infectivity distribution , and that will include tissue distribution , between the new variant and classical CJD .
I should also like to say that , yes , there is an amount of risk blood - no question about that .
Our understanding is that it is quite limited .
The Commission is only able to intervene directly for medicinal products that have received a Community marketing authorization through the centralized procedure .
No medicinal products derived from blood or plasma have received such authorization to date .
The situation is different so far as decentralized procedures are concerned .
There we act under Article 12 of 75 / 3 / 90 / EEC , whereby we can propose , via the comitology procedure , a decision to withdraw the marketing authorization and therefore withdraw the product .
With regard to the products you mentioned that are implicated with nvCJD , the CPMP has discussed this and it has recommended that batches of implicated products still on the shelf be withdrawn .
That has happened .
The vehicle is there in the decentralized procedure but as yet no licences have been granted through the centralized procedure .
Question No 48 by Sören Wibe ( H-0964 / 97 )
Subject : Stability Pact budget balance requirement
The Stability Pact contains a requirement that budgets should balance over the economic cycle .
Does this requirement relate to real or nominal balance ?
Has the Commission taken into account the impact on employment , for instance , of the real squeeze on demand which is bound to result from requiring nominal financial balance in the Member States ?
Mr de Silguy , you now have the floor , and may I wish you a happy New Year .
Thank you , Mr President , I take advantage of this opportunity in my turn to express to you and your colleagues , for both yourselves and your families , my best wishes for health , happiness and success .
The Commission thanks Mr Wibe for the opportunity he has given us once again to specify the content and meaning of the Stability Pact .
The Stability Pact , approved by your Parliament , is neither more nor less than the translation of the provisions of the Treaty of the European Union .
It is in a manner of speaking the internal regulations of the euro zone .
Adopted by all the Member States , its aim is to ensure the proper operation of economic and monetary union , by specifying the operational procedures of Article 103 and Article 104c of the Treaty .
I would add that it is also a credibility factor for the euro .
In order to re-establish the margins of budgetary manoeuvre in the Member States , this Pact invites Member States , and I quote : ' to respect the medium-term objective of a budget which is close to being balanced or in surplus . '
The Stability Pact therefore does not make mandatory any extra constraint .
It sets an objective .
This is of course a balanced budget or budget in surplus , in the meaning of the national accounts , that is , a balance expressed as a percentage of GDP , and therefore calculated on the basis of nominal magnitudes .
This objective was accepted by the Heads of State and Government for the purposes of , I quote ' reinforcing the conditions favourable to sustained growth in production and employment . '
Indeed , the search for medium-term national budgetary balance can only have positive consequences for employment .
Only healthy budget situations are of such a nature as to promote sustainable growth , and hence the creation of significant employment .
The creation of healthy public finances is a prior condition for benefiting from low interest rates , which favour investment , and hence growth and the creation of employment .
I would add that Europe has got its public finances into better shape in the years after 1993 , and it is beginning to reap the real rewards of that effort .
The figures themselves provide a cold illustration of that reality : in 1996 the deficit was -4.2 % , and growth 1.8 % , while in 1997 the deficit was -2.6 % , and growth 2.6 % .
The forecast for 1998 is deficit of under -2 % - and the deficit is continuing to shrink - and growth of more than 3 % , and it is continuing to increase .
I would add that according to Commission forecasts , Europe will be creating four million jobs in the three years between 1997 and 1999 .
Let me start like everyone else by wishing everyone a happy New Year and thanking the Commissioner for his reply .
I asked this question to find out whether you have discussed this difference between a real deficit and a nominal deficit .
A real deficit is the budget deficit plus the change in the State 's capital position . In other words , if a country has , let us say , a national debt of 150 % of GNP and a two % international inflation , or inflation in the currencies in which the national debt is placed , that means that , even though the budget is balanced , in reality there is a squeeze , a real saving .
That means , Commissioner de Silguy , that if we have a requirement for a nominal budget balance and the countries have a national debt , and we assume that we have inflation which is nominally at 1 % -3 % , the requirements of the stability pact will lead to a real squeeze on demand .
In spite of Commissioner de Silguy 's optimism that this will create employment , do you not agree even so that a real squeeze on demand leads to reduced production and increased unemployment ?
No , I do not think so .
I believe the experience of these last ten or fifteen years proves the contrary .
When the public deficit reaches excessively high levels - and above 3 % it is excessive - we witness firstly a significant increase in the level of debt , and secondly a rise in interest rates .
I shall take a clear and simple example .
When we note that some eighteen months or one year ago in Europe , 50 % of household savings was being used to finance public deficits , you have to come to the conclusion that savings would be better employed in financing productive investment .
Consequently , the reduction of public deficits must mean that savings are released for productive investment , and that internal demand will benefit by this , in terms of either investment or consumption , and at the very least in the purchase of semi-durable goods .
Mr President , I would like to return to the issue of employment since I think it is a fact that the policies are deflationary , and we should take heed of the United States which is talking of the danger - not of inflation or overheating - but of the freezing of the economy , and I do not know where EMU is taking us in today 's conditions .
However , on the subject of employment , I would like to say that here in Strasbourg , New Year 's Eve was celebrated with deeds of desperation by tens of hundreds of young people .
And today in Greece the main news item is the suicide of someone , 60 years old , who left a note which said " I am committing suicide because I am unemployed ' .
And from this standpoint I would like to ask : within the framework of this explosion of new data on unemployment in Germany , of suicides , of the aggressive behaviour of young people who are in despair , are there any new deliberations in the Commission ?
I am convinced that the euro will create an economic framework which will generate more growth and hence more employment in Europe .
I am furthermore perfectly aware that the euro will not solve the problem of unemployment , and that this means we have to attack its deep roots , which arise from a whole series of reasons and causes with which you are familiar .
In the final analysis , 1997 enabled us to make a breakthrough , at least at the conceptual level .
The November European Council in Luxembourg set up a new method .
I believe that this method , which is target-based , is a method based on objectives , and one that we can place our hopes in .
We shall be jointly fixing a number of concrete objectives at the European level , for example that within five years , there should not be any young person who , after six months of leaving a university or school system , is out of a job .
That is an objective fixed at the Community level .
Then , each of the Member States should , in the light of its own special features , traditions and rules , implement and propose plans for how to reach this objective and then , once a year , at head of state and government level , an assessment should be made , and multilateral supervision be exercised .
At this stage , the governments will have to answer for their actions before public opinion , before their partners , to see whether or not they have reached their objectives .
Therefore , I believe it is necessary to attack the problem of unemployment by in-depth reforms , which are not directed against the employees , but carried out along with them .
For this reason , social dialogue is an important factor in the long-term success of the fight against unemployment .
Commissioner , do you consider that the ASEAN crisis will affect the budget balancing process ?
Question No 49 by Tommy Waidelich ( H-0968 / 97 )
Subject : EMU
It was decided at the most recent summit meeting in Luxembourg that Member States not participating in the third stage of EMU will be able to take part in meetings of the Euro-X committee ( Eurocouncil ) , except when issues relating directly to the euro are being discussed .
Will the Commission explain what sort of issues are meant ?
The Eurocouncil was effectively set up by Heads of State and Government at the European Council in Luxembourg last December .
Ministers of states participating in the euro zone can meet among themselves in an informal manner to discuss questions relating to the specific responsibilities which they share in the field of the single currency .
These are questions relating to the common management of the single currency on a basis of solidarity , provided they involve only the euro states .
Examples would be the euro exchange rate , dissuasive aspects ( that is to say , sanctions under the Stability Pact ) , or the preparation for readjustments within the new European monetary system .
But these are only examples .
Additionally , in line with the wish expressed by your Parliament , the Commission will participate in all the meetings of the Eurocouncil and , as the case may be , the European Central Bank may be invited to these meetings .
As the honourable Member has noted , the Heads of State and Government nevertheless specified that ' each time questions of common interest are concerned , they will be discussed by ministers of all the Member States . '
I believe that questions relating to the coordination of economic policy , questions relating to the major orientations of economic policy , should be discussed by the fifteen Member States .
The same applies to everything relating to the single market , tax harmonization or social problems .
Furthermore - and this is essential - the European Council drew attention to the fact that the Ecofin Council , the Council of the finance ministers of the fifteen Member States , unlike the Eurocouncil , is the only body with the authority to take decisions according to the rules and procedures laid down under theTreaty .
The central role which the Ecofin Council is called on to play - at the express request of the European Council , with the support of the Commission and on the Commission 's proposal - this role is the consecration of the unity and cohesion of the Community in the economic field .
I would like to thank you for your reply .
I shall do no less than everyone else and also wish everyone a happy New Year , not least the Commissioner .
We all have an exciting year ahead of us , now that we are going to launch the euro , and the Commissioner is going to be very much involved in that .
I am one of those Swedish parliamentarians who are very positive about this event , that we are now getting a euro , and can have the chance to prevent currency speculation , and through that actually get more independence for countries to conduct an economic policy under the protection of the euro .
In the reply we also found out that a lot will depend on informal meetings in the so-called Eurocouncil .
That means , if I understand correctly , that there are no formal discussions about majority decisions and such .
The Commissioner could confirm whether that is the case .
I would just like this Eurocouncil to develop into a forum where there could be a more political counterbalance against the European Central Bank , more democratic control , and also a coordination of economic policy .
Thank you for your good wishes , which I also accept on behalf of the success of the launch of the euro .
What I can assure you is that we are sparing no effort at present to ensure the success of this operation .
Yes , the Eurocouncil is a useful body , insofar as we can never talk together enough .
We have a common monetary policy , a federal policy ( let us use the right words ) and faced with that , we have national economic policy which remains subject to national competency .
It is therefore necessary to reinforce our coordination and common action .
Hence the interest of ensuring more contacts between finance ministers .
However , all that does not mean that we should overturn the balance of the Treaty .
I believe that the Eurocouncil will be useful for awareness-raising and analysis purposes , but we shall have to be very careful ( and the Commission will itself be careful with regard to its own concerns ) that all the powers laid down in the Treaty , under the conditions set out in the Treaty - that is , Commission proposal , advice from the European Council , Council decision - that these powers should be exercised within the bodies laid down for that purpose by the Treaty , that is to say , the Ecofin Council .
I also join in the goodwill wishes for the New Year expressed by previous speakers .
Like Mr Waidelich , I am among those in Sweden who are very positive about the introduction of the euro and hope that all of this very difficult process will go well .
When this Eurocouncil is formed , it is natural that it is the countries participating in EMU which also participate in this council and in the informal meetings .
However , those countries which have decided to remain outside could still have an interest in being informed about what is happening and the Eurocouncil 's meetings .
Are there any thoughts about how the few countries which remain outside EMU , when it is implemented , are going to be kept informed ?
Firstly , Mr Andersson , since you are a euro supporter from a country which has expressed a desire , at present , not to be a part of the euro , allow me to give you two arguments and two avenues of reflection which might well be usefully pursued in your country .
Do you reasonably believe that a country which is not part of the euro could conduct monetary policy which is totally independent of the euro zone , which by definition will be something extremely powerful ?
Personally I do not believe that there can be any question on this point , because it means that , as part of the euro , one is obliged to follow monetary policy , but without having taken part in its definition .
The second area for reflection is enterprise .
Even if the national administrations of countries outside the euro allow them to work in euros , will they nevertheless not have to bear extra costs ?
Indeed , in one way or another somebody will have to bear the costs of the foreign exchange risk between any euro and non-euro currency .
This foreign exchange risk will disappear for countries within the euro , and hence ( and this applies to both banks and businesses ) they will no longer need to invoice for that .
The problem , it appears to me , remains wholly outstanding for the non-euro countries .
However , Mr Andersson , these are just two ideas or two avenues of reflection which , in my view , would merit further examination .
To give a precise answer to your question , I would say that while this organ is clearly informal , it is nevertheless a fact that its work must be transparent .
The presence of the Commission and the fact that the decision-making body will be the Ecofin Council , provide every guarantee that information will be given in a transparent manner in all the European countries , whether or not they have joined up to the euro .
Nobody can prevent the euro countries discussing things among themselves . But even so , the interest of this European Council resolution is that the discussion is kept within the framework of a procedure and within a system which make it possible both to ensure transparency and to guarantee the unity of the European Union
Question No 50 by Jan Andersson ( H-0970 / 97 )
Subject : Prospects for establishing more criteria for economic and monetary cooperation
At present , economic and monetary cooperation is entirely geared towards achieving price stability .
However , many ideas concerning the possibility of introducing other criteria have been put forward during the debate on the future development of EMU .
One such criterion under discussion , and one which deserves serious consideration , is growth .
What prospects does the Commission see for making growth a criterion for economic and monetary cooperation ?
Mr Andersson 's question provides an opportunity to dissipate misconceptions regarding criteria , means and objectives , which must be regarded as different concepts .
Indeed , there are criteria , for the achievement and proper operation of economic and monetary union .
And there are objectives and means , for the coordination of economic policy .
The criteria for passing into economic and monetary union are defined in Article 109j of the Treaty of the European Union .
I would remind you that those criteria must enable the Commission and the Council to check whether , and I quote : ' a high degree of sustainable convergence has been achieved between the various Member States ' .
Among these criteria is included , I quote : ' the achievement of a high degree of price stability . '
This is also the principal mission assigned to the European system of central banks .
This is Article 105 of the Treaty , and this article lays down , and I quote : ' the principal objective of the European system of central banks is to maintain price stability .
Without prejudice to the objective of price stability , the European system of central banks provides support to the general and economic policies of the Community , with a view to contributing to the achievement of the objective of the Community , as defined in Article 2 . '
Well , what does Article 2 say ?
' Among such objectives ' , and I am still quoting , ' are sustainable and noninflationary growth . '
Growth cannot be decreed .
It is the result of economic policy , and is necessary if there is to be substantial job creation .
Employment policy is furthermore the priority policy of the European Union .
However , price stability is essential to ensure the sustainable nature of growth , and hence a high level of social protection .
The best proof of that is the return to growth in Europe , which has gone hand in hand with the reduction of inflation .
I remind you that in 1996 , we had 2.6 % inflation and a growth rate of 1.8 % .
In 1997 , inflation fell to 2.1 % , the growth rate rose to 2.6 % , and inflation should broadly remain stable in 1998 , with growth rising to 3 % .
The social partners have fully understood this strategy and they support it ; witness their repeated joint statements , in particular those that they issued at the last European Council .
It is therefore not envisaged , under such conditions , that these very satisfactory criteria should be modified .
Only sustained growth and controlled inflation will provide an appropriate framework for job creation , notwithstanding that the fight against unemployment requires the introduction of other measures of a more fundamental , I might say more structural , nature .
This is the way opened by the European Council in Luxembourg in November , and which I mentioned earlier in response to a previous question .
Let me first comment on what the Commissioner said in connection with my previous speech , namely that countries outside EMU cannot conduct an independent monetary policy . I share that view .
It is a fallacy to believe that you can conduct an independent monetary policy outside .
I also share the view that companies in countries which are outside EMU are , of course , dependent on what happens within the euro zone .
There is , of course , still criticism of EMU , and it has weak popular support in Europe .
That cannot be ignored .
One of the reasons for this is that at the same time as EMU is to be implemented our unemployment is much too high .
You cannot ignore the fact that a role may have been played by the fact that there has been an overriding goal of creating price stability which has been placed above all other goals .
I would like there to be more balance between price stability and growth .
I am not against price stability - on the contrary .
But the balance between growth targets and price stability targets should be better .
Very quickly , my answer is that as far as I am concerned , the convergence criteria or stability criteria are not obstacles to growth .
On the contrary , they are so many supports for and means to growth , an economic growth we wish to be rich in job-creation opportunities .
Public opinion in Europe will not accept the new process , the new events , if it is not explained to them .
I believe that a very substantial explanation effort must be planned .
Secondly , there must be reassurance . For that reason it is essential that the fight against unemployment , which has become a priority within the European Council , within the Council of Ministers , should be given content as a policy and put into actual practice .
This is what the European Council in Luxembourg committed itself to in November .
Now the framework must be fleshed out .
I think a promising avenue has opened up .
It reflects the approach which was successfully used for economic and monetary union , an objective-based approach .
We need to persevere down this road .
Unlike the previous questioners , I belong to the critical part of the Swedish representation in Parliament as far as EMU is concerned .
I ask why people cannot imagine developing criteria other than price stability . Employment has not been mentioned at all , while growth has been mentioned .
The US Fed has all of these three criteria in its definition of what the Fed should be concerned with .
The other week I took part in a hearing in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , of which I am a member .
It was a very interesting hearing in which precisely these questions were raised by the participating experts on the lack of balance in the European Central Bank - in other words , that price stability is the only thing that counts .
The question which then also arose was the lack of democracy when we were not really sure who is in charge of the ECB .
My question to you would be : can you say whether it is Parliament or the Council or someone else who is in charge of the ECB ?
I will reply very quickly , Mr President , because I believe you are pressed for time , and we have overrun the time allocated to us .
It was no surprise to me to hear what Mr Lindqvist said .
I believe he is ferociously opposed to the euro , as he has every right to be .
Under these conditions , you can understand that I cannot share his analysis .
I wish only to note - as he cited the example of the United States - that the United States had set themselves the target of a balanced budget for the beginning of the next decade , and that from this year on they will be in equilibrium and probably in a budget surplus .
This is another example which tends to show that there is no incompatibility between a balanced budget , growth and job creation .
A second comment relates to the European Central Bank .
You will , I imagine , be putting questions to the future directors of the European Central Bank at your leisure , as I know you will be auditioning them before they are formally appointed by the European Council .
I think this would be a good opportunity for them to explain to you how they expect to conduct their monetary policy . But as things stand , I believe that the fight against inflation is a prior condition of growth .
I agree with the Commissioner that good public finances and low interest rates are good for growth .
I also believe that through currency stability the euro is good for growth and employment in the EU , particularly in the euro countries .
However , I also believe people may need to consider other possibilities .
I believe that a growth target , such as the Federal Reserve has in the United States , could be a way to proceed .
I wonder whether I have interpreted the Commissioner correctly , and would like to ask the following : is it formally possible to add a growth criterion later if the heads of government are agreed on it ?
Personally , I do not believe it is possible , in the medium or long-term , to contrast the policy of the Federal Bank in the United States with the policy of the Bundesbank in Germany .
If you look at the figures over a period of 10 , 15 or 20 years , you will see that in the final analysis their results are not very different , even if at certain times differences in appreciation may effectively appear .
Secondly , growth cannot be a criterion in the meaning of the Treaty , because once again growth cannot be imposed by decree .
Growth is the consequence of good economic policy .
What we can say is that growth is an aim we pursue in conducting our economic policies , going hand in hand , at the heart of these policies , with employment .
Thank you , Mr de Silguy .
Since the allotted time for this series of questions has now expired , Questions Nos 51 to 55 will be dealt with in writing .
I should like to remind the honourable Member of the Council 's decision of 24 November 1997 .
It was decided then that the Commission 's proposals on music promotion should be made within the context of the decision about the future of cultural action in Europe , which was adopted on 22 September 1997 , and envisages the possibility of a single instrument for culture .
Ever since culture was included in Article 128 , some years ago , we have been conducting an experiment in this respect , by means of three programmes : Ariane , Kaleidoscope and Raphael .
However , both Parliament and the Council have decided that this was probably an experimental route and that in the future it will be better to have an overall framework - a single framework for dealing with all cultural matters .
Therefore , the proposals which the Commission is due to present shortly , which will pay special attention to music , will combine the various cultural and artistic sectors within this single framework , in accordance with the wishes of Parliament and the Council .
As for employment within the cultural sphere , I would remind you that within the next few weeks the Commission will be presenting a Green Paper on culture , cultural industries and employment , which will refer specifically to music .
The study is already at a very advanced stage , although it is not yet finished . However , I want to reassure Mrs Izquierdo Rojo that music will be given special attention .
As regards Community assistance for music during the past few years , the honourable Member is welcome to consult the list which the Commission distributed for information purposes on the occasion of the European Parliament 's hearing on that subject on 18 June .
I should also like to remind you that the Commission thinks cooperative music projects can and should be assisted , but this should depend on how far they meet the criteria of the existing Community programmes and initiatives .
For 1998 , these consist of the Kaleidoscope programme and the call for proposals due to be published within the next few days from line B3-2003 , entitled " Community aid for cultural development projects ' .
Bearing in mind also that the programmes and initiatives I have referred to are open to a wide variety of artistic disciplines , and that the cultural quality of the projects is one of the selection criteria , you will understand that the Commission is not able at this time to predict the amount of financial assistance which can be granted to this sector in 1998 .
However , the most important thing I want to remind you of , is that direct aid to Member States ' orchestras experiencing financial difficulties is a matter for the Member States , as Mrs Izquierdo Rojo knows very well .
The Member States are responsible for determining priorities for public assistance for musical institutions , while Community action is directed towards promoting cooperation between Member States , in accordance with Article 128 of the Treaty , and the principle of subsidiarity .
Nevertheless , I want to mention the Community aid given to orchestras such as , for example , the European Youth Orchestra and the ' Orquestra Barroca ' , through the Kaleidoscope programme .
In other words , we do grant aid to those programmes and orchestras which involve all the different Member States .
What is more , I personally think this type of aid should be boosted .
I think the existence of this sort of orchestra , involving representatives of all the Member States , is highly symbolic .
In the future , our thinking on music will become part of the framework programme on European cultural policy .
I am taking this opportunity to draw special attention to this matter , because I think we must adopt a new approach , although what we have done so far will serve as a reference .
We need to know exactly what we want to do with culture within the Community .
That question has not yet been answered clearly , and there are still many uncertainties . We need a lot more debate , because some Member States think the Community 's involvement in this area should be minimal .
Other Member States have problems of a constitutional nature , by which their very constitution makes it difficult for their culture to be dealt with on a Community basis .
For that reason , I think both Parliament and the Council have shown very good judgement . The Commission is convinced too , and we are going to prepare that great framework programme , that great cultural programme , right away .
That is where music comes in .
To that effect , we are going to hold a forum on 29 and 30 September , at which Parliament will be represented to a very significant extent .
Every two or three weeks I meet a group of representatives from the world of music , and from other cultural spheres .
For example , Mr Gutiérrez Aragón is one of the many people who have attended these meetings .
I have met about a dozen people each time , representing all the different countries .
The main purpose is to receive encouragement , and to find out what the people of Europe think can be done in the cultural sphere .
The result of these meetings will allow us to prepare the document the Council has asked us for , and which Parliament also wants , which we must present before 1 May .
Therefore , we have a lot of work to do before then , and you can of course rest assured , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , that we are going to pay a great deal of attention to what cultural activity means - including , obviously , the world of music - and to what extent it can contribute to job creation .
I want to thank the Commissioner for his long answer , which was so positive and encouraging .
I would be even more reassured if , in view of the inadequacy of the policy implemented so far , we could pay special attention to the innovative aspects . Subsidiarity must not be a hindrance in the next stage .
I would like to ask whether , in order to reach those prestigious orchestras which have not yet received sufficient assistance , you envisage setting up agreements with different bodies to make sure that subsidiarity itself does not prevent us from attaining that objective , through lack of musical culture . The problem is that what we have done so far is no good , because it has not managed to promote music .
Exactly - I think we have to try those agreements .
What I would like to ask of Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , whose sensitivity on these matters is well known , is that she should contribute any ideas she may have on the subject , since now is the time to try to put them into effect .
We are going to start writing the draft on 1 February , so until then we are keen to hear suggestions , especially about our planned forum .
We do not want the Commission to succumb to the temptation of locking itself away in an office to prepare this draft .
We do not want it done like that .
That is not the right way to work on anything , but especially not on culture .
Therefore , we want to talk to actors , creative people , poets , artists , parliamentarians and governments , so that we can get ideas from them all , within the context of that forum .
You can also rest assured that before the formal presentation on 1 May , I will try to have a meeting with the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , so that we can exchange views on the matter .
I think the question you have raised is important , and I would like to deal with it specifically and give precise solutions once we have sketched out the framework programme , which will be finally presented on 1 May .
Commissioner , I would particularly like to thank you for your reply to Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's question .
But I would like to ask two supplementary questions .
Since I have been a Member of this Parliament , there has only been one notable success in the field of music .
That was the European Year of Music , which took place following an initiative by Mr Hahn .
It was a great success .
Have you used that to prepare plans in readiness for 1 May ?
My second point is this : I am deeply concerned about the decline in our folk music .
Folk music is undeniably gradually being killed off by the various mass media .
Will you be taking these very important points into account in your programme , and will you be promoting folk instruments by supporting this music ?
This is very important for the future !
Mr von Habsburg , the folk music you mention is something I particularly care about .
In fact , I think Europe 's rich diversity is one of our most characteristic features .
What is Europe , after all ? What is European unity ?
It is the sum total of the diversity of its different peoples , traditions , life-styles and customs .
That is the big difference between Europe and that melting pot , the United States .
The basic difference is that we must safeguard our rich diversity .
Music and popular songs are , of course , part of that diversity and must be safeguarded .
As for the European Year of Music , I remember when that was launched . I was here at the time , but in a different capacity - in the Council of Europe .
It was a great success , for the very reason that it did not just involve highbrow culture , but tried to promote respect for that cultural diversity .
We will bear that in mind , and as regards the programme we are going to present on 1 May , I have taken note of the wish expressed here , which I absolutely agree with .
Question No 57 by Hugh McMahon ( H-1001 / 97 )
Subject : Transmission of major sporting events by terrestrial television in the EU
Can the Commission inform Parliament of any progress made in discussions with Member States with a view to drawing up a list of major national and international sporting events , such as the Five Nations Rugby , the Open Golf and Wimbledon , which remain available to all EU citizens ?
In the codecision procedure for the amendment of the " Television without frontiers ' directive , Parliament approved an amendment aimed at guaranteeing public access to specific sporting events of special importance through open-access television throughout the whole European Union .
I had not included that in the draft directive .
I presented a draft directive on 22 March 1995 , and did not include a proposal on access to specific sporting events .
Nevertheless , when I heard Parliament 's idea of including the possibility of guaranteeing public access to such events , I thought it was interesting , and made a note of it immediately .
Because agreement was not reached following the second reading , there was a conciliation phase , during which it was established - and I agreed - that it was not possible to obtain what could be termed a harmonized list of major events at Community level .
It was important to acknowledge in some way the opinion of those in favour of open-access retransmissions of events , but some of us ( myself included ) thought it was impossible to have a harmonized list of events at Community level .
For that reason , the new Directive contains provisions to guarantee that Member States can adopt measures to protect the right to information , and ensure wide public access to television coverage of national or non-national events of major importance to society .
The examples we usually give are the Olympic Games and , in football , the World Cup and the European Championship .
These provisions appear in a new article of the Directive - Article 3a .
They consist of a system known as mutual recognition , which is designed to prevent evasion of national measures to guarantee access to television repeats of important events .
The system comprises three phases :
Firstly , Member States can draw up a list of major events and adopt measures to ensure that large sections of the public are not prevented from following these events , either directly or as repeats , on open-access television .
Secondly , the Commission has to be informed of these measures .
The Commission will check that they are in keeping with Community law , and seek the opinion of a committee set up under this Directive , known as the Contact Committee , made up of Member States ' representatives .
As long as they are found to be compatible with Community law , every set of national measures has to be communicated to all the other Member States and published in the Official Journal .
Thirdly , Member States must ensure that the television broadcasting organizations under their jurisdiction comply with the lists of events drawn up by other Member States in accordance with this procedure .
Lastly , I want to remind you that the new Directive was published and came into force on 30 July 1997 , and Member States have until 31 December 1998 to incorporate it into their respective national arrangements .
In the Contact Committee , there has been much discussion about the application of Article 3a , and so far the Commission has not received any official notification from the Member States .
Nevertheless , the Commission is aware that the vast majority of Member States - if not all of them - have adopted or plan to adopt measures to guarantee wide public access to television coverage of major events , and we hope to receive the relevant notifications during 1998 .
To conclude , I will give Mr McMahon an answer to his very specific question .
As far as the three events you mention are concerned , the United Kingdom will need to propose them on the list it presents to the Commission , and the Commission will have to judge whether they are indeed major sporting events .
That , therefore , is the method set out in the Directive . It is not , I repeat , a harmonization - a single list - but depends on the lists provided by the Member States , and the fact that each Member State must accept the others ' lists , on the principle of mutual recognition .
Finally , the Commission must give its approval and make sure Community law is not contravened .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his very full explanation - 6 minutes 47 seconds worth of an answer ; a very full and comprehensive answer .
What is obvious from his answer and , perhaps should be underlined , is that no Member State has sent him any information .
Is he going to put some pressure on Member States to give him information , to give him a list ?
How often does he envisage this committee meeting and would he invoke the infringement procedure if Member States do not give him a list ?
Mr McMahon , a Member State does not have to present a list and may choose not to .
That is its own decision .
If a Member State presents a list that is , for example , over the top , because of the number of events included , or their nature ( all football matches , for example ) then obviously the Commission would not accept that .
However , there is nothing to prevent a Member State from deciding it does not want to put any event on the list .
That is perfectly acceptable .
Therefore , I am not going to do anything .
All I am going to do is wait for them to send me the list .
I am sure that nearly all the Member States are going to do so .
But it is possible that some may not . I know of at least one Member State which so far has no intention of presenting a list ( which , I would point out , is not the Member State with which I am most familiar ) - and that is entirely possible .
As for the Contact Committee , we thought it was a good idea for the Commission to be able to consult , rather than act in isolation .
Whom should we consult ?
A contact committee was the obvious answer .
In the end , however , it will be the Commission which adopts the decision .
And obviously , if a Member State fails to respect the Commission 's decision , the appropriate steps will be taken .
I have a very brief question .
I would like to know where the Ryder Cup fits into this .
The Ryder Cup which , as you know , was held in Spain for the very first time recently , is probably the only competition where almost the entire population of Europe actually cheers for Europe .
You might cheer for England , France , Germany or whoever , in other competitions , but the whole of Europe taking on the United States at golf actually brings the people of Europe together on that occasion for two or three days , where everyone is supporting the European team .
Yet in the United Kingdom it was on satellite television , where the majority of people could not even watch it .
So where does the Ryder Cup fit in to this particular scenario ?
Mr Cunningham , I may have my own opinion about what you are asking - I think it is an important event - but at the moment I would prefer not to answer you in a personal capacity .
At the moment , we have to wait for the various Member States to send in their lists .
Once the lists have arrived , the Commission will consult the Contact Committee , and having received their reply and taken account of it , will adopt a decision .
It is a question of restrictive criteria , but that does not mean that important events will not be included .
And something else I think is important is that an event which is important in one country may not be so in another .
Think of the Derby for instance .
Obviously , that is a very important event in the United Kingdom , but it is probably of less interest in Spain or Greece .
Well , the criterion to be used is that each Member State decides which are its important events , and the others respect that decision - hence the mutual recognition .
Question No 58 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-1009 / 97 )
Subject : Commission study on children and advertising
This is the third time I have asked Commissioner Oreja a question about the study , repeatedly promised by the Commission , on the effects of advertising on minors .
Other independent studies have shown that children cannot be classified as consumers , on the grounds that they are unable , until the age of 12 on average , to distinguish an advertising message from objective information .
Can the Commissioner say what stage the Commission 's study has reached ?
When will he be able to report , even informally , to the Committee on Culture , for example ?
I think I can give Mrs Ahlqvist a brief reply .
It is not the first time this question has been raised , and I know how concerned Mrs Ahlqvist is about this matter .
I should like to remind her that , in response to a petition from a delegation in the Council during the revision procedure for the " Television without frontiers ' Directive , the Commission promised to carry out a study on the effect of television advertising and telesales on children , with a view to re-examining this question at the next revision of the Directive .
I want to repeat what I said to Mrs Ahlqvist last time .
I fully appreciate her concern , which I share .
However , I am subject to certain limitations , and the Commission has undertaken to do this within a given timescale .
That is , the Commission has to carry out this revision by 31 December 2000 at the latest .
It has to produce a report on how the Directive is being implemented , which will include appropriate proposals for adjustment , if necessary .
So , that is what we have promised to do .
The report will also be presented to Parliament , of course .
Unfortunately , the study cannot be started in 1998 ( although that is what I would have preferred ) because the budgetary authority ( and Mrs Ahlqvist knows what I mean by that ) has cut the appropriations proposed by the Commission for this sort of study .
At the moment , the Commission has another priority , which I am sure is also of concern to Mrs Ahlqvist .
It is an investigation into the anti-violence chip , which is mentioned specifically in Article 22 of the new Directive .
We had to choose , and since our priority is the chip programme , the Commission will not be able to start the study in question until the beginning of 1999 .
Therefore , I would hope to have results during that year , or very early in 2000 at the latest . I repeat what I said last time : I want this to be done before the deadline , if possible , preferably by the date I have mentioned .
Therefore , we should complete this study in time to include it in the application report mentioned in Article 26 .
If the situation were to change ( with regard to the Notenboom procedure , for example ) I can assure the honourable Member that we would take the appropriate steps to try to relaunch the study .
As I said , I fully share the honourable Member 's concern .
I shall be very brief .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
I know the Commissioner is in favour of carrying out this study .
I have never before received an answer which is so definite about the timing as that it will be done in 1999 .
I am therefore grateful for the reply .
However , in Sweden there is growing irritation about and criticism of children 's advertising .
People are calling for boycotts and think that something must be done .
Now I have got this answer about the year 1999 .
Although it is negative , it is at least clearer than the two previous answers , so I thank the Commissioner for that .
Question No 59 by Maj Theorin ( H-0965 / 97 )
Subject : The situation in Burma
The situation in Burma is very serious .
In 1990 , the NLD ( National League for Democracy ) won the free parliamentary elections and over 80 % of the seats contested . The result of those elections has not been respected .
The military regime is still holding on to power , thanks to the state of emergency .
The NLD held its first officially authorized congress on 27 September 1997 , shortly after which a large number of the delegates were detained by the SLORC military dictatorship .
What steps is the Commission prepared to take to support the opposition 's struggle for democracy in Burma ?
As regards the European Union 's political position with respect to the Burma question , the first thing I want to assure you is that the common position adopted in October 1996 has been renewed .
In that sense , the European Union is maintaining exactly the same position with regard to what has happened in that country .
Secondly , we have continued to exclude Burma from the benefits of the system of generalized preferences , and are still doing so . As Parliament knows , that was a Commission initiative .
Thirdly , in November the Commission presented the Council with a proposal to postpone the high-level meeting with ASEAN , because ASEAN was insisting that Burma should be there .
The European Union did not accept that , and the meeting was postponed .
I think it is an extremely positive step for us to refuse to continue to work with ASEAN until Burma 's position within that group is clarified .
With regard specifically to human rights and democracy , the Commission has set up a Europe-Burma office in Brussels , with the aim of raising public awareness about what is happening in that country . Another aim is to train future leaders , if possible , and to help the Burmese opposition .
Overall , the funding is approximately ECU 950 , 000 .
Let us hope this office can provide permanent proof that the European Union is firmly committed to Burma , and the situation there .
I am grateful for this clear position from the Commission . We do not have a difference of opinion .
We do not think Burma fulfils the criteria which must exist in order to be able to have economic and trade relations and to have customs privileges for this country .
This is very important since there are European companies , probably also in my own country , which are currently considering whether to start investing in Burma , which would be very serious if it happened .
In the US there has been a ban on new investments since May 1997 because the situation in Burma has not changed .
The EU now has access to the legal framework and the possibility of using economic pressure .
It is therefore important that the EU now leads the way and shows the political will .
It is good that the Commission is entirely in agreement with me that we cannot of course allow European companies to profit from the oppression to which the Burmese State now subjects its inhabitants .
As Mrs Theorin knows very well , the Commission has taken a very firm and clear measure regarding the Burmese Government , which I think Parliament appreciates .
In a globalized economy , we do not have the power to determine where a private company should make an investment . In any case , in view of the situation in south-east Asia , I think it is a bit risky to talk of European investments at the moment .
Not because of the situation in Burma , but because of the general market situation in south-east Asia at the moment .
I should like to ask the Commissioner whether he accepts the legitimacy of the 1990 elections in Burma in which the NLD led by Aung San Suu Kyi were the clear and legitimate winners .
If that is the case , would he agree with me that any new elections likely to be convened by the military junta in Burma would not be accepted as legitimate and therefore would never be accepted as capable of overriding the 1990 results ?
The answer is obvious .
Any elections which fail to be free , democratic , transparent and open to international observation will never be recognized , either in Burma or in any other country .
The Commission shares Parliament 's concern over the human rights situation in Colombia .
I think there is widespread recognition of the attitude taken towards this issue by the Commission and the European Union in general .
As for the UN Human Rights Office in Bogotá , Colombia at the moment , I should say that the very existence of that office is due to the intervention of the European Union , not just because of the political support we have given , but also because of financial support . Bear in mind that because of the difficulties the United Nations is experiencing , we decided to extend Community funding for the coming year , to allow that Office and Commissioner Mazarrosa to continue working .
As regards the paramilitary groups , especially the so-called Convivir cooperatives , I myself , at a public press conference during my latest official visit to Colombia , made clear what the European Union 's position is .
We do not consider any paramilitary activities ( specifically including this type of cooperative ) to form part of the normal responsibility of a state to guarantee a normal situation , in whichever country .
We think the main thing is to promote peace and peace negotiations , between now and the general elections in May . As I had the chance to say in Colombia , we think that no matter who wins in May , the new government 's main political objective must be to negotiate and seek for peace , in a country which is suffering the ill effects not just of drug trafficking , but also of the paramilitary guerilla warfare - which is also partly responsible - and of the internal political situation itself .
It is a very complex and difficult situation , in which I think the European Union can do quite a lot to help the peace process and internal negotiations .
Thank you for your reply .
I agree that the situation in the country is , to say the least , difficult .
So I cannot say that I was particularly pleased to hear that we have an office in the country .
I have also asked a question about a specific person .
I wonder whether I would have an answer to that question .
I also intend to return to this question .
It should come as no surprise to you that the European Union should be the main provider of finance , and should have been responsible for setting up a Human Rights Office in Bogotá - the first of its kind in Latin America .
It was a decision made by the Human Rights Committee in Geneva , together with Mrs Robinson , the new UN High Commissioner for Human Rights , who is working with us extremely well .
I cannot remember the address now , but it is a well-known public fact that that Office has been in existence for a year .
In autumn 1997 I had cause to criticize a Parliamentary resolution which gave onesided praise to the peace initiative of the Columbian Government without taking a position on the fact that at the same time the Government in Columbia was also bombing civilian targets .
We have now had another reminder of the Columbian Government 's duplicity through its arming and use of these paramilitary groups .
It therefore means a lot to be able to interpret the Commission 's answer as meaning that it does not share the former Parliamentary majority 's illusions and its somewhat naive view of the Columbian Government , but has a more critical attitude towards that Government .
We can be grateful for that .
No , no , my position is still the same .
I agree with that European Parliamentary resolution .
In Colombia , which is a country I know well and where we are doing a lot of work in the area of human rights , those rights have been violated by the Government .
I said as much in Bogotá .
They have been violated by the military , but they have also been violated by the guerillas .
In the situation in Colombia , nobody is entirely blameless .
Everybody is responsible .
Yes , I realize you do not like that answer , but they are all responsible for the situation .
I agree with the Commissioner that we are all responsible for our own actions , but he seems to have made general statements of concern about human rights in Colombia without responding to any of the specific questions put to him .
I asked you , Commissioner , what you were going to do in terms of direct discussions on the issue of the formation of armed groups to combat the paramilitaries .
I asked if you would seek to increase funding directly to Colombian human rights organizations .
You did not respond to either .
Frankly , your words about support for the UN Office would be a little better received if , during one of your press conferences in Colombia , you had not said that you believed that the Convivir could be steadied and that they could continue to exist on some terms .
Either the report I have read is wrong or you have gone directly against what the person who runs that UN Office is actually recommending , and we finance him .
Please give us some specific answers now and not just general areas of concern .
We are all responsible for our own actions .
I will be very brief , Mr Howitt , because I am not sure whether I have not understood you , or whether you do not wish to understand me .
The one thing I will not do is present a programme to combat the paramilitaries by means of NGOs .
I do not know if I have understood you correctly .
I am not sure if you know what a Colombian paramilitary is .
I get the impression you do not know .
In my opinion , to imagine that it is possible to combat paramilitaries or the paramilitary phenomenon - in Colombia , Algeria or anywhere else - by financing or not financing NGOs , reveals a naivety beyond all political discussion .
I am sorry to have to put it so bluntly .
Secondly , I do not believe I attacked the Human Rights Office in any way at all .
There must have been a misunderstanding here . On the contrary ; we are funding it .
Therefore , I would ask you all to follow very closely the policy we are operating towards Colombia , and the progress we are making in a difficult situation .
But please , do not suggest that the Commission should do things that are frankly difficult to accept .
Since the time allocated to questions to the Commission has now expired , Questions Nos 63 to 82 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Emissions from organic compounds
The next item is the report ( A4-0406 / 97 ) by Mr Cabrol , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Directive on limitation of emissions of volatile organic compounds due to the use of organic solvents in certain industrial processes ( COM ( 96 ) 0538 - C4-0139 / 97-96 / 0276 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Cabrol report on the reduction of VOC emissions is a critical document .
The fact is that the present draft directive will impact on many areas and will have far-reaching effects .
The Commission report states that this initiative will apply to some 400 , 000 businesses , including many SMEs , representing a total of 30 branches of industry , and will naturally affect many more consumers .
The cost of this , as we have already heard , will amount to billions of ECU .
The significance and scale of this issue should therefore not be underestimated .
The proposed aim of the directive , namely a two-thirds reduction in VOC emissions , certainly justifies the cost involved .
A reduction of this magnitude over the next few years is a truly ambitious goal .
It is one which deserves our full support and we should not be tempted to soften its impact .
Nevertheless , I would warn against any regulations which overshoot the target in certain areas .
After all , what is the point of imposing stringent limits on ethyl alcohol , a relatively mild surface cleaner , when the use of alternative products , such as non-volatile solvents - which pose a much greater threat to the environment - is left out .
We are all of the opinion that environmental protection should be promoted not primarily through compulsion but rather by incentive .
Let me give you an example from my own country . The switch to low-solvent paints and coatings has meant that solvent consumption in Austria has fallen by about 50 % since 1990 .
I therefore advocate this kind of incentive scheme at European level so that limits can be applied in a more flexible way in these areas .
This week we are discussing employment and job migration .
I believe that we should seek to achieve our environmental objectives while at the same time attempting to promote our environmental policy in a moderate way , so that we can continue to sustain our existence in the years to come .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists I would like to give my support to Mr Cabrol and also give him my thanks for his report on the Commission proposal .
This directive to control the emission of VOCs from industrial installations has the support of my group , and I would like to give my personal thanks to the rapporteur for the hard work that he has undertaken and what he has achieved so far .
It is increasingly clear that VOC emissions have an adverse impact upon human health and the environment in general , whether it is by their contribution to creating photochemical smog , ground-level ozone in our atmosphere or stimulating asthma or even cancer in our people .
We have good reason to seek to reduce and control and even eliminate their emission from the industrial installations in which they are used .
Their use is indeed wide-spread and the activities in which they have a role are many and various , so we have sought to set new , stronger limits on their emission in a whole range of larger industrial installations .
As for their wider role in smaller installations , we hope the Commission will come forward as quickly as possible with a proposal to ensure that new low-solvent paints and coatings are used , and other less harmful substances are introduced .
We clearly recognize the difficulties in some industrial sectors in reducing the use of VOCs or changing to effective alternatives and consequently we have allowed a generous time-limit for compliance , which we believe will give adequate time for the necessary change to take place .
We think that the vote of the Environment Committee fully reflected our views and we will be giving our support to all the amendments passed by that committee , particularly those which clarify the provisions of the directive and reduce the scope for the use of national plans , so making the proposal more European-wide and more single market orientated .
Therefore we are unable to accept the additional amendments tabled by some colleagues to the report in the part-session .
In conclusion we hope that the Council and the Commission will accept our views , incorporate them into the proposal and make them a truly worthy part of the European Union 's effort to protect the environment , and indeed a shining beacon to the whole world .
Mr President , in this " packed ' Chamber , I note on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party that the European jigsaw puzzle of directives which is supposed to improve air quality in Europe is slowly but surely being completed .
The Car Oil programme is at quite an advanced stage .
Last month in Kyoto tough agreements were made .
Today we are talking about the reduction in emissions from organic compounds .
With a jigsaw puzzle , it is important on the one hand that the pieces are all there , and on the other hand , that you have the right pieces .
With respect to these organic compounds this is not quite the case .
What is missing in the puzzle is the piece that regulates paint thinners .
We submitted Amendment No 8 , and I would like to ask the Commissioner whether she might be able to repeat the promise which , to my knowledge , she made in the Council : to come up with a proposal for paint products this year , because these thinners are too harmful to health to be sold any longer .
We must be careful when discussing the directive for organic compounds not to reject existing successful national programmes in advance , as suggested in Amendment No 22 .
In my country , the Netherlands , there is a voluntary agreement with industry for reducing emissions , which is showing good results .
It would be a pity if this House were to reject these kinds of national programmes , when both the Commission and Council have given them their approval .
My group will therefore not support Amendment No 22 .
I ask my colleagues to agree with Amendment No 3 .
Requirements for smaller installations should not be less stringent .
VOC emissions are far too serious in these countries .
I note that with this amendment the European airquality puzzle is nearing its completion .
Mr President , it certainly shows the incompetence of European environmental policy that we are now setting limits for VOC emissions some 20 years after one of our Member States , namely the Federal Republic of Germany , introduced laws to control this very problem .
I have heard a lot today about the problems facing industry .
Many speakers have mentioned the competitive economy .
Why are we not talking about those whose health has been ruined by chemical products ? Indeed , the fact that we are not doing so is equally disgraceful .
I know many people whose lives have been affected by solvents .
Surely it is time for us to create standards which will ensure that fewer people will have their health damaged in the future . After all , we should not forget that costs do not just apply to industry but to our public health service as well , not to mention the many cases of personal suffering and other problems inflicted on those whose health has been impaired in this way .
We are very concerned indeed about the substances being used in the chemical industry and I would ask you , Madam Commissioner , to look into this matter .
Such substances are used a great deal .
We know that they are carcinogenic and we also know that endocrines are involved - and these are quite specific issues which Parliament has also been looking into . It is precisely because of the carcinogenic and oestrogen-like effect of such substances that we must make a start on restricting their use as far as possible and on giving industry incentives to find replacements for them .
This too is a question of competitiveness .
We need to exert pressure for the withdrawal of products which are dangerous and which constitute a threat to health and to the environment .
This would ultimately give us a competitive edge since we would be supplying the market with less dangerous products .
At the moment our primary concern should be to reduce the range of substances used by the chemical industry .
I would ask you , Madam Commissioner , to examine why the Commission is not prepared to follow the European Parliament 's tougher approach and why it continues to hide behind the coat-tails of industry .
Let me close with the plea for an immediate reduction in these toxic substances so that appropriate incentives can be offered to the industrial sector .
We should not forget that the European Union has many citizens whose health has been impaired by chemicals , and our concern for them should be equal to - or even greater than - our concern for the interests of industry .
Mr President , I want to start by congratulating Professor Cabrol on his report .
In his report he has significantly deepened some of the points in the Commission proposal .
Reducing the amount of organic compounds is necessary for two reasons .
Firstly , because these chemicals cause ozone pollution to the earth 's surface , with all the unpleasant consequences for people with bronchial problems .
Secondly , because it has become clear by now that these chemicals are by no means harmless to the people who work with them daily .
Painters , upholsterers , people who work with glue , people who have to clean using acetone are all seriously threatened by these chemicals .
They will have to face psychological illnesses which are often diagnosed too late , and ruin their lives .
These include concentration disorders , insomnia , dizziness , and in the worst case even loss of memory , personality disorders and depression .
These syndromes , which are now known under the name of OPS , organo-psycho syndrome , were for a long time not recognized .
A stop ought to be put to this .
The aim of this draft directive is not to regulate the working conditions within the companies in which these organic compounds are released .
Yet I hope that obligations to reduce them will also make a contribution to combating OPS .
All the same , I would like to call on the Commission to pay attention to this problem as part of EU social policy .
I am less happy with one point in the draft resolution , namely the deletion of implementation of the reduction through national programmes .
The regulation about national plans in Article 5 of the Commission document was by no means worse than the general regulation .
Often national plans are much more effective .
For the rest : excellent advice , which the Council can capitalize on .
Mr President , I am pleased that we have here a proposal which focuses on organic solvents .
These liquid chemicals have a particularly toxic effect on people and the environment .
We should therefore strive to limit their use as much as possible .
For many years , solvents have been suspected of causing brain damage .
As Mr Blokland said , this is seen to a large extent among painters who are in daily contact with these chemicals .
That is where the term ' painter syndrome ' comes from .
This experience should be included in the directive which we are considering today , because public health is not just a leisure concept , but is indeed also a topic for the work environment .
In other legislation the connection between the internal and external environment is recognized , and it is therefore a little mystifying that the Commission does not want to recognize the connection in this text . But hopefully the Commissioner will explain that more fully .
I also see a clear connection with the directive on chemical agents for which Freddy Blak is the rapporteur .
I fully support the amendment which was proposed by Mrs van Putten and adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , which includes health risks from occupational exposure , and also the amendment which clarifies that Member States which are ahead of the Community with regard to the substitution of dangerous organic solvents can maintain tougher restrictions .
It can only be an advantage to have some who lead the way and so gain experience which benefits everyone .
Mr President , I would like to make one or two supplementary points to what has been already said by my colleague Mrs Breyer .
My first point is that the Commission was heavily insistent on the problems of atmospheric pollution and the role of CFCs as the precursors of tropospheric ozone , but as several colleagues have already pointed out , the risks are multiple .
The negative effects of volatile organic compounds are many .
I lay particular stress on the risks at the place of work , but also on diffused risks , particularly the effects on the reproductive system , which have until now been very widely underestimated .
In brief , this directive is coming at the right time .
It is a shame that these proposals should be so weak , but I shall come back to that in a few moments .
Secondly , the rapporteur rightly drew our attention to the fact that 40 % of waste is the result of do-it-yourself - people working on their homes at the weekend .
Perhaps we should envisage a measure which would promote the use of low solvent-content paints , or at least less harmful solvents , involving , for example , the introduction of an eco-tax .
My third comment is that the Commission 's text also raises the question of the costs of the operation , which are enormous .
However , little is said about health expenses .
I would like to give a figure .
On consulting recent literature , I realized that in most European countries , constant franc expenses on health have increased by a factor of 3.5 over 25 years .
This is enormous , because the level of health is by no means clearly better than twenty-five years ago .
Consequently , and here there is no real risk of getting things wrong , we can say that the damage caused by environmental pollution is increasingly having an adverse effect on the health of Europeans . This is ample justification for emergency measures .
I would like to make my last comment in the form of a question to the Commissioner , Mrs Bjerregaard .
It would appear that the Council has already decided on its common position . This is rather surprising , as Parliament is now in the process of a debate .
Is that true ?
If the answer is yes , the present debate would itself be a surprising event .
Mr President , I would also like to thank Mr Cabrol for his excellent work , and I would primarily like to go into an issue a number of my colleagues have already discussed , namely the effects of thinners on employees who work with them .
As far as we know , they are used in approximately twenty economic sectors , including the chemical industry , decorating businesses , the metal industry , printing and allied trades , even food , stimulants , and textile industries .
Exposure to these chemicals can lead to tiredness , nausea , palpitations , and other symptoms .
Long-term exposure can lead to irreversible damage to the nervous system , which can manifest itself as forgetfulness , concentration disorders and even loss of identity - in other words , the organic psychosyndrome , OPS .
In the autumn of 1997 , the Dutch Government took measures to protect employees in some of the sectors where thinners are used .
In other Member States , namely Sweden , Denmark and Finland , clear legislation for the protection of employees also exists .
Since the introduction of this legislation the number of OPS victims has decreased in these countries in particular .
In some countries OPS is recognized as an occupational illness , but in other Member States no attention is given to OPS .
That is why we amended this directive .
In fact , I submitted a number of these amendments myself , and I am delighted that they have been adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
I therefore think that the protection of these OPS victims will have to be incorporated into the Commission 's proposal , which deals with public health , but in which this element does not feature at all .
It is an opportunity that the Commission has to grasp now , in anticipation of what the Commission has yet to do between 1999 and 2003 , a common programme for the illnesses related to pollution , I understand .
I also hope that the Commissioner can respond to our amendments , and I would be grateful if she could give a reply .
Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and especially their rapporteurs , Mr Cabrol and Mr Rübig , for the very thorough work on the preparation of this complicated proposal .
What is said is correct : this is a very important proposal , but it is also a very technical proposal .
The main purpose of the directive is to reduce VOC emissions from a long list of industrial activities in which solvents are used .
The emissions of many of the VOCs , as has also been emphasized in the debate here , are directly harmful to human health and should therefore be reduced as much as is technically possible .
The solvents are used , as we have heard , in paints , for cleaning , in the printing industry and for many other things . In all , 20 sectors are affected .
For most sectors , the requirements consist of emission limits and limits on diffuse emissions .
However , businesses may be exempt from these requirements on condition that they achieve the same reduction in emissions in another way . For example , by replacing products with a high solvent content with products containing low levels of solvents , or none at all .
And the proposal also allows Member States to achieve the same targets by methods which are best suited to their national conditions , and which are set out in a national plan .
The Commission has considered the 32 amendments proposed by the Committee on the Environment , and the 15 new amendments proposed by Parliament .
The result of this was that the Commission is able to accept 11 of these amendments either wholly or partly .
The Commission is able to accept Amendments Nos 4 , 13 , 15 , 17 , 18 , 21 , 25 and 31 . It can accept Amendment No 23 in principle and Amendment No 26 in part .
And , finally , it can partially approve Amendment No 37 ( footnote 1 ) . These amendments improve the text with additional background , sensible and logical additional requirements , the removal of possible misinterpretations , improved transparency and an increased level of protection .
I shall not go into details for every one of these amendments , but I would like to give a reason for our attitude to some of them , and so explain the Commission 's thinking .
The Commission believes that the Member States should have a certain freedom of action with regard to how they achieve the directive 's environmental objectives , which is something several of the speakers here this evening have touched on .
Therefore we cannot support Amendments Nos 6 , 19 and 22 , which completely remove the possibility of making national plans .
However , as Parliament is no doubt aware , the Council is flexible on reducing the scope of the national plans , and so the Commission can continue to work on that basis , and we will of course take it up in the continued procedure .
Amendment No 16 , concerning a duty to replace R40 substances with less harmful substances as soon as possible , is not supported by the Commission because R40 substances are not sufficiently dangerous to require such measures .
The Commission believes that the very strict emission limits which have been set out for these chemicals are a sufficient incentive to seek substitutes for R40 substances .
Since the risk of occupational injury - a question which was raised by Mrs Jensen and Mrs van Putten among others - does not fall within the scope of this proposal , Amendment No 2 and Amendment No 20 cannot be accepted immediately .
On the other hand , the Commission is going to arrange an exchange of information , and I think we should definitely consider using information about this important aspect in this exchange of information , and so Amendment No 17 is acceptable .
Amendment No 7 is not acceptable because the Treaty already contains the necessary provisions to allow Member States to adopt more stringent requirements .
Most of the amendments concerning procedural aspects can be accepted , but two amendments propose that the approval procedure should only be used for plants covered by the IPPC directive .
They are Amendments Nos 10 and 14 .
In line with the principle of subsidiarity , Member States should be able to decide freely which procedure - approval or registration - shall be followed in the case of non-IPPC plants .
In two new comments the Commission is called upon to take supplementary initiatives .
The first comment is Amendment No 8 , in which Mr Eisma was involved among others , and it concerns the question of a directive on solvent containing products such as paints and DIY products .
The Commission agrees that such an approach could be useful , and intends to set the preliminary work in motion this year .
However , in our opinion it is too early to enter into any commitments before the investigations are complete .
In the other comment , Amendment No 9 , the Commission is called upon to examine how plants under the threshold values set in the directive can be regulated at the EU level .
It is not the Commission 's intention to supplement this proposal with further measures for small plants .
The Commission has been particularly careful to ensure that unnecessary burdens are not placed on small and medium-sized enterprises .
Consequently , the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3 and 28-30 , which introduce tougher emission limits or change the scope of the proposal .
Amendments Nos 36 , 37 ( apart from footnote 1 ) , 38 , 42 , 43 , and 45-47 will either reduce the environmental protection planned in the proposal , or limit the scope of the proposal .
Therefore these amendments cannot be supported by the Commission .
The Commission is certain that its proposal , improved by the addition of many of Parliament 's amendments , provides an effective and balanced basis for limiting the pollution of the troposphere by ozone .
Thank you , Commissioner Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Epidemiological surveillance
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0004 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council ( C4-0437 / 97-96 / 0052 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision setting up a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the European Community ( Rapporteur : Mr Cabrol . )
Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for his detailed explanation of the situation which faces us at the second reading , which I do not intend to duplicate tonight .
Instead , with respect to the few diligent souls still left in the Public Gallery at this hour , I would like to illustrate in a way that is particularly relevant to Members why we need to make some real progress both tonight and in the coming weeks to create a meaningful European network for surveillance and control of communicable diseases .
There is something that most Members do more often than most of our fellow citizens : we fly in aeroplanes .
Put any two Members together and very soon they will start discussing departure lounges and airline schedules .
We do not just fly around Europe , we often move through most of the corners of the globe .
Throughout that globe there are some very risky places , and some of the risk for the unwary or the unprotected is caused by disease .
The disease could be carried in the air , in liquids , bodies , articles or by insects .
Yet in some of the European Union Member States , there are health rules at points of access , in others the rules are very different , despite frequent cross-border transits .
On some airlines measures are taken to protect passengers - for example by spraying cabins - on others they are not .
Information is made available in some states , sometimes accurately and accessibly and in a range of different languages based on a wide range of data .
In such circumstances a close degree of cooperation and coordination makes common sense , not just for travellers and parliamentarians but for all our citizens who need protection in many more ways than the very simple small example I have just set out .
However , the common position returned to this Parliament offers a number of low common denominators .
While agreeing the surveillance network means obligations on Member States , the Council has agreed unanimously only a more general flexible framework for information exchange and coordination of efforts .
Even allowing for Treaty limitations , there are severe concerns that this will be completely insufficient .
After all , the poor status quo brought about these proposals after initial reports showed the weaknesses .
Five years later we still need progress .
Hence the strength of the near unanimous votes in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection for the recommendations of the rapporteur .
Mr Cabrol has pursued his extra proposals with his usual vigour and diligence .
It will be of great interest to see whether , assuming Parliament as a whole adopts the recommendation , as I hope it will , in the subsequent conciliation negotiations the minimal stance of the Council and the more progressive and realistic approach of the Commission - which I know places considerable importance on these proposals to the extent of unusually reserving its position - can be reconciled with the more forward-thinking proposals from this Parliament .
It may be that some are too far ahead of their time , and specific European structures may have to await the lessons of the future reports which we will now receive at even more regular intervals than we suggested at first reading .
I am pleased that at least some of our suggestions have already been incorporated .
However , my group will be supporting the argument for a more clearly defined role for the European Union , which goes beyond a couple of officials keeping an eye on development of diseases within our boundaries , or simple supplementation of wider WHO or state networks which may or not be effectively implemented .
The Commission wants the power to be proactive , to study and act upon significant outbreaks wherever they occur and , given the draft Treaty commitments on coherent public health policies across Europe , to take proper coherent action where and when it is needed .
It needs to be sure of accurate , fast , comparable data and that there are no weak links in the chain .
Finally , I hope the whole House will thank Mr Cabrol for pursuing his case .
I now look forward to both the Council and the Commission negotiating seriously and urgently on all the amendments we support to help a meaningful , practical and effective network to be put in place , not to expand bureaucracy but to help tackle some of the worst diseases in the world .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all the political groups , in keeping with the position already assumed on the first reading , have declared their agreement , in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , with Mr Cabrol 's excellent report on the decision to set up a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the Community .
As the rapporteur reminded us , the common position is unacceptable and , in fact , the Commission stated that it could not accept its current wording because the text proposed by Council does not have the necessary means to achieve the objective of this programme , which is to collect information on communicable diseases from surveillance networks in the Member States .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has adopted the 22 amendments proposed by the rapporteur almost unanimously , which gives us every hope for a strong and united commitment on the part of the Parliamentary delegation to the conciliation procedure upon which this report is inevitably embarking .
As rapporteur on the health monitoring action programme which ended last year , I noted the Council 's hard and short-sighted position on that occasion too . Real force had to be applied during conciliation at that time , because of the Council 's opposition to the idea of conducting a feasibility study into setting up a permanent structure to act as a European health observatory , and because of the scant funding proposed .
A central and permanent structure at European level for a network for the epidemiological surveillance of communicable diseases is essential in view of the outbreak of old and new epidemics , and in order to have a fast alarm system that enables Member States to take the necessary and properly coordinated measures .
Unfortunately , Article 129 of the Treaty is contradictory , even in the new Amsterdam wording : on the one hand , in the first point it declares that it wants to ensure a high level of human health protection , but then , further on , the same Article prohibits any kind of harmonization of the laws and regulations of the Member States , thus eliminating the means for any incisive intervention .
However , as we know , pathogens , microbes and viruses do not stop at state borders , and do not observe regulations .
Nevertheless , the proposal made by the rapporteur , whom I congratulate on his clarity , commitment and decision , does not actually imply any amendment to the regulations , but only asks for a structure to be set up to collect available information on communicable diseases , to pass it on to the Member States for the better protection of the health of European citizens .
For these reasons , the Group of the European People 's Party will vote in favour of the amendments and the programme .
Mr President , I am delighted that the Amsterdam Treaty on the future of the European Union states that the new provisions on public health protection will be introduced with particular focus on committing the European Union to improving the level of human health .
This provision - Article 152 of the Amsterdam Treaty - is clearly a recognition that the European Union must introduce confidence-building measures in the field of public and human health , in the light of difficulties which arose as a result of the problems relating to BSE and blood-contaminated products in many European states in recent years .
Indeed , Community action which complements national policies shall be directed towards improving public health , preventing human illness and diseases and obviating sources of danger to public health .
Such action shall cover the fight against the major health scourges by improving research into the causes , their transmission and prevention , as well as health information and education .
The Community shall complement the Member States ' action in reducing drug-related health damage , including information and prevention .
In particular , the European Union shall adopt measures setting out the highest standards for the quality and safety of organs and substances of human origin , blood and blood derivatives .
However , European Union measures adopted in this sphere shall not prevent any Member State from maintaining or introducing more stringent protective measures on this subject .
Finally , I am indeed pleased that the European Parliament has been given the power of codecision by the Amsterdam Treaty , with the European Council of Health Ministers , on all new proposals for European legislation in the area of public health and human health .
I should like to compliment Mr Cabrol on his detailed and excellent report .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I should first like to say that the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left fully supports Mr Cabrol 's report . It is an excellent report , which has demonstrated profound and serious contradictions in this area , which is such an important part of the building of Europe .
Now that we have the opportunity to implement Community policies , instruments and responses to problems suffered by the people of Europe , it is unthinkable that we should fail to take advantage of that opportunity , because of difficulties totally unrelated to the matter .
Faced with a problem of this nature - the problem of the growing risk and increased incidence of all types of communicable disease emerging in Europe and elsewhere - we do not see how the Council and the Commission can fail to agree with Parliament , so that we can design appropriate Community instruments .
We also think Professor Cabrol 's report states very clearly the relevant points which have to be considered in order to make progress in this respect .
He has the backing of our whole committee .
Therefore , we do not understand why there has been reluctance expressed about this aspect of the building of the European Community , in these areas which do not present a great problem . In fact , both the Maastricht Treaty and the Treaty of Amsterdam already recognize the European Union 's competence in the area of public health .
Therefore , we think efforts should be made to respond to the needs of the European public .
Finally , I think it needs to be stressed that the European socioeconomic model is adding to the difficulties , by creating these problems both within Europe and elsewhere . It should also be revised , to create a model based on solidarity rather than competitiveness and inequality .
Mr President , anyone involved with health knows that the best way to save financial resources and , obviously , human life is prevention .
Prevention is not just a question of vaccines , but also requires health education , with information . Also however , and obviously particularly with regard to communicable diseases , it involves recognizing the danger in time and seeking to reduce its consequences .
Curiously enough , the Council is not aware of this , preferring to save a bit of money today , making the Member States run the risk later of having to face an epidemic with possibly huge expenses .
This is obviously very serious , particularly as we would once again miss the opportunity of providing Europe with the image ( which is the only thing of interest to citizens ) of a supranational organization that deals with their wellbeing .
We can go ahead and make the citizens pay the consequences of the Maastricht parameters for the euro by saying that we cannot spend money to ensure their health .
I think this would be a serious mistake .
I am delighted that in our vote in committee we were able unanimously to appreciate Mr Cabrol 's report and all its amendments . I hope that this House will do the same , and that the Commissioner will support Parliament 's work and manage to convince the Council this time to do what has to be done in our Europe .
Mr President , I think at this stage in the debate several things have become clear .
One is that this Parliament is fortunate enough to have an excellent rapporteur who combines his professional abilities with the political authority to have been able to prepare this report , with contributions from all sides of the House .
I also think this is a very important message for the European Commission .
We all have great faith in Commissioner Flynn 's negotiating skills . He has often demonstrated his strength of mind and capacity for hard negotiations with the Council .
Parliament will not fail to give him its support here .
We must also send a clear message to the Council .
We do not understand why they should be so little inclined to increase these demands , which represent a practical and heartfelt necessity which would benefit all our citizens .
The Council should not view the transfer of powers as a loss . They should see it for what it is , as defined in the Treaties : a way to share these powers , the better to help and protect the right to good health of every member of the public .
That is one of the obligations of all governments , and appears in our constitutions .
This should also be a call to governments as regards their budgetary provisions for preventative medicine , which are very low at present . In the best cases , the proportion is 2.4 % of the health budget , and in some countries only about 0.4 % .
That is very little .
Furthermore , the public has lowered its guard , because it has too much faith in the effectiveness of pharmacological methods , especially antibiotics . Even in the hospitals , the medical staff themselves had failed to attach enough importance to cross-infections , which has led to a major increase in this problem .
In view of all this , it is our duty to let our citizens see that the European Union can be efficient in this field .
The example of the exponential growth of AIDS shows that the principles of preventative medicine and compulsory safety measures have not been properly applied .
Mr Commissioner , I beg you when the time comes to approve the agreement on the common external frontier - if we are ever able to approve it - to please make sure that the compulsory external health ruling is included . It is an essential component of the network currently being planned .
Mr President , I wish to pay proper tribute to Mr Cabrol whose work in committee has been outstanding .
He is , after all , a man who has today only asked for a railway network , and we are offering and the Council is offering not even a green light on the signal .
It really is not good enough .
I do not think the common position of the Council in any way seriously reflects Parliament 's amendments .
I should like to draw the lessons which we should already have drawn from the CJD and BSE crises .
That was something we had no foreknowledge of .
We suddenly found ourselves confronted with a disease , or a variant of a disease , which hitherto had been apparently unknown to science .
Where were we ?
We were in a muddle ! We were in a mess !
We have seen the destruction of the European beef industry and justifiable undertaking of protection for the public health of Europe 's citizens .
That is something we ought to learn lessons from , and the obvious one is that there should be a surveillance network .
As Mr Cabrol says , information collected about communicable diseases will not come together by magic : there has to be a mechanism by which this is achieved .
I contend that should be by a centre , and that is fundamental to Mr Cabrol 's report .
We need that centre to coordinate information .
There is also Mrs Marinucci 's point on costs and comparative costs .
What if we do nothing ?
Are we going to wait yet again for another CJD-type outbreak and take all the consequences again ?
What kind of criticism will be made of us as parliamentarians , of the European Commission and indeed of the Council ?
We ought to learn that lesson and give the green light to Mr Cabrol 's report .
Firstly , I thank Parliament for the work that it has done on this issue .
I particularly want to express my thanks to you , Mr Cabrol , for the very valuable work that you have undertaken , right from the very beginning of this process .
We are all convinced of the necessity for the European Union to develop its activities in this field and , in particular , to introduce a formal mechanism to share not only information on communicable diseases , but to ensure that a coherent approach is taken with regard to control measures .
We are all clear that the European Community needs this network .
The need to have comparable and reliable data on the evolution of diseases such as CreutzfeldtJakob Disease through all of Europe is an obvious example of the importance of having a comprehensive network properly put in place .
But let me give you another example taken from the latest issues of many European newspapers which reflect the anxieties and fears of our citizens : this is the new Hong Kong chicken flu .
Although , until now , this has affected only a limited number of people , there is much concern about this new flu strain .
It is called influenza AH5N1 .
It appears that nobody is immune to this particular strain .
It is not covered by the 1998 vaccine produced with the advice of the WHO .
Without a Community network , there would be no possibility of monitoring new cases at Community level and no possibility of defining and coordinating control measures for travellers coming from the Hong Kong region .
Moreover , should there be an epidemic , we do not know how quickly a vaccine could be produced on a large scale and whether we would have to distribute , on a preventive basis , the only specific drugs available .
This example illustrates why we strongly believe that this network must not restrict itself just to surveillance , but also encompass control measures .
We want to create a system which makes it possible to take rapid and effective action .
We want a system which enables the Community to define protective measures which have to be taken , particularly in situations of emergency .
We want a system which is not only comprehensive on paper but , in fact , which works in practice .
This means that it has to be built up in a gradual and pragmatic way .
In view of this and despite some specific improvements added by the Council , we have had to enter a general reservation regarding the common position , as the text did not give us the means to respond effectively and in a coordinated fashion to epidemics or outbreaks of communicable diseases in a Community without internal borders .
So the Commission has been very carefully examining the proposed opinions and all the amendments .
I am pleased to see that they accord very much with the views of the Commission on how the final text of this decision should look .
I can inform the House that we are willing to accept either wholly or in part 17 of the amendments ; 14 can be accepted in full .
They are : Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 15 , 19 , 20 and 22 .
For the other three - Amendments Nos 14 , 18 and 21 - the Commission will follow Parliament 's suggestions , but with an improved wording .
Let me explain the reason why we consider the remaining five amendments unacceptable .
Amendment No 1 refers to one recital which , in our view , does not reflect properly the variation in surveillance capacity in the Member States .
Regarding Amendment No 3 , the Commission , as it has stated on the very first reading , believes that rather than restricting the choice of methodologies to the established ones , the possibility must be left open for the development of new and more effective methodologies .
As to Amendment No 16 , the Commission feels that it is necessary for the coordination of measures by the Member States to come under the comitology procedure mentioned in Article 6 .
Therefore a reference to that effect must be made in the fourth paragraph of Article 5 .
Concerning Amendment No 17 , the Commission feels that two representatives from each Member State must sit on the committee so as to ensure coverage of both the surveillance and the control branches of the national authorities .
Let me turn to Amendment No 5 , specifically mentioned by the rapporteur , on a European Centre for the surveillance of communicable diseases .
I fully understand and appreciate the motivation and concerns that have been expressed .
I share the aim of wanting to reinforce the capacity of the Community to deal with communicable diseases .
However , this aim has to be achieved in the most practical and straightforward manner and , in particular , it has to take into account the work which has already been undertaken and the structures which already exist in the Community .
There are already national centres in existence , many of them with considerable experience and expertise in this field .
There are also several effective disease-oriented networks which are capable of swinging into action quite quickly - something which is crucial for the control of communicable diseases , especially in certain local settings .
In our view it is much better to build upon and strengthen what already exists and has proved to be working well , rather than to start from scratch and construct a totally new and untried organization .
This is especially the case with the advent of powerful information technologies which improve our capacity to communicate effectively .
The Community is investing heavily in linking the national administrations for a variety of joint functions .
Communicable diseases surveillance and control is one of these .
For these reasons we cannot accept the amendment .
Let me just repeat once again my deep appreciation to Parliament and to you , Mr Cabrol , for your efforts and for the close collaboration with the Commission on this particular issue .
I hope I have explained the Commission 's position .
I trust that before very long we will have this new network .
It will certainly be a great advance in the development of public health in the Community as soon as it is brought into effect .
Mr President , it is a point of information arising from what the Commissioner has just said .
I would like to know from the Commissioner how this network is to be coordinated and by whom across the Union ?
Mr President , it will in the initial position be coordinated by the Commission .
I do recognise the point you make , Mr White , that later on when we have further experience it may need to be developed further in the way that you have suggested .
Thank you , Commissioner Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Biocidal products
The next item is the report ( A4-0011 / 98 ) by Mrs K. Jensen , on behalf of Parliament 's delegation to the Conciliation Committee , on the joint text , approved by the Conciliation Committee , for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the placing of biocidal products on the market ( C4-0679 / 97-00 / 0465 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , when the European Parliament hopefully approves the Conciliation Committee 's report on this directive , we will ensure risk assessment at a European level of chemicals which have so far not been covered by other environmental regulations .
You could say that it is the last major link in the chain of chemical directives which the EU has embarked on introducing , but it is also the last chemical directive from the time before people really began to take a position on chemicals which act like hormones .
It is a matter we shall return to with the report on hormone-like substances .
The reason I am mentioning this problem is , of course , because I have a little nagging doubt about the extent to which the directives we have now are sufficiently comprehensive in their environmental protection .
The biocides directive will provide more safety because it will be easier for citizens to handle these chemicals correctly , and water and soil should also be positively affected by the environmental protection which will come into effect .
Transparency in the EU should also win with this directive .
The Council was caught red-handed when it sent the common position to Parliament without the declarations , 14 in all , on the protocol adopted by the Council or jointly by the Council and the Commission .
That sort of thing is not acceptable in an EU which is open and where legislation is adopted jointly by the Council and Parliament .
Under the conciliation procedure it is clear that these declarations have no value with regard to the biocides directive , and in future it will be the case that legislation appears in the Act and not in another place beside it .
That is an obvious advantage for the public , including industry .
Under the conciliation procedure we have obtained an assurance that a complete technical dossier for the socalled low risk products will be presented , and that this will not be able to include substances which in themselves may give cause for concern .
At the same time , we have been given an explanation of what is meant by basic substances which are sometimes used as biocides and should be labelled as such , namely carbon dioxide , nitrogen , ethanol , 2-propanol , acetic acid and kieselguhr .
We have also had our requests granted with regard to the filling in of the new annexes which the Council sought to introduce with the common position .
The annexes can no longer be called blank cheques because the institutions ' modus vivendi on informing the European Parliament in full will be adhered to , but you may of course wonder whether it might take some time to get this confirmed .
The directive is a pioneer in one area in particular - the assessment of alternatives .
This ensures that very dangerous substances do not come onto the market if there is a less harmful substance which can be used for the same purpose .
This approach should be introduced into all the chemicals directives because it safeguards our surroundings and health at the same time as promoting technological development .
The biocides directive has been criticized in some parts of industry for being too expensive .
To that we can say that industry has a lot of the information about chemicals and products anyway .
Long transitional arrangements have been built into the directive , and Parliament has even had a " fast track procedure ' inserted which should not compromise the necessary environmental requirements .
Mr President , firstly I want to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Jensen , for this work , which has taken her months and has always had our support .
She has mentioned the subject of Council declarations , which are becoming frequent in codecision procedures .
And once again in this Parliament , we must reject them outright , because they contravene the spirit and the letter of the Treaties , and are an obvious misrepresentation which this Parliament will never be able to accept .
Secondly , I think all the institutions have things to learn from the negotiations which arise from codecision .
Here in Parliament , perhaps we should have presented fewer amendments at the first reading , in order to focus more attention on the essential points .
The Commission , for its part , had still not realized the meaning of the codecision procedure and Parliament 's new responsibilities .
It resisted meeting Parliament 's basic demands right up until the last moment .
Parliament could not hand over a blank cheque for something as important as the definition of active substances .
I think the Council will also have to change its working methods . The codecision procedure is pretty revolutionary , and the Council will have to change the way it has been working .
It always tries to keep a low profile , although that goes against the spirit of the Treaties . The Council will have to get used to deciding by majority , even if it is a qualified majority .
In that way , the procedures can be speeded up instead of being delayed .
I also think there is a very clear message which it is important to convey to all the people of Europe . That is , that this Parliament makes use of the powers and responsibilities which are increasingly bestowed upon it by the Treaties .
The promises contained in the Treaty articles on guidelines to provide the highest levels of protection for people 's health and for the environment are going to be fulfilled - in each and every one of the proposals . The people of Europe can rely on that .
Of course , the free movement of goods must also be made a reality .
Establishing specific centralized systems , such as for the approval of active substances , benefits everybody . It means that experiments ( including animal experiments ) are not duplicated ; approval procedures can be more easily guaranteed ; and arguments and suspicions between Member States can be avoided .
Therefore , mutual recognition is another added value provided by Community procedure .
Finally , I think the message to all the people of Europe is that our procedure may be complex , and we may be asking for the codecision procedure to be improved and speeded up ( which the Treaty of Amsterdam has done to some extent ) , but despite all the difficulties , the relationship between the Commission , the Council and Parliament in the codecision procedure is working better and better all the time . That is a very positive message for all our citizens .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission would like to thank Parliament and especially the excellent rapporteur , Mrs Kirsten Jensen , and the Council for the progress which has been made during the conciliation procedure with this draft directive which adds a substantial new element to EU legislation on chemicals .
The purpose of the directive is , as we know , to harmonize the single market for products containing biocides , and to ensure a high level of protection for people and the environment .
In connection with the second reading , Parliament adopted five amendments .
Three of these amendments were unacceptable to both the Commission and the Council .
But , as has also been emphasized here this evening , the subsequent conciliation procedure has borne fruit , and the Conciliation Committee has reached agreement on a compromise solution which is now before Parliament .
The Council has already given that solution its approval , and I think and hope that Parliament will do the same .
With regard to Amendments Nos 18 and 19 on the simplified procedure in connection with Annex 1A and 1B , I am convinced that the proposed compromise solution will fulfil the aims of these two annexes , namely to simplify the administration of the directive without reducing the level of heath and environmental protection .
Parliament wanted to make sure that the modus vivendi was followed in connection with the comitology procedure for the inclusion of active substances in these annexes .
The Commission is entirely in agreement with Parliament that the decisionmaking process should be absolutely transparent , and it will do its utmost to put this into practice .
The Commission has promised to present a proposal for the revision of the comitology settlement at the beginning of June 1998 .
We believe that with this undertaking , which President Santer confirmed on 11 November 1997 in a letter to the President of Parliament , we have accommodated Parliament 's reservations in this area , as was emphasized by Mr Valvarde López .
As far as Parliament 's Amendment No 17 is concerned , I am satisfied that the Conciliation Committee has reached agreement on a time-limit of 24 months for the incorporation of the directive into national law .
To sum up , I would like to stress again that the Commission can fully support the compromise solution on which agreement was reached during the conciliation procedure , and I would like to end by once more thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Kirsten Jensen .
Thank you , Commissioner Bjerregaard .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Cohesion and the information society
The next item is the report ( A4-0399 / 97 ) by Mrs Sierra González , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission communication on cohesion and the information society ( COM ( 97 ) 0007 - C40044 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the starting point of any study of the setting up of the information society within the European Union has to be the fact that things are uneven at the present time . In the near future , this unevenness can lead to imbalances in terms of competitiveness and cohesion , thereby cancelling out the benefits which the use of new technologies can provide in terms of cost .
This unevenness occurs in the basic infrastructure of the information and communications technologies , and in the cost and reliability of advanced services .
Such unevenness is producing quantitative and qualitative inequalities , especially in the so-called cohesion countries , where there are basic shortages .
Availability and ease of access are prerequisites for being able to enjoy the benefits provided by the development of the information society .
And availability and cost are precisely the factors which at the moment are tending to widen this gap between the European regions , consolidating a situation of quantitative inequality between rich and poor areas .
This can be illustrated by an example : there is now almost universal access to the public telephone exchange network , but there are still substantial differences in the quality of the services .
As regards advanced services , progress has been made with cellular telephones ( including GSM ) but there is still great variation in the availability of rented lines or advanced exchange lines , and with the on-line digital network service .
Charges are generally higher in the cohesion countries than in the more advanced countries of the Union .
Similarly , the number of personal computers is lower .
In 1995 there were 15.2 PCs for every 100 inhabitants in the most developed regions of Europe , compared with 3.1 in Greece , 8.6 in Spain , 6 in Portugal and 8.9 in Italy .
This structural weakness , and high costs , hinder the development of regional small and medium-sized enterprises , whose capacity for initiative is lower than that of large companies , and who have less opportunity to obtain strategic information .
Telephone , electricity and cable companies , and others , who market ICT applications , have opted to seek the maximum economic return in the short term . This means that the costs to the consumer have little relation to the real costs , which inhibits the growth of new technologies , especially in the less well-off regions - specifically , the cohesion countries .
The skill levels of human resources are also uneven .
The information society opens up new possibilities for people to gain qualifications , because not only does it mean new teaching instruments , but in particular it also means that sources of knowledge can be almost universally available . This marks the end of that unequal situation whereby a student in a small city is at a disadvantage compared with another in a great metropolis , with access to technical , scientific and history libraries .
To a large extent , the opening up of these possibilities promises to lead to the decentralization of sources of culture , and an increasing number of centres for the diffusion of culture . In the medium term , this can contribute to social cohesion .
However , if the structural weaknesses of the school systems are not taken into account , the inequalities may increase .
The possibility that investments may be delayed in certain regions means there may be a polarization between those who have information and those who do not .
To avoid such polarization , we need political action to tackle the profound structural changes imposed by the information society , in working practices , methods of business organization and public administration .
That policy is partly lacking , as shown by the fact that only 2 % of the structural funds are spent on investment in the telecommunications sector .
The cost of the information society should be part of the " mainstreaming ' of the structural funds .
In fact , the structural funds have played a central role in laying the foundations of the information society , despite the lack of investment .
But we need an integrated approach , to satisfy public administration , the teaching system , industry and consumers .
In conclusion , I want to point out that for the sake of cohesion , charges to consumers and costs to businesses need to be set at a reasonable level . Similarly , access to modern information tools , particularly the Internet , cannot be based on private individuals purchasing PCs or other equipment , but requires easily accessible work stations for the public to share , and the consequent funding of an open telecommunications network .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the Commission 's timely communication on cohesion and the information society has received an important response from Parliament in the form of Mrs Sierra González ' report , which is extremely accurate and detailed , and focuses precisely on the set of problems which concern us .
It is no surprise to me that Mrs Sierra González ' report logically tackles what I believe to be the crux of the problem - and the aspect that worried the Commission when they sent us this communication about the information society and cohesion .
For Mrs Sierra González begins her report by talking about competitiveness .
And the fundamental idea behind cohesion today ( which many people do not understand properly ) is the ability to generate competitiveness in those regions which are strategically less well advanced , so they can be brought up to the same level as the other regions .
That is the fundamental aspect , not the almost religious connotations which some people like to attribute to the concept of cohesion .
We are talking about an instrument - the information and communications technologies - which is fundamental to the future development of competitiveness , and to an increased quality of life for our citizens .
To achieve that competitiveness , the immediate requirement in the less favoured regions is for small and medium-sized enterprises to be able to equip themselves properly , so that they can rise to the challenges of competition , stabilize their businesses today and in the future , and guarantee job stability . The net result will be to create cohesion - competitiveness , in other words .
It is hard to see how any small business in a less favoured region can survive the challenge without introducing electronic commerce , for example .
It is difficult to imagine that a small or medium-sized enterprise could engage in research and innovation without having a fully operational system of information and communications technologies .
Well , how effective are all these discussions we hold in this Parliament ?
What is the basic factor needed in order to plant the information society firmly within European society ?
Let us be realistic .
The Commission 's wish to include activities connected with information and communications technologies in the structural funds , as a significant part of them , is obvious and highly commendable . However , possible actions by the Commission or using the structural funds will not exhaust the market .
The market has a mind of its own and is extremely powerful . It is a veritable superpower compared with the potential of subsidies from the European institutions .
Therefore , we need to make it quite clear that at the moment the main stumbling block hindering the information society 's insertion into society is the charges set by telephone , electricity and cable companies seeking maximum returns in the shortest possible time . And that is what I want the Commissioner to think about with us , although the idea is not new to her .
I would like her to consider the extent to which the European Commission is prepared to sit down at the table with these operators , as one of their most important customers , and make them bring their prices down to realistic levels which will allow demand to increase , and will give easy access to everybody , no matter which European region they happen to be in . I would also like her to consider how far the Commission is prepared to go in fulfilling its responsibilities , not just by making it possible to act through the structural funds , but also sending out a serious message that will persuade these companies to allow everybody to have access to these services , which are so vital for the present and the future .
If that cannot be done , we are just designing the new shape of European inequality .
The Commissioner knows that very well , which is why I am not presenting this as a complaint , but just asking for her help and collaboration .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I was going to say that we are rather a select band of debaters this evening but colleagues are coming out of the background ; perhaps the information society is working indeed .
First , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the broad thrust of her report on cohesion and the information society .
There can be little doubt of the importance of information and communication technology - the information society - to our economy and to our lifestyle .
In particular it opens up all manner of possibilities for remote rural areas , for ultra-peripheral islands and poorer less favoured regions with a low density of population and limited transport infrastructure .
In my constituency of Devon and East Plymouth which contains cities and isolated farming communities there are numerous ICT projects in hand : for distance learning , for academic exchanges of information with the universities in other Member States , for training , for business such as a satellite link ISDN video for cattle auction by remote bidding or for telesales operations .
The Internet for both recreational study or for business use is catching on fast in our part of the world .
All of this adds up to the possibility of job creation and business start-ups which do not have to be subsidized , which leads me to say that if I were to find fault with any part of Mrs Sierra González ' report it would be where it suggests any intervention in the pricing and the market mechanism of the information society , or where it suggests additional spending in the European budget beyond existing lines for structural funds and the cohesion fund .
The best way to expand ICT in Europe is to let market forces and technology get on with it .
Competition and customers are powerful forces for growth and for better services .
There is not enough money in the European budget to pay for all the items on the shopping list , or should I say " wish list ' , of spending proposals in this report .
By all means ask for a greater proportion of structural funds to be spent on this instead of something else , but let us be realistic about not asking for more money when it is not there .
Instead let us agree that ICT holds out great promise for disadvantaged regions , and the forces of competition and technology will deliver .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I think we should congratulate ourselves on the fact that the Committee on Regional Policy is talking about the information society and the effect it will have on European cohesion .
We need to stress the impact the information society will have on the new activities which will be developed in industry , trade and services , and on overcoming the frontiers and borders between Member States .
Nor must we forget what the information society will mean for training , now that we talk of life-long training or continuing training .
The information society removes the need for teachers and students to be in the same place at the same time .
It is possible to be taught in your own home , by a teacher from another place and time .
The information society offers a wide range of opportunities . However , those opportunities must be available to all the people of Europe if we really want cohesion at European level .
The opportunities should exist throughout the whole extent of the European Union , including rural , peripheral and island zones .
There is a lot of talk about information superhighways .
I would prefer to use the term " information roads ' or " information routes ' .
Superhighways , or motorways , often charge tolls - not in Germany , Madam Commissioner , but in other countries .
If we want information to reach every location , it should travel by roads which do not have tolls , but are open to all .
Therefore , I am very pleased with Mrs Sierra González ' report , because it talks about the potential limitations to the information society , in the sense that it may fail to benefit everybody , and that those responsible for its development may seek nothing more than financial profitability .
We already know that such financial profitability , like toll motorways , will only form links between major population centres , leaving many others marginalized . That is not what should happen with the information society we want for the European Union .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , no-one doubts that the new information and communication technologies can have positive effects on education and training , on changing times and the organization of work , on business modernization at the most varied levels , and consequently on people 's increased opportunities for free time and leisure .
However , I have several reservations to add to the somewhat rosy-coloured picture painted by the Commission with regard to the relationship between cohesion and the so-called information society , especially because , in a context in which state responsibility is declining , owing to the privatization of companies and services which at the outset might be in a better position to deal with the problems that might affect the less developed regions , it is difficult to see how the prospect of a large and easy profit is compatible with the universality and fairness of citizens ' rights and the objects of inter-regional and inter-State cohesion within our Union .
The report draws attention to the dangers that uncontrolled , unregulated growth of such an information society might cause , by creating new and deeper divisions in the economic and social development between rich and poor regions . Such divisions might relate to : differences in infrastructure and access to information ; discrepancies in the opportunities for gaining access to education and training - promoting and accentuating new forms of exclusion ; or costs that might affect small and medium-sized enterprises in the cohesion countries and the respective most backward regions .
This could accentuate trends towards industrial delocalization , or even raise doubts as to the consequences , quality and stability of employment .
Furthermore , the mass of information available might not relate to the specifically regional and / or national cultures , traditions and requirements , in aspects ranging from the content of such information to appropriate linguistic use .
The recommendations set out in the report drawn up by Mrs Sierra González - whom I congratulate warmly although there are no more than half a dozen of us here - the recommendations set out in the report , as I was saying , for the structural funds to play a far more substantial part in the materialization and construction of infrastructures , in education , training and research-related aspects , naturally deserve our full support .
The same support should be given to the proposal that , in the division and respect for their respective populations , the governments of the Member States should be responsible for defining and regulating the context in which universal access to information and provision of public services should be provided .
Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur for her excellent report and the Commissioner for her interest and , indeed , involvement in this important issue .
I should like to thank the rapporteur for grasping the importance of the information technologies in reducing the environmental burden of development actions , for example by reducing the need for mobility or the need for transport infrastructures .
In particular , I refer to paragraph 20 which recommends that the total or partial substitution of ' physical ' investments by the supply of adequate telecommunications services in such a way as to minimize the cost of investment and the constraints on the environment be systematically included as part of the evaluation process of investments financed by the structural funds and be a substantial part of the national programmes as presented in the framework of these funds .
I should also like to stress that the information technologies should not create greater regional and social disparities : they should contribute to reducing such disparities .
Therefore , existing imbalances and discrepancies between core and peripheral regions should be counterbalanced by giving special stress to the setting up of information highways and facilities in the peripheral regions .
Unless we take action in this regard , there is a risk that these opportunities will not be available in the peripheral regions and that differences will become even greater .
So we need to take proactive measures in regard to this .
The information society should continue to be considered as services of general interest , and investment in information infrastructures should comply with the principles of equality , continuity and affordability so that market logic does not discriminate against the needs for access to information of peripheral regions and vulnerable social groups .
If the benefits that the information society would make accessible to every citizen in the European Union are to achieve optimum advantages , the costs must be set at a reasonable level .
I take the point made by Mr Chichester in this regard , but we must ensure that they are set at reasonable levels .
In particular , I would ask not just the Commission but the Council to be involved here and to ensure that the suppliers of education , particularly to schools , allow free access .
Hardware is one thing , software is another : but the actual telecommunications providers are often either the state or some kind of monopoly .
They can well afford to provide low-level or free access to schools .
It would be an extremely important achievement throughout the Union if our young citizens got free access to these services at a training level .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I come from a country which is not particularly rich , and which is on the edge of Europe .
I was born on an island where the children did not have all the equipment that was available to children born for example in Athens , the capital of Greece , or indeed in other large cities of Europe .
On this island , as on the other Greek islands , illness was and is a much bigger problem than it is in Athens or in any other large European urban centre .
Why am I saying all this ?
I am saying it because I believe the information society provides some answers to problems of this kind .
Children can connect up to the Internet and have access to information , something which could not even be imagined a few years ago .
Tele-medicine can provide an answer to some serious health problems .
The new prospects for commerce and economic life may keep people in the peripheral regions .
However , this is not something which will happen automatically .
The information society will not suddenly appear in the remote and island regions tomorrow morning just because we are debating it here .
There need to be policies to maximize the advantages offered by the information society and , at the same time , to limit its dangers , making the information society a humane society , a society of equal opportunities . I think that is the desire of all of us in this House .
So what do I believe ?
I believe that it is necessary to move perhaps even more quickly towards the liberalization of telecommunications , since this will help towards speedier and cheaper access for everybody to the opportunities of the information society .
Nor let us forget that the more widespread the use , the cheaper the purchase .
I also believe that we must ensure that there is information available in as many languages as possible , because this is an issue which is related to equality of opportunity , to enable everyone to have access to this new world which is being opened up .
At the same time , I believe we must make use of the resources of the structural funds , especially in the new period of 2000 to 2006 , so that we can introduce information technology into schools and public sector services ( an essential step for the modernization of education and public administration ) , promote the new technologies on the islands and in the inaccessible and remote regions ( using it in tele-education and telemedicine ) , and take advantage of available resources and professional training to bring about familiarization with the new world of knowledge and information .
I think Agenda 2000 is an opportunity for us to take a serious look at the issue , since I think that essentially the second Delors Package has finished - it finishes in 1999 - in view of the Salter Package .
I think we can look at this matter closely , Madam Commissioner .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , information technology and telecommunications have opened up tremendous opportunities to cover distance and overcome obstacles , nurturing decentralization and regional equality .
But in practice , to fulfill these goals we need a clear working strategy as well as strong political will .
Every region and citizen must have access to the basics of the information network .
Among the requirements of an equal information society are the availability of new information technology , like the Internet , in public places such as libraries and schools , as well as multi-lingual software and facilities .
Furthermore , we need effective training , not only in how to use the equipment , but in understanding how the systems work .
What is especially important , I think , is to train professionals in the computer industry to help ordinary people find and use the information they need .
At the regional level , it is also vital to pay attention to the needs of small firms and their readiness to become information literate . There is a demand for the new skills , and they create jobs .
Thus , structural funding must seek to give better support to the low-profile regions in their application of the information society .
Mr President , first let me thank Mrs Sierra González most sincerely for her report on the significance of the information society for EU cohesion policy .
It broadly agrees both with the Commission 's analysis of the situation and with its conclusions .
The Commission also believes that the information society is of strategic importance for economic and social cohesion and for employment .
It will certainly also constitute a key technology for regional development , provided that structurally underdeveloped areas , rural districts and peripheral regions can be guaranteed access to information and communications technologies .
It is certainly well worthwhile using information and best-practices technology to make the most of the opportunities available , but to do so we first have to draw attention to the fact that these opportunities exist , and implement a suitable awareness and education programme .
In this respect , technological development is only one side of the problem .
Our main aim should be to give the regions themselves - that is to say , their inhabitants and their businesses - the capacity to exploit the possibilities of the information society in order to strengthen the competitiveness of the economy , particularly as far as small and medium-sized enterprises are concerned , and to promote regional development .
To achieve this we need a regulative framework which , by guaranteeing universal employment , is capable of ensuring a fair system of access and job costing , and is able to adapt this concept of universal employment to meet changing technological and social conditions .
To this effect we require practical assistance , which includes not only investment in infrastructure but also the provision of education and training schemes to enable people to obtain the necessary job qualifications .
This in turn will require a research development programme to promote a user-friendly information society and the continued development of transmission and application systems for businesses and citizens alike .
In order to reduce the technology gap which exists between the core and the peripheral regions of the EU we need to offer companies incentives to provide up-to-date job opportunities even in the less well developed areas .
This is by no means only a question of investment aid , but can also include the organization of a demand market or the provision of public access to modern information networks , which have already been called for here , in schools , libraries , town halls and job centres - as our IRISI project demonstrates .
On the basis of its communication on cohesion and the information society , the Commission is seeking to concentrate its efforts and to use the synergy which exists between the different initiatives . The communication also attempts to highlight economic and social cohesion in telecommunications and research policy , and to incorporate the transition to the information society into the EU 's mainstream structural programmes .
For this purpose , the Commission has set up an Action Centre whose main role will be to coordinate the activities of the individual Directorates-General in promoting the information society .
A Committee on Cohesion and the Information Society is currently being set up as part of this Action Centre 's mandate . The aim of this committee will be to ensure that social cohesion is one of the dimensions included in all Community policies which are relevant to the information society .
The information society is one of the themes of the forthcoming Fifth Framework Programme for Research .
About 25 % of all funds provided under the Fifth Framework Programme are to be allocated to research actions associated with the information society .
The Commission has also extended the current forum debate on the information society to include eastern Europe , in order to involve the applicant countries in these deliberations ; this is also one of the requirements associated with new membership .
The draft of the first report on universal employment is currently being prepared and the Commission has , as you know , already laid down guidelines for the financing of universal employment in a competition-oriented environment .
Finally , in its half-time review of Objective 1 regions , and within the framework of the second programme-planning period for Objective 2 , the Commission has called upon Member States to use the strategic potential of the information society for regional development purposes .
It is not enough just to have the Commission 's opinion that this is an important development instrument . What is really needed is to convince the regions and the Member States of this , since they are the ones who , in the programming stage , are taking the decisions on assisted projects .
If we want them to promote more information projects , then we must begin by helping them to amend their priorities and overcome the fear of the information society which still prevails .
We can be sure of one thing , which is that the information society will be one of the key themes for the next generation of structural fund programmes .
In this respect , the Commission is helping the regions to improve their planning vis-à-vis the information society so that in future they can make greater use of relevant projects and best practices .
More than 30 regions are or were involved in these actions , which were aimed at improving cooperation between the public and private sectors , to the effect that in this area we can eliminate the subsidy mentality and put in its place a mentality which really seeks to make the most of new opportunities , to establish and structure the needs of those players who are involved in the information society at regional level , and to support the regions in building up a partnership between the main regional players .
I am convinced that if we succeed in driving this process forward , then we can rely on the fact that the market will react to demand , and also to the organization of demand-driven interests . This is something which will not happen automatically but which will require a helping hand from us .
I hope you will continue to support us in our endeavours .
Thank you , Commissioner Wulf-Mathies .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.00 pm . )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Tuesday 13 January have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , it is stated in the Minutes that over the last ten years the US dollar has been devalued by 50 % , causing the loss of 18 million jobs .
In fact only 1.3 million jobs have been lost .
Mr Rübig , I think you are referring to the verbatim report of proceedings .
However , we shall look into the matter .
( The Minutes were approved )
Membership of political groups
I must inform you that Mr Kerr is now a member of the Green Group in the European Parliament , with effect from 1 January 1998 .
Thank you very much , Mr Kerr .
The Minutes will be corrected .
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
The next item is the voting on objections concerning the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Mr President , a point of order before we vote on the objections introduced regarding matters of urgency , on the one hand from the Green Group regarding Tibet , and on the other the Liberal Group , regarding Kenya .
Our group is in agreement with these objections , but as the two groups did not announce them at the Conference of Presidents , we have not been able to submit our group 's resolutions on the same subject for review .
Thus , if you are in agreement , I would like our resolutions B4-1476 / 98 regarding Tibet and B4-0084 / 98 regarding Kenya , also to be submitted to the vote which is going to take place .

We will deal with the matter immediately .
British Presidency and the situation in Algeria
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the British Presidency 's programme , and the situation in Algeria .
Mr Cook has the floor .
Mr President , President of the Commission and honourable Members , the Luxembourg Presidency demonstrated yet again that the smallest nations of Europe are the equals of the largest .
Its presidency was capable , efficient , and dynamic .
It is a hard act to follow .
I understand that it is traditional for the incoming presidency to begin its speech to the European Parliament by saying that at this moment Europe is at a particularly important stage in its development .
I understand why they do that .
After all , it is always true .
And it is good that successive presidencies approach their task with that sense of excitement , because the advantage to Europe of a rotating presidency is that every new presidency brings its own new national drive , a new range of experience , and a new determination to make its mark .
Britain has the privilege of holding the presidency as Europe takes two real historic steps .
In the next six months our presidency will act as pilot both to economic and monetary union and to the enlargement process with the Central Europeans and Cyprus .
These are momentous projects .
The British Presidency will work closely with the European Parliament to give both economic and monetary union and enlargement the best possible start .
Both of us - Parliament and presidency - have a duty to Europe and to our electors to work together in cooperating for a successful launch of both projects .
When the new Labour Government in Britain was elected in May , we promised we would transform our relations with Europe .
We have done that .
Britain is now a committed player in Europe .
( Applause ) We believe that when Europe works together the result is better for every country in Europe .
The problems we face are common problems which demand common solutions .
Problems like global warming and international crime are not ones that any one nation can solve on its own .
Today nations are as interdependent as they once were independent .
The world has changed since the times of Monnet , Spaak and Schuman , but every change has made their vision of European cooperation more compelling than before .
Britain wants to use its presidency to create an effective and inclusive Union that is open to the whole of Europe .
That is why we are so concerned to make a success out of economic and monetary union and enlargement .
We also want to build a Union that responds to the real concerns of the European peoples .
That is why we want to take forward work on jobs , the environment and crime .
We want to make the Union efficient , so we will focus on the reform agenda and start to prepare the European Union for the challenges of the next century .
And we want to make it a more effective voice in the world , so we will be working to improve the performance of the common foreign and security policy .
The new British Government is committed to making a success of European cooperation , and our presidency will be an affirmation of this .
Economic and monetary union will be a most momentous step .
During our presidency the key decision will be made on who qualifies for Stage Three of EMU - which currencies are to be locked together in the single currency .
The European Parliament will , of course , have a key role to play in that decision .
Britain will be in the chair when the crucial decision is made next May .
We will discharge this responsibility to the best of our abilities , fully and scrupulously , in a way that we hope will show Europe at its most constructive best .
We want economic and monetary union to be a success .
Britain itself will not be in the first wave , but that does not mean that we have no interest in the success of monetary union .
Our economy is bound up in that of the continent and we have as much reason as any country of the continent to work for a successful launch .
We are also committed to making enlargement a success .
The Luxembourg Summit opened the road to enlargement .
Now it falls to us to get the process moving ahead down that road .
During the British Presidency we will be launching the Accession Process for all applicants , as well as starting negotiations with those countries that want to join the European Union .
It is a process in which the European Parliament will have a crucial role to play .
We must be sure to work together , because enlarging the European Union is an historic opportunity , both for Europe and for the new Members .
It will give an immense boost to all our economies .
It will create a wider , stronger Europe .
It will fulfil the challenge set eight years ago when the Iron Curtain was brought down and will enable us to create a prosperous , self-confident and more stable Europe .
We have got rid of the Iron Curtain .
It is important that we do not tolerate in its place a velvet curtain which separates the affluent nations of Western Europe from poorer countries on its borders in central and eastern Europe .
The last 50 years of division in Europe have been an aberration in our history .
In the history of Europe its great cultural figures , such as Mozart , Chopin , Goethe or Voltaire , would not have recognized a concept of a Europe that was divided in the way it has been in the past 50 years .
It falls to our generation to have the great opportunity of finally ending that division by opening the doors of the European Union to the new democracies of central and eastern Europe .
We have two important but practical objectives for the British Presidency on enlargement .
First , to get the actual negotiations off to a flying start .
And , second , to help those who have further to travel - to make sure that all the applicant countries feel included in the process .
We will continue to provide support along the way to all those applicants : support to help them to reform their economies , privatize their state-owned corporations , strengthen their public administrations .
That is why Britain itself will be assisting in providing training for some of the negotiators on the side of the Central European countries that are applying .
We are assisting in the training of their negotiators because we believe these negotiations are not confrontational or adversarial .
These negotiations have one common purpose : to make a success of enlargement .
The inaugural meeting of the European Conference will be held on 12 March in London .
It will be a visible demonstration of the inclusive Europe we want to build .
We also want it to be a substantive meeting , discussing issues that matter to all our peoples , both in the Member States and the candidate countries alike - on the environment , drugs and organized crime .
The prospect of Cyprus joining the European Union offers us the opportunity of contributing to peace and the prosperity of all of the people of that island .
The European Union firmly supports the United Nations SecretaryGeneral in his efforts to find a political solution on Cyprus .
We hope the leaders of the two communities will resume UN-led negotiations after the elections .
We welcome the willingness of the government of Cyprus to include Turkish Cypriots in the delegation for accession negotiations .
We would like to see a bizonal , bicommunal , federal Cyprus join the European Union .
But Cyprus is entitled to have its application for membership considered on its own strong merits , and its progress must not be conditional on a solution to the division of the island .
We will also work hard to strengthen relations between the European Union and Turkey .
Turkey matters , both as a major player in an important region , and as a long-time ally of Europe .
We recognize Turkey 's European vocation , and the need to draw her into the enlargement process .
We have laid down criteria for all states wishing to join the European Union : the need for a market economy , democratic governance and observance of human rights .
Turkey 's candidacy for membership of the European Union must be judged by the same objective criteria as any other country .
Britain wants to reconnect the peoples of Europe with the European Union which their governments are trying to create .
Our peoples need to know that the European Union is relevant to their lives .
To them the European Union sometimes seems to spend too much of its time discussing things that do not touch their lives : abstractions and theories , rather than a concrete agenda .
Our people need to believe that their worries dictate our agenda in Europe .
Three issues are of paramount concern to the people of Europe : employment , jobs and crime and the environment .
I know they are your priorities .
They will also be ours .
First , employment .
It does not matter in which country you ask the question .
If you ask people what they worry about most , there is only one answer in all our countries : jobs .
I am sure it is what you hear in your constituencies among your electors .
Over 18 million people are unemployed in the European Union .
Five million of them are under 25 .
That means one in ten of Europe 's young people are without a job .
Each one is not a figure , but a tragedy , a waste of talent and an alienation from our societies and our economies .
The modern economy is very exciting for those who are prepared for it , for those with the skills and the confidence to flourish in the new market-place .
But many are intimidated by it , and many are excluded from it .
Our task must be to build in Europe a modern market economy but with just , inclusive societies .
I believe it can be done and that Europe can show how .
The Union has a major role in that process . The Jobs Summit in Luxembourg set an agenda for putting Europe back to work .
Britain will use its presidency to pursue that agenda with vigour . By helping governments find the best ways to help their people find jobs , and by pursuing the four goals agreed at the Luxembourg Jobs Summit , which match well with the new British Government 's own priorities .
Employability , so that our people have the skills they need to find work . Flexibility and adaptability , so that our companies can adapt to a fast-changing market .
Entrepreneurship , so that we can turn Europe 's creativity and innovation into jobs and growth , particularly in small and medium enterprise companies . Finally , equal opportunities , so that all those who want to work are given the chance , not just the young and the able-bodied .
At the Cardiff Summit , one of the top priorities will be to review progress on the Action Plans on unemployment now being drawn up by every Member State under guidelines agreed at Luxembourg .
A key part of staying competitive must be making the single market work and completing the single market .
We will be working hard on the single market action plan approved in Amsterdam and , together with the Austrian Presidency , we aim to get it completed by the end of 1998 .
The action plan gives us a full programme .
We want single market rules applied quickly and enforced better .
We want to engage the Commission and the European Parliament in producing better , simpler legislation .
We want to remove barriers so that Europe can benefit fully from the huge potential of the information society and electronic commerce .
Our aim is an effective single market , free from hidden barriers or unfair state aid , which leads to real prosperity .
Then we will have a Europe that can work for the people , and put the people back to work .
The second major concern for the people is crime .
The drugs trade is worth about $ 400 billion a year around the globe , second only to the oil trade in value .
It is one of the most integrated of trades in Europe .
If we are to catch the criminals who carry out that trade , then we need to match their cross-border work and their international cooperation .
We need to match it with teamwork and international cooperation of our own .
( Applause ) As a presidency , we want to get Europol launched as soon as we can , so that Europe 's police forces can work together effectively .
We will take a fresh initiative against high-tech crime .
New means of cross-border communication such as the Internet offer tremendous new opportunities for access to information and freedom of expression .
But they are also open to risks of abuse , which we can only fight if we fight it together .
We will attack the drugs trade right at its heart by helping the drug-producing countries in Central Asia stem the flow .
We must show the people that the European Union shares their fears and concerns , and is able to act to tackle them .
The last of those concerns is the environment .
The people of Europe want us to be serious in our duty to take care of the planet and to hand it on to our children in good order .
Right across the board , European Union activities need to secure a sustainable Europe .
We will use the British Presidency to put environmental considerations centre stage in the European Union 's decision-making process .
They should be at the heart of all our policies . Not an afterthought or an appendix .
The European Union transport policy has a major impact on the environment .
Let us ensure it is a positive one .
To make this a reality , we will be holding a joint Transport and Environment Council in June .
We will be taking forward the proposals for higher standards on vehicle emissions to create a higher quality of clean air for our people .
By linking the two , we can help to ensure that Europe 's transport policy is friendly to Europe 's environment .
The British Presidency comes at the same time as three important international projects on the environment : the follow-up to the Kyoto climate change talks , negotiations in the UN on providing clean water , and talks on managing the world 's forests .
Kyoto proved that the European Union can be an impressive world leader on the environment .
But Kyoto did not take us all the way to our goal .
Where agreement was reached , we now need to take its implementation forward , and where we did not reach agreement , we need discussion to take forward further agreement with our partners worldwide .
Jobs , crime and the environment .
Those are the concerns of the people of Europe .
Those are the priorities for the British Presidency .
But there must also be progress on the reform agenda for Europe itself .
Tomorrow 's fast-moving world belongs to those who respond fastest , those who change fastest and those who modernize .
The people want to see a European Union that works efficiently and fairly for their benefit .
The Agenda 2000 reforms proposed by the Commission make up an exciting programme to modernize the European Union .
The European Union has to change to meet the challenges posed by enlargement , but also the challenges from a changing world .
The European Union has to make some hard choices .
The common agricultural policy is perhaps the clearest example .
It made sense in the 1950s against a background of food shortages .
A common policy is no less relevant today but it needs modernization .
The Commission was mandated at Luxembourg to bring forward legislative proposals .
During our presidency we will want to make sure that work takes place .
I know the strength of feeling on reform of the common agricultural policy , and the divergence of views about it .
But there is much we can agree on .
A new agricultural policy that will still support our farmers , but at a lower cost to our taxpayers and at a lower cost to the consumer , preserving rural communities and also the rural environment .
I know there are many in the European Parliament who will want to see a shift in our policy so we can devote more of our resources to the areas most relevant to today 's concerns .
( Applause ) We will use our presidency to work with you to ensure that our money is well spent .
The people want to know that the burden is shared fairly , that regional aid goes to help the poorest areas , the areas which need them most .
They want hard action on mismanagement and fraud , to know that their money is not being wasted .
Making the European Union work more efficiently for the people will be our priority .
Another will be making it accessible to the people .
We will propose measures to make the European Union more transparent , including opening up the Council of Ministers still further .
If the people are to believe that the European Union belongs to them , they must at the very least know what is being discussed and how things are decided by us .
( Applause ) I also want the British Presidency to help restore the people 's faith that the European Union can speak and act for them in the world .
I say both ' speak ' and ' act ' deliberately .
It is important that the European Union 's voice is heard quickly and authoritatively .
But it is also important that we match our words with deeds and show that action by the European Union can have an impact .
The European Union can and should be a major player on the world stage .
We will use our presidency to launch a European Union Code of Conduct on arms exports , to establish agreed standards for all exports of arms by European Union members .
We will implement the new European Union Joint Action on landmines , which reaffirms the Union 's commitment to a complete global ban , and to its programme of landmine clearance and help for victims of landmines .
( Applause ) We will work for a coherent European approach to human rights , and make sure it has real impact by working in partnership and dialogue with other countries .
We will continue the Union 's efforts to strengthen its relations with the rest of the world .
I will be travelling tomorrow to Washington and Ottawa to brief the US and Canada on our plans for the presidency .
In May we will be holding summits with both countries .
I will be going to Latin America in February to chair the European Union / Rio and European Union / San José ministerial meetings .
Tony Blair will be chairing the Second Asia-Europe Meeting in London in April , the first such summit with Asia on European soil and an important milestone in our relations with Asia .
During our presidency we will also aim to reach agreement on the European Union mandate for negotiations on a successor to the Lomé Convention .
Under our presidency the European Union will continue to work with our partners to help implement the peace agreements in Bosnia .
We will seek to improve the speed and effectiveness of the European Union 's aid effort to that region .
We will make sure that the European Union continues to make a positive contribution to the Middle East Peace Process .
We are disturbed by the current deadlock , which is a matter of vital concern to the European Union as much as it is to anybody else .
For this reason , we will be working to complement the efforts of the United States to broker talks between both sides and we will be examining how Europe can facilitate progress on practical measures , such as the Gaza airport and seaport .
I should also like to say that we share the deep concern of the European Parliament over recent events in Algeria .
You have made your feelings clear , most notably through your award of the 1997 Sakharov Prize to Selima Ghezali .
Her work , in the most difficult circumstances , is a cogent reminder to the world of the problems that Algeria faces .
The latest massacres , and the scale of the savagery involved , have been appalling .
People across Europe are united in revulsion and horror by the stories they have read in the press from Algeria in recent weeks .
The British Ambassador , on behalf of the presidency , has sought permission from the Algerian authorities to visit the sites of the recent horrific atrocities .
We want to find out how we can help .
We have seen no evidence to support allegations of involvement by the Algerian security authorities .
The world 's media have a keen interest in these dramatic events .
It is in the interests of the Algerian authorities to let the press see for themselves what is going on in their country and who is responsible for the terrorism .
The governments of the international community also have a legitimate interest .
We have learnt too often in the past that if we allow terrorism to take root in any one country , it can all too quickly be exported to other countries .
( Applause ) That is why the British Presidency readily took up the proposal to send a troika mission to Algeria .
Such a mission will both examine how the European Union can help end the terrorism and demonstrate the strong feelings of the peoples of Europe for the terror and sufferings of the people of Algeria .
I give you an assurance that the presidency will keep the European Parliament fully informed .
In conclusion , I should like to say that in even a long speech one can only provide a snapshot of a programme for six months of a presidency .
It is an ambitious and full programme , a programme that demonstrates the Europe that Britain and the European Parliament want to see .
An inclusive Europe that is prosperous , open and peaceful , an efficient Union that cooperates effectively on the things that matter to our people and speaks for them clearly and forcefully in the world .
The European Parliament has a key role in that vision .
The British Government has been working to build up our links with Parliament - links that possibly were not kept at their strongest by the previous British government - and we have developed our presidency agenda in close consultation with yourself and with other Members of this European Parliament .
We want our presidency to ensure that you are given the best possible chance to play your important role in the crucial decisions ahead of us .
Yours will be an important voice in the debate on economic and monetary union .
You must give your assent to enlargement .
When the Amsterdam Treaty comes into force you will have a much-expanded brief for legislation .
The British Presidency is determined to engage in an equal dialogue with you in all these areas , from the plenary debates to your committee rooms .
But your role goes much wider than this .
I believe that the European Parliament has a crucial part to play in our mission of giving the European Union back to the people , in explaining the key issues to the people of Europe , in ensuring they have the chance to speak and that their voice is heard .
As a government that believes in an open , transparent Europe and in a Europe that reflects the views of ordinary people and acts on their concerns , we believe you have a vital role .
We will not always agree but I can assure you that your views will always be listened to .
We are at the threshold of creating a wider , stronger Europe ; a Europe which stretches from Warsaw to Edinburgh ; a peaceful , prosperous and confident Europe ; a Europe which can speak with one voice in the world but which respects and encourages different national cultures to flourish within the Union .
It has fallen to Britain to take the mantle of presidency when these opportunities are within our grasp .
We need your help if we are to grasp these opportunities .
I know you will give us that help .
( Loud applause )
Thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
Mrs Green now has the floor .
Mr President-in-Office , it is the most tremendous pleasure for me to welcome you to the European Parliament today .
As a British Labour MEP , I take delight in being able to welcome the first Labour Government Minister in this Chamber for over two decades .
( Applause from the left ) As leader of the Socialist Group in this House , I know that Socialists , Social Democrats - and some other Members of this House as well - were mightily relieved to see the back of the previous government which was most hostile to , most dishonest about and most obstructive in the European Union .
( Applause from the left ) On 4 May , just three days after the British general election , the Observer newspaper carried the headline ' Goodbye Xenophobia ' .
The first positive message of the new government and from the President-in-Office in particular was towards the European Union .
The Foreign Secretary is very welcome here .
On 16 December 1992 at the conclusion of the last British Presidency my colleague and predecessor Jean-Pierre Cot addressed the then British Prime Minister and said : ' At the outset of the British Presidency , I looked forward confident in my belief that those traditional British characteristics of fair play and efficiency would make it a success ' . He concluded : ' the British Presidency has behaved less like an honest broker and more like a fervent partisan ' .
Today I make a plea to the Foreign Secretary to ensure that this British Presidency will demonstrate that fair play and efficiency and restore British self-respect and dignity in this House and in Europe .
But , more , we hope that this presidency , in seeking to carry out its priorities will demonstrate the drive , the vigour , imagination , flair and vision which has marked the first eight months of the government 's stewardship of Britain .
It will be no surprise to the Foreign Secretary or to this House that my group endorses the major policy priorities which he has outlined to us today as his plan of work for the next six months .
Colleagues in my group will deal with that agenda - jobs , drugs , the environment , the foreign affairs agenda , in detail during the course of the debate today .
I want to raise just two issues in particular .
Firstly , enlargement of the Union to Cyprus and central and eastern Europe .
We welcome the President-in-Office 's commitment to open the process of enlargement in an inclusive and transparent way in March in London .
I know that the British government believes in making hard choices .
I want to ask the President-in-Office to take up the hard option which in our view accompanies the opening conference and that is to begin the process of discussing the complex issue which was not concluded at Amsterdam and which the Luxembourg summit at least had the grace to admit must be tackled .
It is not popular or easy to raise what is often regarded as the navel-gazing issues of institutional reform .
But the simple truth is that the European Union will not work without greater qualified majority voting ...
... let alone the re-weighting of votes , numbers of Commissioners and so on .
Similarly , the word is out that the reforms of both the common agricultural policy and the structural funds which you mentioned will simply not even begin until the end of this year when the German election is over .
Nobody expects that these questions can be resolved in the next six months but please do not pretend that they just do not exist .
The second issue I want to raise is a the decision which must be taken on the euro during the first few days of May of this year .
This Parliament , as the President-in-Office said , has a unique and very particular responsibility .
It is the only Parliament in Europe which can have a direct relationship with the European Central Bank and which already has a direct relationship with Ecofin .
This Parliament can exercise democratic control over the euro and the institutions which determine its success or otherwise .
On this side of the House we are determined that role will be carried out in a very hard-nosed way .
We call on the Council to look seriously at the proposals coming forward from Parliament to give the euro democratic legitimacy .
The attitude of the British Presidency in supporting the right of this Parliament to give its view on the recommendations of Ecofin on which countries should be in the first wave of EMU has given a clear message of democratic commitment for which we are very grateful .
I hope now that the President-in-Office will press his colleagues to support a democratic euro .
This presidency occurs at a crucial time - I have said it if the Foreign Secretary did not .
It carries with it the hopes of those concerned for the future of Europe and , in particular , for our young people .
We wish it well .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , thank you for your statement and more specifically , for your promise that you will listen to the voice of Parliament .
You reminded us that your presidency will be marked by two historic agreements .
On the 30th of March the negotiations with the eleven candidate countries will start and during the first weekend of May the decision on the euro will be taken .
These historic steps have been provided for in agreements , and have been prepared in the European Council for a long time .
They illustrate once more how the European Community has been able to function on the basis of a gradual and continuous process in which patience but also determination are the best and most secure driving forces .
Also , Mr President , once the course has been set , you will be responsible for setting and settling the agenda , and also and particularly for creating the political climate .
You spoke of the transparency of your decisions just now , and the plea to public opinion .
I think that during your presidency the support of the people will be a key element in the countries where the euro will be introduced , but also in the candidate countries , who finally want to belong to a community of free and democratic nations .
The European Community 's decisions have never been as concrete and as influential in the daily life of our fellow citizens as they are now .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we know that the British tradition , permeated with its sense of democracy , attaches much value to the participation of everyone in big , collective decisions .
That is why it is paradoxical that your government has announced that it does not wish to belong to the first group of Member States who will introduce the euro .
Jean Monnet said of the British : we realize that you respect facts , not hypotheses .
History proved him right , when he predicted that the United Kingdom , after a long period of hesitation , would put itself up for the ECSC and the EEC once these two communities achieved their first successes without changing anything in their federal principles .
I , for my part , have confidence in your pragmatism .
Because once the euro is seen to be a strong , stable , attractive currency , your country will join as well , and contribute to its image .
We expect your presidency , during a delicate phase in which fundamental formal decisions will turn over quite a few old habits , to use all its talent and energy to convey a message of hope and trust to the entire population of the Union .
Because , ladies and gentlemen , each new day confirms our conviction that , in defiance of scepticism and resistance , the euro will materialize .
This is a new opportunity to safeguard the standard of living of our people , and a new opportunity for the growth of our economy , an absolute condition for the creation of new jobs .
The hope for sustainable peace on our continent has never been this close and this strong .
Which is why we have to convince our fellow citizens that they should look forward with generosity and with thanks to the enlargement with central and eastern Europe .
And during the Summit in Cardiff , in mid June this year , the first steps towards the reform of Agenda 2000 will be made .
You will have to use your creativity here to stop the fifteen from sinking into powerlessness and from dividing over monetary issues of secondary importance after the historic decision on enlargement and the euro .
Pursuing the general interest will have to prevail over the cold defence of acquired rights , or the populism of national and class egoisms .
That is why the basis on which the European Community was built exists .
Common integration exists , the key to success for the European Community , giving priority to belonging to a strong unit which defends our interests in the outside world and at the same time sticks together internally , so that everyone feels involved .
We have to continue down this road , and we support you in the actions you have announced : job creation , competitive strength , combating fraud and crime , protecting the environment and public health , culture , the information society , the launch of the planning and warning unit by the Common Foreign and Security Policy , renewal of the Lomé Convention , promoting human rights around the world . And I would like to ask you the question , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , will you take actions on behalf of human rights in Nigeria , in Burma , the solution of the problems in Cyprus .
Mrs Green emphasized this , I do it again .
Institutional reform , too , which was not achieved in Amsterdam , is an absolute must for each presidency , including yours .
I was very moved when I recently read an interview with the former President of the European Commission , Jacques Delors , who said that European Integration was brought about on the basis of the economy .
Now we are going to tackle a second major enterprise : enlargement to include the countries of central and eastern Europe . But says Jacques Delors , and I quote :
' This assumes that by the year 2010 all the member countries will have the same ambitions for a unified Europe , and the means to achieve this .
I doubt that very much .
I fear that if we do not consider this question seriously , the European political project will slowly fade away , in favour of a huge free trade zone ' .
( NL ) We must keep this message by Jacques Delors clearly in our ears and in our brains , in our outlook , in our mind .
I call on you , you who are characterized in your tradition by pragmatism , to make a creative effort also , and to make this European Union live during the next century as well .
( Applause )
Mr President , I warmly welcome the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom as President-in-Office of the Council to Parliament this morning .
I wish him every success in his presidency on behalf of the people of Europe .
I thank him for his very extensive address to Parliament .
I endorse the priorities of the presidency , which he clearly outlined .
I strongly endorse the priority which the presidency proposes to give to the objective of showing the peoples of Europe that the European Union is working for them in practical ways .
This objective will only be achieved if it can be clearly demonstrated to the majority of people that the European Union is relevant to their day-to-day concerns and that the Union can contribute to finding solutions to the problems in our society .
The issue of most widespread concern at the present time is crime .
There are very few people in any of our countries who have not themselves been the victims of criminal acts or whose families have not been affected by crime one way or another .
Practically every night television news bulletins bring stories into our homes of more and more horrendous crimes being perpetrated by evil people , often against defenceless people in our society , such as young children or the very old .
Large numbers of our people are concerned over their personal safety or the safety of their families .
In many of our communities house break-ins , muggings and violent attacks are considered to be more commonplace than had been the case years ago .
The underlying cause for a large proportion of these crimes is drug dependency and the abuse of illegal drugs .
Illegal drugs seem to be readily available nowadays both in terms of quantity and variety , particularly to young people .
The abuse of these drugs poses a serious health risk to impressionable young people who are persuaded to experiment with them .
The drug dependency and addiction which ultimately follows for many of these people can only be satisfied through the proceeds of crime .
It is this type of drug-related crime which is posing a serious risk to many of our communities .
I believe that the European Union can make a major contribution towards tackling the scourge of drug abuse by concentrating its resources in a coordinated manner with the national authorities on tackling the international drugs trade .
The illegal drugs trade is now a sophisticated international business .
The fight against this trade , if it is to be effective , must also be sophisticated and international in scope .
Those of us who participated in the negotiations for the Maastricht Treaty had hoped that Europol would be the agency which would provide national authorities with the intelligence and information on money laundering , illegal drug production and smuggling , which they required to prosecute those responsible for the drugs being distributed to our communities .
Many years later I am disappointed to see yet another presidency having to list as one of its objectives that of finishing the preparations for the establishment of Europol .
The only people who could be happy with these disgraceful delays are those involved in the illegal drugs trade .
Nonetheless , I warmly welcome the British Presidency 's commitment to getting Europol established and its interest in promoting international efforts to tackle the illegal drugs business .
I will be supportive of any such proposals which come before this Parliament .
During the British Presidency decisions will be made concerning those countries which will be included in the first wave of participants in the single currency .
While I appreciate that Britain will not be one of these countries , it is nonetheless important that all countries , even those not participating in the single currency from day one , should be actively involved in the preparatory and planning phases for the launch of the euro because of the potential impact of this currency on all our economies , whether inside or outside the single currency zone .
A critically important aspect of the launch of the new currency will be the attitude of individual citizens to the euro .
The President-in-Office will recall the reticence , concern and even fearful response of many British and , indeed , Irish citizens to the decimalization of our respective currencies during the 1960s .
In the lead-in to decimalization the importance of establishing a high degree of consumer confidence was perhaps not fully understood .
I believe that the same risk exists today .
It is vitally important that the European institutions , as well as national governments , undertake a comprehensive process of education amongst all sectors of the population and not just amongst the financial and business community , as seems to be mainly the case at present .
When the euro is launched it will be necessary to exchange money held in present currencies for the new currency .
This requirement may well provide a useful opportunity for the authorities to identify the assets of criminals and to take appropriate action .
I hope that the presidency will ensure that the initiatives necessary to identify criminal assets are put in place and in good time to avail of the opportunity .
The work programme submitted by the presidency suggests that efforts will also be made over the next six months to make progress in the negotiations on the reform of the common agricultural policy .
Clearly the Commission 's detailed proposals will need to be tabled before any significant progress can be made in this matter .
Final agreement on reform of the CAP should be preceded by a lengthy and comprehensive debate spread over a number of presidencies .
This reform will have major political significance , not just for our future relations with East European countries , but also for our rural areas , for food policy and for the millions of farmers and workers involved .
Finally , the presidency has identified environmental policy as one of its priorities .
In this regard I would hope that it will give due consideration to resolving a long-time existing environmental problem of major concern to your neighbours in Ireland - the problem of continued discharges of radioactive material into the Irish Sea from the Sellafield complex .
Mr President , after years of bitter negativism the British government 's positive attitude comes as a refreshing improvement .
Few presidencies have won as much goodwill .
Few , for that matter , have organized as big a public relations campaign to generate this goodwill .
Anyhow : welcome back , England .
But a warning is called for .
Good intentions are not enough .
A presidency has to show results .
This applies to two areas : monetary issues and foreign policy .
The most important decision for the Union under the British Presidency is the one about the euro .
Regrettably the British government was not prepared to state clearly whether or when England will join the European currency .
The presidency therefore has to conduct these negotiations with one hand tied behind its back .
Tony Blair wants to lead in Europe , but he cannot expect to lead from the sidelines .
I would like to ask the UK nonetheless to see to it that the Member States respect the Treaty when its appoints the first president of the European Central Bank .
According to the Treaty this appointment will run for a full period of eight years , and not for two or four .
Messing around with the Treaty on this point could damage its credibility even before it is launched .
Mr President , the financial crisis in Asia is casting an increasing shadow over Europe .
Although there is no reason to panic , there is cause for serious concern .
Devaluation in Hong Kong or China , or a financial crisis in Japan would affect both America and Europe .
Up until now the Union , in contrast to America , contributed directly to finding solutions .
The absence of the world 's largest economic block is conspicuous .
Why did the European Union not send a team to the countries concerned to offer political solidarity and support ?
Of course , the Asian countries need to deregulate their economy and reform their financial sector , and the British Presidency should make this clear in the ASEAN countries and in Japan .
But we must also express confidence in the Asian economies at the highest political level .
This is not the time for the Union to create the impression of being introverted , selfish , and irrelevant .
If , in addition , there is another area where there is a need for British leadership it is foreign policy .
It is on this point above all that the British Presidency will be judged .
There is an urgent need for effective European diplomacy in the Mediterranean and in the Balkans .
I support the intention expressed by the presidency to make the Union play an active role in the Middle East and Algeria .
Now that the Algerian government is not capable or not prepared to end the crimes against humanity in its country , the international community needs to consider seriously if it should set up an international criminal court for Algeria .
This could be the most effective method for applying international pressure .
The Union must also improve cooperation with Turkey .
Obviously no country which violates human rights can join the Union .
As long there is no genuine freedom of speech , and as long as children are tortured by the police , negotiations with Turkey are out of the question .
But it is nonetheless in the interest of Europe to cooperate with Turkey on issues such as regional security and emigration .
In March 1995 the Association Council decided to deepen the political dialogue with Turkey .
The presidency must see to it that these decisions are finally implemented , and that financial cooperation is resumed .
Pacta sunt servanda [ pacts are there to be observed ] .
Two comments about the Balkans .
I am getting increasingly worried that Kosovo will be the next keg to explode in the Balkans .
Maybe it is not too late yet to prevent a war in Kosovo , but things are changing for the worse .
It is vital that the EU and the US increase their pressure on president Milosevic .
The international community should appoint a highly placed representative for the Kosovo issue .
Kosovo must be one of the priorities of the British Presidency .
My group is also asking for priority to be given to the arrest of war criminals in Bosnia .
Nations do not commit war crimes , individuals do .
That is why the guilty have to be tried .
Only then can the circle of violence be broken .
1998 must be the year in which Karadzic and Mladic are finally brought to court .
The United Kingdom has an important military force in former Yugoslavia .
I therefore call on the British Presidency to use all political , as well as military resources to arrive at the arrest and deportation of these two criminals .
One final remark about the democratic quality of the Union .
One of the ways to increase democratic control in the Union is by means of the introduction by the Council of a common electoral system based on proportional representation .
If our European citizens wish to have this system in 1999 , then the necessary decisions must be taken no later than June this year .
This means that the presidency must make its proposals by the end of March .
The Liberals agree with the British government 's wish to bring Europe closer to the people .
I therefore trust the British government to agree with our wish that this important democratic reform is accomplished this year .
Mr President , my group wholeheartedly welcomes the objectives and words of the presidency .
It will be up to the presidency to ensure that we will also be able to applaud its actions .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as you so rightly said , the decisions on the euro and the start of enlargement negotiations define the tasks and the significance of the British Presidency .
And what can Members of the European Parliament hope for from a British Presidency ?
We know what we hope for : a British Presidency which believes strongly in Europe today , and is tenacious , optimistic and practical , with a sense of humour as well , if possible .
And with a Labour presidency , we must also hope ( especially those of us on the left ) that it has an awareness of society .
For that reason I should like to make a few friendly comments - not at all formal - on some of the things you said .
Because at this time of enlargement , culmination of EMU and forthcoming development of the Stability Pact , when it is going to be so difficult to implement social policies ( which will sometimes be hindered by circumstances ) , we need to say a resounding " yes ' to enlargement , but we also need to make clear ( as you did ) how essential it is to combat unemployment .
The fight against unemployment must not just consist of good intentions , but should be given the same importance as currency and the fight against inflation , which we share .
But we need more than that .
In order to build a balanced , democratic and just Europe , we need to maintain the great objective of economic and social cohesion , and the aspiration to a Europe based not just on liberties , but also on great equality between north and south , east and west .
There is an obvious question : how do we achieve that cohesion ?
What are our suggestions ?
Well , we propose that we continue to use the structural funds in an intelligent and transparent manner , without squandering them , but maintaining that internal solidarity between northern and southern Europe . That does not have to be incompatible with enlargement policy .
You mentioned the common agricultural policy , and I venture to say to you that we need to overcome the imbalances in aid provided for different agricultural products .
We need reform , but a reform which helps to provide more equal opportunities for the different countries and farmers of Europe .
If we want to fund enlargement and internal solidarity at the same time , we cannot agree with the Commission 's approach in Agenda 2000 .
It is impossible to work with an own-resource limit of 1.27 % of Community GNP .
I will speak in terms which the people of Europe will be able to understand : the Commission is proposing that out of every ECU 10 , 000 of the GNP , ECU 127 should go to the Community budget .
The European Parliament , on the other hand , is asking for a further ECU 4 for the budget out of every ECU 10 , 000 of the Community GNP ( that is , a total of ECU 131 ) , so that we can simultaneously tackle enlargement and solidarity .
How can it be impossible to use an additional ECU 4 out of every ECU 10 , 000 ?
I find that incomprehensible , and I am not just speaking for myself , but on behalf of many European citizens .
Furthermore , we want to tackle the problems of money being squandered and lack of transparency , but we support the welfare state as one of Europe 's most characteristic features .
The market should be transparent , but it should be subject to democratic values and the political and social rights of the people .
I am sure that a Labour President must remain highly sensitive to this aim of maintaining the welfare state as a mark of European identity , through all the reorganizations and updates required by each political option .
And to finish , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I want to say that we agree that there should be reasonable dialogue with Turkey , but from a European viewpoint , as you said .
Turkey has to fulfil the same criteria as the other countries .
It cannot threaten northern Cyprus , and be constantly opposed to human rights .
We cannot accept a United States viewpoint , shaped by Turkey 's importance in NATO .
We see things from a European point of view , and we want the Council to defend that view .
Finally , if Parliament 's President will allow me , I would like to say that we are all committed to Algeria .
Perhaps we may have slightly differing views about it , but we agree that the Troika should go there , and so should a major European Parliamentary delegation - not just to try to shed some light on what is happening , but also to promote dialogue between all those forces which condemn the terrorism and are prepared to develop an Algeria ruled by law .
For all these tasks - for a Europe based on democracy , solidarity , and also social aspects - you can count on the support of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen and the British Presidency of the Council , I pondered for a long time yesterday evening about what comes to mind when I think about the British Presidency , and then suddenly there it was in my head , and especially in my gut : rock- ' n ' -roll .
The cry for justice , democracy , freedom and solidarity , the imaginative escape from the old fug .
That is what rock- ' n ' -roll is for me .
Tony Blair 's message is that time is on my side , and so talking about my generation , Mr Cook , I agree with you and you make us reflect on everything this Europe of ours needs on its long and winding road , because Europe is sick .
Its health will certainly not be restored by a ratification of its condition or by accepting and tolerating that condition .
Europe is sick , and the European ideal is becoming weaker because there is a feeling that combined efforts are being made to undermine it .
Europe once stood for freedom and peace , but now the opening of its borders is seen as a danger and 2 000 Kurdish refugees are seen as a threat to order and security .
Yes , Mr Cook , I agree with you : the divisions must be overcome , instead of setting up new barriers .
Europe is sick .
Ecological destruction is spreading , and it is not only the forests which are wasting away .
Europe is sick . It is suffering from mass unemployment and a policy which talks about stability but is only concerned about money , a policy which is geared towards the euro but not towards European men and women .
Democracy resides in the endeavour for equal opportunity , social justice , tolerance , protection and help for the weak .
European democracy is in a sorry state when 30 million people are without work .
People who are made social outcasts .
People whose social decline increasingly excludes them from participating in society and politics and abandons them to their fate .
People whose experience is a life of poverty and lack of prospects from childhood onwards .
Those people need more than words .
Words are all I have to take your heart away .
That is not enough for those people !
Because people have to know why they are supposed to want Europe in the first place , what is needed is a clear future perspective for the Europeanization of policies , in order to tackle problems which cannot be solved nationally on a European level .
People do not live on money alone .
They need work so they can earn money .
They need equal opportunities to get work .
They need dignity so they can believe they have an opportunity in the first place .
Social justice is not everything , but without social justice Europe is nothing !
This must be the agenda for the British Presidency .
For Europe as well as at home .
Let no one say this is outmoded or that it cannot be done .
France and the selfconfident movement of the unemployed prove the opposite .
You cannot always get what you want .
But if you try , sometimes you may find that you get what you need !
The EU will only become a union of all its citizens if it also becomes a social and environmental union which is committed to sustainability and based on democracy .
Democracy is not a vision . Democracy is a matter of survival for this European Union .
Democracy based on the principle of participation , on equal rights for all people , on respect for fundamental and human rights , rights such as the right of asylum , which only make sense when their application is guaranteed rather than their abuse being complained of .
Democracy , that means transparency and openness , because behind closed doors principles become eroded .
But transparency and openness do not mean big brother is watching you in the offices of friendly governments , nor do they mean Europol in my private life .
We want an integrated Europe which is solidly established on a democratic , social and ecological Europe , and this is what the British Presidency must do .
We can work it out , we can work it out !
Life is very short and there is no time .
I promise you , I will ask you once again !
I thank the Stones , the Beatles and the Bee-Gees for helping me to write my speech !
Mr President , this for me is a very historic day because 21 years ago to the day I was the only MP still here who spoke on the first ever UK Presidency - the last UK Labour presidency .
I notice from the Minutes that Mr Tomlinson spoke in the next debate and he is still here , but he was speaking as President-in-Office of the Council , not as a Member .
So it is historic and I would like to start on a pleasant note by throwing a few bouquets at the President-in-Office , which might surprise him .
The first bouquet I am throwing is because of the introduction of PR for euro elections - a long awaited improvement in our lot .
The opting into the social policy shunned by the previous government , the promise today of opening Council deliberations , something I spoke about 21 years ago , suggesting as I do now , that EP committee chairmen be invited to Council deliberations on relevant matters : I wait to see if that will be followed 21 years later .
It is not a case of rock and roll so much as of a slow foxtrot .
I would like to praise also the enormous courage of Mr Cook 's counterpart in government , Mo Mowlam , for her very brave actions with regard to Northern Ireland .
I would like to praise the European noises that are coming from the front bench .
But I start now with a criticism about EMU .
It is an irony surely that in the moment when the decision is to be made as to who is to be in the first tranche , the UK has opted out , although it qualifies , and is not going to be in the first tranche .
That to me is a lost opportunity .
I would say to the President-in-Office that the train will start , it will travel well , and will it not be harder to clamber on the train once it is well in motion ?
The Trade Union Congress , the CBI , the exporters of whom Scotland has very many , are all in favour of EMU .
So I think that this is a great shame and I wonder if even yet it is not possible for the UK Government to change it 's mind ?
Here is what President Crosland said 21 years ago today : ' There was always in the context of EMU , a widespread hope that financial policy-making would pass from Member States to the Community and that the Community would transform from a customs union into a fully integrated economic union complete with its Central Bank , a single fixed exchange and a growing harmonization of taxes . ' It is a bit of a slow foxtrot , is it not ?
While the UK has dithered , bereft of vision , the clock has ticked on and I think the failure of the UK to join EMU is a present tragedy .
On the social policy side I have another criticism .
Is there much point in getting the advantages of the social policy , which we have always supported in the party I represent here , if Old Labour 's stance of defending the disadvantaged is to be abandoned ?
Disabled , single mothers , students - there is a Euro-speak that people criticize but there is also a New Labour-speak which I criticize .
' Means-testing ' is now ' affluence-testing ' .
' Long-termism ' is meant to excuse the savage cuts of today .
I would like to turn to some practical questions on the priorities .
We all have our favourite environmental issues , but I would urge that we enforce the code of conduct passed by this Parliament for sub-standard tankers which threaten all our coasts and have , in fact , caused enormous damage to many of our Member States .
On unemployment , the EMAC committee on which I served has put forward that there should be a compulsory rule about late payment .
That really would help to solve the problems of small businesses and we should look to the very small businesses where real jobs can be created in great numbers .
The President-in-Office did not mention fishing today .
We have had a debacle of decades with the last government 's sell-out to Spain on fishing .
But recently we had another one by this New Labour , with the sell-out on the Fraga report .
So , I ask the President-in-Office if he is still committed to the principle of relative stability ?
This is the fundamental question .
And are flag-ships to be allowed to continue making a nonsense of the whole of the CFP as it was originally developed ?
Has he read the Duke of Edinburgh 's criticism this week of the one-sided nature of fishing agreements between the EU and poor developing countries ?
Members on all sides of this House and from all countries welcome the referendum , which must be another bouquet I throw at this government that the President-in-Office represents .
But there is keen sadness about the broken promises : the direct relationship offered to the new Scottish Parliament with Europe has been watered down , the status of the ' Länder ' has been watered down , the right to attend meetings if the Scottish interest was dominant has been watered down .
On enlargement , can we solve it without an enhancement of the funding ?
I have an interest here as an Objective 1 area .
Objective 1 is just beginning to work to redress hundreds of years of neglect of my area .
Lastly , my 23 years here have seen the reconciliation of the old rivalries of Europe which caused war , horror and devastation and by decades of patient dialogue we have created the habit of cooperation .
That is a habit we must never take for granted .
( Applause )
Mr President , I also welcome the President-in-Office here this morning .
I would simply say that the programme he has outlined here this morning is a very ambitious one and for my part I welcome it and I congratulate him .
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the present United Kingdom Government on its enthusiasm .
I just hope its enthusiasm is realistic , when one considers how much one can achieve in the very short time of six months available to it .
I am concerned at the continued emphasis being placed on the role of the European Union in solving the problem of unemployment .
I have made my view clear in this Parliament that I believe the only way to tackle this serious problem , which faces us all , is at national level , and closer to the people .
While I do not oppose the involvement of the European Union in addressing unemployment , it must be realistic in accepting the limits of its ability in this area .
What we can achieve at European Union level is better support on training , especially in the area of our young unemployed , and the retraining of those who have been unfortunate in losing their employment .
We can also achieve more by sharing and pooling our achievements through our research and development programmes .
I would ask the presidency to move towards the stimulation of greater research and development to emphasize its importance for the future .
As the President-in-Office said , we are also entering into the crucial phase in the Agenda 2000 proposals .
More especially , there is the matter of the further reform of the common agricultural policy , which is in great turmoil , nowhere more so than in his own country , the United Kingdom .
The ban on United Kingdom beef must be removed as it is destroying the industry .
I trust the President-in-Office during his term of office will work for the removal of that ban and the implementation of the ' born-after date ' scheme .
On the same front , he must be positive in redressing the imbalance created by the strong pound and the fact that the UK Government has not applied for the support available to it in Brussels to enable it to alleviate the problem .
I am impressed by the presidency 's enthusiasm in environmental protection .
Despite progress , pollution remains at unacceptably high levels .
We in Europe have attempted to face up to our responsibilities by positive action .
We must now persuade other countries outside the European Union to accept their responsibilities .
The President-in-Office has a tremendous challenge ahead of him .
I wish him well and look forward to working with him closely in that challenge .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , it is quite difficult for a Member to comment when he has only just heard a speech .
It leaves no time for consideration .
I will give you but a few impressions , the first of which relates to the imprecision of your stated intentions with regard to the themes mentioned : you wish the countries of eastern Europe and Cyprus to become members ; you wish to see a Europe of full employment ; you wish to see a safe , drug-free Europe ; you want a pollution-free Europe , both its water and its air ; you want to see an end to terrorism in Algeria .

But then what ?


Let us look at these questions a little more closely .
I note that the President-in-Office set the objective of participating in the privatization of the economies of eastern Europe .
This is a significant and perilous objective .
I must note , ironically , that it is quite amusing to hear the Minister for Foreign Affairs of a Labour government sounding the death knell for the statist economic theories of which his own party was for decades the eulogist .
I say this with the best of intentions , for the benefit of Mrs Green .
In reality , as the examples of Switzerland or Norway show , it is not the European Union that creates prosperity but a free economy .
Regarding the accession of Cyprus , it will not be able to find a solution to the political situation there by itself .
If a solution is not forthcoming prior to accession , membership , far from bringing about peace may , in fact , risk bringing about war .
With regard to unemployment , the President-in-Office has limited himself to a dramatic assessment and a quite explicit wish .
The remedy for this situation is , however , already known .
We must have the courage to confirm that the absence of reasonable protection for the European market with regard to the importation of products produced under conditions of social dumping in the rest of the world is one of the causes .
Either we achieve a coherent regional grouping based on preferential treatment for Member States only , or we immerse ourselves completely in free trade on a world scale .
The one and the other are completely incompatible .
On an international level , you have mentioned your movements , Mr President-in-Office .
I am only sorry that you are starting with Washington .
I am not saying a visit to Washington is not needed , only that you should not start there , because of the risk of giving your other contacts the impression that our policy tags along behind that of the United States .
Finally , with regard to Algeria , I am quite surprised that we need to send parliamentary missions as if our secret services had not already got enough information on the subject .
I would like to restate that all these events started when the victors of the first round of the first free elections in that country for thirty years were imprisoned .
Mr President-in-Office , I believe that your policies are based on good will .
Good will may earn you appreciation around the world , but it is not the basis of good policy .
Mr President , the last time that Britain held the presidency of the European Union was in the second half of 1992 .
Then the British Presidency was characterized by drift and vacillation , by lack of purpose and absence of vision .
This time it will be different , very different .
The British Labour Government has a clear , well thought-out agenda , as we have heard this morning , an agenda which is designed to make the essential link to the peoples ' concerns and aspirations and European cooperation .
Europe should not be about remote bureaucracy and abstract theories .
Europe should be about joint approaches to common problems .
It is about tackling the issues which affect the lives of ordinary people in all the Member States .
It is because the British Government recognises this that the British Presidency is , I believe , so determined to pursue the priorities which have been outlined .
Quite rightly , at the top of the presidency 's agenda is to reach agreement on which countries will qualify for Stage Three of economic and monetary union .
A successful start of the euro is in everybody 's best interests .
Also at the top of the agenda is job creation and if there is any issue weighing heavy on the people of Europe it is surely the fact that there are over 18 million people unemployed throughout the Union .
There can never be a true European Union when we have such high levels of unemployment .
Unemployment causes personal misery , it undermines social cohesion , it eats at Europe 's very soul .
What we have to do is to take forward the employment guidelines agreed at the Luxembourg Job Summit so that we have concrete action plans .
Plans which will turn good words into practical deeds ; encouraging entrepreneurship , promoting education , training and life-long learning , improving employability , increasing equal opportunities .
This is what is needed and I am sure that this is what the British Presidency will promote with vigour and with determination .
If Europe it to succeed in the global economy , we cannot be complacent or conservative .
To win in the world we have to make the process of change a way of life .
To be competitive we have to be innovative and to be innovative we have to be radical and forward-looking .
This means that we have to create a more effective single market , a market which , for example , embraces telecommunications and the energy sector .
It means ending unfair state aids .
It means encouraging small businesses and attacking red tape and it means ensuring that research and development is at the very cutting edge of our economic advance .
Another priority for the presidency is to launch the process of enlarging the European Union .
Let us be clear that this is of tremendous importance to all the people of Europe .
Enlargement will bring real benefits to both the existing Member States and the aspiring members .
It will bring mutual economic rewards and deliver greater security and stability .
But , as we all know , for enlargement to work , the European Union itself has to change .
Agenda 2000 is a good starting-point .
Now we have to have a serious debate about how we can develop a new regional policy to meet the needs of the future , and how of course we are going to reform the common agricultural policy .
If modernisation is needed anywhere it is here .
The emphasis which the presidency will place on enlargement is , I believe , indicative of how the presidency wants the European Union to look beyond its current borders .
In a similar vein the presidency should be congratulated on its determination to improve the Union 's common foreign and security policy , the emphasis which it is placing on agreeing an new negotiating mandate for the Lomé convention , and on its desire to give human rights the attention which is required .
The British Presidency has indeed set itself an ambitious agenda .
It includes a wide range of issues , issues about which people are desperately concerned .
In my experience the international menace of the drugs trade is undoubtedly one of those issues of greatest concern to the people of Europe and I for one warmly welcome your commitment , Foreign Secretary , to take up this fight in earnest .
It is indeed heartening to hear also your commitment this morning to work with the European Parliament .
I can assure you that the European Parliament is more than happy to work with you .
Partnership , consensus , cooperation are our joint words , we share a common approach to Europe 's development .
Finally , I wonder if I could conclude with a personal note .
At the end of the presidency the European Summit will be held in my constituency , in Cardiff , the capital city of Wales .
I am delighted that this will be the case and I am confident that at the end the presidency we will see a Europe which is more confident , a Europe which is more dynamic , a Europe which is more relevant and a Europe which once again has the full support of our people .
Let us all work together to ensure that the Cardiff Summit is the people 's summit .
Mr President , we very much welcome the opening of the British Presidency of the European Union .
Although the Labour Party has changed its mind six times on our membership of the EU since we joined 25 years ago , for the last few years it has been fairly consistent .
I hope the UK Presidency will be a great success .
Before I come back to the presidency , I should just like to deal with one or two remarks made by Mr Cook in his speech .
It is extraordinary that he should talk about bringing the European Parliament closer to the people when his government is about to impose a system of proportional representation on the United Kingdom which is , as I understand it - and we are still waiting to find the definition - a closed list system .
Although this is relevant to the European Parliament and although I know that Mr Cook is a long-time proponent of PR , would he agree with the attitude taken by his colleague , Mr Straw , the Home Secretary , that the electoral regions will be very large , and that it is highly unlikely that an individual candidate will be known by more than a fraction of the electorate in that region ?
Voters cannot , therefore , be expected to make an informed choice between candidates of the same party .
That in itself speaks volumes about the Labour Party 's attitude toward the European Parliament .
I should also like to say that the fact that two Members of the European Parliament have now to leave the Labour Party in order to speak freely , one sitting with the Communists and one with the Greens - one who told me this morning that he was expelled by fax - suggests to me that the control-freak tendencies of the Labour Party are now becoming known to people in Europe as a whole .
I would add that , since we are all concerned about candidate selection , quoting from the Conservative Party 's own manual on candidate selection , it says : ' Edmund Burke 's words still hold good today .
Your representative owes you not his industry only , but his judgement and he betrays , instead of serving you , if he sacrifices it to your opinion .
Authoritative instructions , which the member is bound blindly and implicitly to obey , though contrary to the dearest convictions of his judgement and conscience , are utterly unknown to the laws of the land and against the tenor of our constitution . ' The Conservative Party will stand by those principles , unlike the Labour Party , which ...
( Murmurs ( of dissent ) ) we understand , will allow the National Executive Committee to make the rankings , the order of the list and the selections in toto , in secret and impose those candidates on the United Kingdom .
( Murmurs ( of dissent ) ) I am going to return to the presidency because that is what I am expected to speak on .
Conservatives largely agree with the government 's priorities for the presidency : enlargement , jobs , cleaning up the environment and the fight against crime .
These are all important policy objectives that we too would have put high on the agenda .
We hope progress will be made on enlargement .
It is a historic challenge .
We have a moral duty to embrace the people of Eastern and Central Europe who lived under a cruel and alien tyranny for so long .
Enlargement is in all our interests because it will dramatically increase the single market .
Indeed , one of the many reasons why the Treaty of Amsterdam left so much to be desired was its total failure to get to grips with this challenge .
On enlargement , Labour has a clear objective for the presidency and the setting of a detailed timetable for those applicants in the first wave .
I hope they succeed , despite the fiasco of the treatment of Turkey at Luxembourg .
Britain 's record on jobs is far better than the European average .
Unfortunately , Labour 's approach to this question is likely to lead to more unemployment , not less .
Any party that can contend that signing up to the social chapter and the regulations made , and to be made under it , increases flexibility in the marketplace does not deserve to be taken seriously .
Europe needs to tackle head on the unpalatable truth that unless we cut our social costs and free up our labour markets , we will be out-priced and out-performed by the rest of the world .
Unacceptable levels of unemployment will persist .
Red tape and regulation are luxuries Europe can no longer afford .
I have been distracted during the course of this address .
I have had far more reaction from this Assembly than Mr Cook did earlier on .
His speech was heard in almost total silence .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , undoubtedly the European Union will experience in the next few days and in the near future a period of great change and major challenges : the euro , the enlargement , the application of the Treaty of Amsterdam but also the definition of a more appropriate and courageous political and institutional framework , at least I hope so !
In these six months we will be embarking on the first negotiations for the reform of the structural and cohesion funds and for us this is a very important task given that the changed conditions in many regions of the Union , often for the worse , require particularly great attention .
It will also be the six months of the start of the measures decided by the special Council on employment , six months in which the Member States must produce their plans of action for the Cardiff Council ; we trust that British pragmatism will be able to banish dangerous demagogic solutions for achieving the urgent employment targets we have set ourselves .
We also trust that , with the same pragmatism , the British Presidency will be able to strive to bring to completion the operational rules of the internal market , by which I mean that deregulation and simplification of the legislation will be amongst the priority objectives to be pursued .
I think this will be the real help which we can and must offer to our citizens , to whom in fact the British Presidency seems to want to direct particular attention .
I wonder if the presidency could not also convince the national governments of the need for general simplification of the legislation which is burdening citizens , firms and civil society in general .
Finally , we agree with the timetable of activities and initiatives of this six months according to the legislative programme which this Chamber has already debated , above all for the intention expressed by the President-inOffice of the Council , Mr Cook , to take serious and determined action against drugs .
But in concluding I must call on the Council to ensure that more decisive and strong action is taken to deal with those emergencies which , as such , are not predictable in a legislative timetable .
I refer to those aspects of foreign and security policy which often find both our respective countries and our Community institutions unprepared .
The absence of the Union or its serious delay in dealing with problems like refugees , genocides , international tensions and conflicts in general , are no longer tolerable in a Europe which we want to have a strong and solid presence in the eyes of world public opinion .
So we also draw the attention of the presidency to the advantages of continuing without delay a serious and responsible Mediterranean policy which can contribute stability to the regions and develop our relations , recalling that this Parliament will also start a Euro-Mediterranean parliamentary forum as soon as possible .
As a Member of this Parliament , as joint leader of the UPE and as a European citizen , I sincerely wish the British Presidency the will and the wisdom to give a strong impetus , more than just a nudge , to Union policy thanks precisely to the proverbial Anglo-Saxon pragmatism , now that Albion seems to have converted from initial Euroscepticism to become a convinced and loyal Europhile .
I myself , being responsible for the international institutional reports of the Mediterranean Laboratory Foundation am happy to make available the results of the second Euromed civil forum , which the Foundation held in Naples last December after having collected the testimony from Spain of Barcelona 1995 , and I obviously remain available for an official presentation to the Presidency of the Council and trust that in future above all the Presidents-in-Office , like the other Community institutions , will also give continuity of attention and support to the action of the Euromed civil forum .
Mr President , I welcome the statement by the President-in-Office .
The United Kingdom is neither a large state nor a small one .
It is a middle-sized Western democracy with a complicated historical legacy .
It cannot regain the glory on the world stage which it once enjoyed .
But where it once thought of power , it can now think of responsibility .
The President-in-Office 's speech offers hope that is the new United Kingdom approach .
Britain 's new approach to Europe will be welcomed in this House .
Britain has been notorious for governments - Labour or Conservative - who have believed that the Atlantic is narrower than the Channel .
That belief has kept us first out of the European Community and then for years on the periphery of its affairs .
But if the UK is eager to join in , to show leadership , then we must recognize that you cannot lead from behind .
The decision not to join the single currency at the start is one much regretted by my party .
If the United Kingdom is so keen to make the single market function properly , to get people back to work as the President-in-Office says , it should put its money where its mouth is .
Liberal Democrats welcome the importance that the presidency has given to Europe 's constitution .
If the Presidentin-Office wants to connect the people of Europe with the European Union , we must open the Council of Ministers to public scrutiny .
We must allow Parliament to develop to its full democratic potential .
The President-in-Office is personally extremely well placed to do this .
As a compatriot of mine , he has suffered from the pantomime of misleading Druidic nonsense which passes for a British Constitution .
European Liberal Democrats welcome the UK Government 's proposals to reform the electoral procedure in the UK to give us a House where all Members are elected on a common principle .
The President-in-Office spoke of restoring people 's faith that the EU can speak and act for them in the world .
It is a pity he did not give longer to the ethical foreign policy he has spoken of at home .
At the helm of the Union , the UK is uniquely well positioned to deliver a powerful moral punch .
The code of conduct on arms exports of which the President-in-Office spoke sounds too much like codes of conduct everywhere which are observed mainly in the breach .
We need a legally binding EU arms export code and we need the establishment of a permanent international criminal court .
We must not let the torturers go unpunished nor lose hope that we can change the course of history , and that the 20th century in which our weapons technology has made the argument of force easier than the force of argument and has brought such human misery , can give way to a 21st century in which the power and the imagination and the skill of Europe can be harnessed to create a stable , just and peaceful world .
Liberals in this House wish the presidency well .
We recognize there is a fresh wind in the highways and byways of the UK , in the main streets of its villages and towns and cities , and that there is in it the warm purpose of the British people to make a constructive contribution to the building of Europe .
As Gladstone said , you must trust the people .
Hope makes a very good breakfast but a rather poor supper .
We in this House will watch the presidency closely to ensure that it has the courage of its convictions .
Mr President , Robin Cook , there are good things in the presidency 's programme on openness and quality in legislation , but the task - and the opposition - are so great that it will not succeed unless the presidency insists on new methods .
As far as openness is concerned , the presidency should secure the support of seven other countries in the Council to change the Rules of Procedure so that every meeting and every document is automatically open unless a 2 / 3 majority on the Council decides otherwise .
Thus it would be those who wanted to close a meeting or a document who would have the burden of proof .
The principle was adopted unanimously in Parliament 's Committee on Institutional Affairs and is included in the report by our New Labour colleague who presided over the sitting , Mr Martin , which was adopted by a large majority in this Chamber .
The biggest problem today has to do with the quality of EU legislation .
EU legislation is impossible to understand for ordinary voters .
An EU law typically consists of a directive or a regulation and then a long list of unreadable amendments .
You never know whether you have got everything .
The presidency should insist that no more amendments are made to existing laws , but that the amendments are presented in a special script in a compiled and consolidated edition .
Every department which needs an amendment will thus be forced to make the legislation accessible to people other than those who have specialist legal departments in Brussels .
And the existing body of law , comprising 20 000 directives , regulations and other legislative documents will be halved simply by recording the amendments separately .
You could then go further by compiling laws on the same subject and thin out the legislative jungle .
Finally , about decentralization .
If there is to be decentralization in Brussels , each rule should include an automatic lapse after , for example , five years .
Thus , in order to continue a law would have to again ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , after listening to Mr Cook 's statement - and I thank him for its clarity - I would like to be able to repeat what was affirmed recently by the British Prime Minister , Mr Blair , in an interview given to the Financial Times , namely that the British Presidency represents a great opportunity to demonstrate that the United Kingdom intends to play a constructive role in Europe and for Europe , and an opportunity to demonstrate that the agenda of economic reforms for monetary union is proceeding .
I want my good wishes to convey this message as well , in the hope that the United Kingdom will carry out a constructive role in this six months of presidency .
I believe , the days of British anti-European feeling are long gone ; the era of Labour seats left empty in this very Chamber after election by direct universal suffrage is long gone .
More than historical , the episode must be considered emblematic of a certain ideological approach to politics .
The historical processes , as in this case , cannot be suffocated by sectarian and factious attitudes and it is an irony of history - and we are delighted at this - that today it is the Labour leaders who are giving us assurances on the constructiveness of their action to the advantage of Europe .
This constructive role emerges from the fixed priorities of the British Presidency and in particular from the hoped for success of economic and monetary union , from the start of an authentic Union foreign policy , from the struggle against organized crime and from the defence of the environment .
We are sensitive to this commitment for the definition of a common foreign policy and we give all our support to initiatives to end the Algerian carnage which tragically continues to strike tens of thousands of innocent victims .
The presidency will achieve much if it succeeds in seriously committing the Union against the expansion of fanatical and murderous fundamentalism and contributes to bringing peace to a friendly country linked to us by cultural , political and economic ties and establishing authentic values based on the defence of human rights .
The list of things to be done was long and has touched the various sectors of activity of the Union .
Just two comments : the first is about the preparation for enlargement of the Union .
Let us act in such a way that the reform of the agricultural policy does not involve penalizing zones and regions privileged because the fruit of the work of centuries gives typical and noble food products .
The second concerns the reform of the structural funds which should not negatively strike zones and regions already burdened by serious social problems resulting from structural situations and the economic crisis .
In both cases the risk of deeper crisis is real and the populations would not understand the operation of the Union as compared with the aims of regional policy .
These fears and doubts also betray uncertainty and incomprehension on the part of the citizens , which characterize this phase of the construction of Europe .
The single currency , which we want to be a federating instrument , raises fears in reality .
The United Kingdom itself , although operating in favour of EMU , has already decided not to form part of the first euro platoon .
Why ? Our voters are wondering .
This uncertainty is born of the fear of the potential risks without the Union having the political instruments to face up to any eventuality .
In any case the question that we are asking , Mr President , is what European Unionism needs to become a reality , and what is still needed to achieve European political union ?
We have to give an answer to this question !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as an Austrian - and indeed my country will be the successor of the British Presidency - I thank you Mr President-in-Office of the Council for your clear statements , for a people 's Europe , a Europe which wants to draw nearer to its people and citizens and a Europe which treats jobs and the environment as priority issues .
But as a foreign policy speaker for my group , the PSE group , I would like to deal with two trouble spots close to us , but which affect us quite specifically in our own security interests .
I should like to call upon you Mr President-inOffice of the Council , and urge you , to do what you have often announced , today as well in this house , to demonstrate a high level of commitment in influencing developments in the Middle East and Algeria .
This is not a question of interference , but the legitimate participation of Europe in the shaping of a collective environment , in the preservation of our inherent security interests .
The Middle East , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is certainly also a central element of your presidency .
The peace process has unfortunately been interrupted .
The European Union is paying an awful lot of money , most of which - and this is not our fault - is ultimately having a negative result in Palestine .
We ought no longer be the paymaster following the motto of Europe pays and others - particularly the United States - deliver , as is the case in Bosnia and the Middle East .
I would like to fully support your efforts , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , and especially your efforts at the talks in America , to encourage the Americans to develop a stronger partnership in the Middle East in the interest of peace .
We want to support , not hinder , everything that America has done .
But we also want to do something else , Mr President-in-Office of the Council : with our efforts in the Middle East and Israel , but also in Palestine , we must also turn our attention to human rights as well as taking up the fight against corruption .
This must be our objective wherever our money is used .
With regard to the situation in Algeria , the fate that country is experiencing is particularly tragic .
Here too , we must focus on a common territory , the common economic and political interests and the control of migratory movements ; but above all it is a question of a humane outcome .
None of us should be indifferent to the shocking events in Algeria , the brutal and gruesome murders , the horror of the Algerian nights !
It is a mockery for the government to allege it has everything under control .
It has nothing under control !
There are allegations , presumptions , that sections of the government and sections of the military are directly or indirectly behind these murders .
We have no proof , merely anonymous statements .
This makes contacts and discussions in Algeria all the more urgent .
We from the Parliament will have to take the same action as you .
It is our sisters and brothers who are being murdered there .
We must not be indifferent to that !
We must do everything to prevent it continuing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the European Union the spring of 1998 is of crucial significance .
The course is now being set for the third stage of economic and monetary union .
Central features of this are the question of the group of participants , the fixing of the exchange rates between the participating Member States and the personnel heading the European Central Bank .
On 25th March the European Commission and the European Monetary Institute will submit their reports on which Member States fulfil the stability criteria on the basis of the statistical data then available .
The deliberations of the European Parliament and the parliaments of the Member States will subsequently commence in April .
In Germany the Bundestag and the Bundesrat , and probably various regional assemblies as well , will submit their comments .
So in this sense April of this year is the month of the parliaments .
At its meeting on 1st May , on a Friday , after the bourses have closed , the Council of Ministers for Economic Affairs and Finance will adopt a resolution on its recommendation as to which Member States should belong to the smaller grouping of the monetary union .
In the morning of the following day , 2nd May , a Saturday , the European Parliament will give its opinion on this proposal at a special sitting .
This special sitting of the European Parliament is necessary because the Treaty expressly prescribes that the Parliament must render an opinion on the Council 's proposal .
The final decision on the group of participants will then be taken in the afternoon of the same day at the meeting of the Heads of State and of Government of the European Union .
Consequently , on the evening of 2nd May it will finally be certain which Member States belong to the smaller grouping of participants in monetary union .
However , the schedule for monetary union also envisages two further resolutions being adopted over this weekend .
On the one hand this involves the final fixing of the exchange rates between the currencies of the participating Member States , and on the other hand determination of the identity of the President of the Central Bank .
Therefore the finance ministers , whose activities are as we know not subject to entertainment tax , will probably meet again on Sunday , 3rd May in order to finally determine the bilateral exchange rates and to submit a proposal on the personnel for the managing board of the European Central Bank .
Since the Maastricht Treaty the European Parliament has been directly involved in personnel decisions relating to the appointment of the President , Vice-President and the other members of the managing board of the European Central Bank .
The Maastricht Treaty granted Parliament these rights , which were formulated according to the prototype of comparable rights of the Senate of the United States and which have no prototypes in the parliamentary tradition of Europe .
The procedure for the appointment of members of the managing board is precisely laid down : proposal by the Council , opinion of the European Parliament and finally the decision by the Heads of State and of Government of the countries belonging to the smaller grouping of the monetary union .
The envisaged hearing of the candidates will take place within the relevant committee of the European Parliament during the week from 11th to 14th May , and the European Parliament will probably put its opinion to the vote on 14th May .
The Heads of State and of Government of the participating countries will then make their final decision .
This means that the managing board of the European Central Bank will be in place at the conclusion of the British Presidency and that the Central Bank will be able , as envisaged , to begin its work in the second half of the year .
This week four German professors appealed to the Federal Constitutional Court against monetary union with the objective of at least postponing it if not completely abandoning it .
Constitutional experts have ascertained that the media interest in this legal action is inversely proportional to its prospects of success .
The Federal Constitutional Court will merely have to examine whether the entry criteria , as contained in the Maastricht Treaty and the appurtenant Protocols , are fulfilled .
In this connection it has expressly allowed the institutions of the European Union scope to assess , evaluate and forecast the situation .
The German Federal Constitutional Court could only make a negative decision about Germany 's participation in the monetary union if the Heads of State and of Government were to be in violation of the Maastricht Treaty in their decision about the participating countries .
However , since all participating parties are determined to adhere to the Treaty in all its details , we need not be troubled by such legal actions ; they will not be successful .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I must be the only MEP today representing the oldest ally country of the UK speaking here .
We have been allies since John of Gaunt , and so we know the British well and understand their way of thinking .
I would like to thank you for the new position you have adopted , but I should also say very clearly and very frankly that the British Euroscepticism has also helped Europe to reform in many ways .
I want to be sincere in what I say !
The truth is that Europe has not managed to change its institutions to get closer to the citizens .
This is an undeniable fact .
That is what is needed .
It is also true that it has not managed to harmonize its criminal laws for corruption and fraud on financial and food matters to be punished .
It is not enough just to talk about control .
We need to find penalties and punish offenders .
It is easy to talk , but difficult and not always politically correct to punish .
I hope that the current presidency will have the courage to face this problem , which is one of the problems of greatest economic significance , to the extent that it is not just the States that have been robbed or the Union 's money , but it is also a way of introducing unfair competition , which is certainly not in line with the economic model we are all aspiring to in a global economy .
However , it has also been easy to make the countries , even the weakest ones , accept all the principles and obligations of monetary union .
Nothing has been done with regard to a convergence of education , vocational training that actually brings the citizens closer to progress and actually makes Europe more open , more able to defend itself against the threats of a global economy .
Finally , the common agricultural policy certainly has to be reformed , it certainly has to be modulated , but , for God 's sake , Mr President , let 's not sink to the depths of making junk food , which is what we are seeing in those countries which speak on behalf of consumers but do nothing for their health .
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , like other groups , my group has already given its opinion on the content of the British Presidency 's programme but I would also like to pass in review some of the points which seem to me significant .
In particular , Mr President of the Council , I would have liked you to have developed and gone deeper into some of the other subjects which , to be frank , you often only touched upon , the subject of combating drugs , a subject which moreover is currently under discussion here in the European Parliament .
I think that during the six months we will certainly have occasion to deal with our positions and have a dialogue on a subject which I think is very important , which cannot be taken lightly and which thus increasingly requires , in an increasingly integrated Europe , an increasingly single market , a coordinated approach at the European level .
But in my speech , Mr President , I want to touch on one single point , hoping that it can be received by you and hence it can constitute another front on which to measure , in a certain sense , the British Presidency , also because it is a subject which the European Parliament has very much at heart but on which I want to complement the British Presidency , in particular its government , for the position which it has already taken as a presidency .
I refer to the subject of the permanent criminal court , Mr President , a subject which is , as we know , in the negotiation stage at the United Nations and which this very year , at the end of the British Presidency , from 15 June to 17 July , will be the subject of an international diplomatic conference called in Rome and which must give life to the permanent criminal court .
His government , at the last UN preparatory committee , took a courageous and important position , choosing to sustain with force not only the creation of the court , but also of a just , impartial court , not subject to the veto of the Security Council .
You are the first permanent member of the Security Council to have assumed such a progressive position , which can be called the position of the like-minded countries . In contrast , we know how much reticence there is on the part of another permanent member of the Security Council and member of the European Union , and we also know how strong is the determination of the other countries like Germany , Italy , and so on .
Will the British Presidency seek to coordinate the European Union to ensure that the voice of the Union should be one voice and only one voice , in favour of an impartial court effective from June 1998 ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is a pamphlet entitled , " The Status of Monks ' by Ibn Taymiyya .
This pamphlet is on sale in Brussels , and also in Paris , in the rue Fossés-St-Bernard .
It justifies the massacre of the monks of Tibéhirine .
The person who translated this pamphlet is Nasreddin Lebatelier : you could perhaps ask Mr Jean Michot , President of the Belgian Muslim community and lecturer at the Catholic University of Louvain , what Mr Nasreddin Lebatelier 's real name is ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ignorance about Islam is tragic .
I heard Mr Cohn-Bendit earlier talking , all in all rather like Mr Raymond Barre , who told us , " We need a French form of Islam , an Islam where the mosque works according to the principles of the Republic ' .
This shows no understanding of Islam at all .
He cannot have read the Qu 'ran , for there is no alternative Qu 'ran .
The Qu 'ran does not understand the distinction Christianity makes between the spiritual and the material .
There is no understanding , here , of the reality I lived through in Beirut for fifteen years , where I saw areas of the city changing slowly , where first the police , then the army , and finally even ministers were submitted to identity checks .
In the 400 regions of my country I see the Tahl Zaatar that I knew in Beirut being created .
It is the House of Islam which is being imposed and , furthermore , the House of Harb , but you know nothing about all that .
A trip to Algeria probably would not open your eyes , since we have all the information here .
A little Islamic culture would do wonders for the uneducated people of this House .
Mr President , could I just explain to the President-in-Office of the Council that the last speech represents a very tiny minority of people in this Chamber and is not representative in any sense of the views of the European Parliament .
I want to raise the issues of economic and monetary union and economic coordination .
One of the principal roles of the presidency will , of course , be to guide very carefully the final phases of economic and monetary union .
In spite of the decision that the UK Government has taken on Britain not joining the single currency in the first phase I think that the vast majority of people in this House recognise that it is the determination of the new government and of the presidency to safely and securely bring about the final phase of the EMU .
What we are very concerned about in this House is the accountability of the European Central Bank , the role after the establishment of the EMU of that Central Bank and indeed of the euro in general .
We would like to begin a dialogue with the British Presidency and then to follow that with the Austrian Presidency on the role of economic coordination and the accountability of that bank .
We are very concerned that the European Central Bank will be almost beyond the touch of the citizens of the European Union .
While the Maastricht Treaty enshrines the independence of the Central Bank , that does not mean it should be unaccountable to the people of the European Union .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council if he will engage in a dialogue with the European Parliament over the next six months to ensure that we have proper accountability of the European Central Bank and to ensure that the aims and objectives of economic and monetary union will promote the objective of employment within the European Union .
We will have monetary union on 1 January 1999 but many of us do not believe that we will have economic and monetary union on 1 January 1999 .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office of the Council on behalf of my group what steps can be taken during the British Presidency to ensure that it is a proper economic and monetary union .
In his speech the President-in-Office mentioned that employment is a key goal of the British government .
Could he explain to us , perhaps when he replies to the debate , what more can be done during the British Presidency , given that we are going to have EMU within a matter of months now , to ensure that the goals of EMU are compatible with the goals of creating more jobs within the European Union .
We recognise also that selling the euro to the citizens of the European Union is essential .
At a point when we are finishing the technical work of economic and monetary union , citizens in the EU simply do not understand the whole process .
It is essential that the British Presidency gives a great impetus to the campaign of informing citizens across the European Union that this is their project , not only the project of politicians , and that it is something important to their lives .
Therefore in conclusion could I also ask the President-in-Office to say something about the campaign that needs to be organized during the course of this year to make sure that the citizens understand the process of the EMU and realise that it is for the benefit of their lives and the future that this project is completed properly .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , at the beginning of your speech you joked that every presidency says it is facing a historic moment .
That is true .
But they also say something else : they promise to cooperate closely with the European Parliament at all times .
Some of us have been here for some time now , and six months from now we will judge you by what you have done , not by your good intentions .
However , for the time being , I thank you for those good intentions .
Mr Cook , your speech reminded me of some of Sir Edward Elgar 's compositions : nice to listen to , elegant and easily hummed . However , we shall see what lies behind .
You say you want an efficient Europe .
So does this Parliament .
And on 19 November this Parliament gave a few recipes , in its statement on the Treaty of Amsterdam , which Mrs Green reminded you of today . In order to have an effective Europe , the Commission will have to be strengthened , codecision and the qualified majority will have to be extended , and there will have to be a re-weighting of Council votes .
Mr Cook , you said you want a strong Europe , which acts and speaks in the world as one .
That is true , and we want it too .
And in order to achieve that , in the realm of international economic relations , you have a weapon : giving the Commission the power to negotiate , as established in the old Article 113 of the Treaty .
You say you want to form a policy to combat drugs , because that is what people are concerned about .
We agree .
Let me ask you a question , Mr Cook .
Do you think the report by Mrs d 'Ancona ( who is a member of your group ) addresses people 's concerns ?
As for the single currency , you - the British Government - have the right to opt out .
There is nothing to object to in that .
You say there are too many risks and uncertainties , and you want to " wait and see ' .
Well , as regards the Group of the European People 's Party , all the governments are going to take that step on 3 May .
We are going to run those risks and meet the political cost of the uncertainties .
You have the right to opt out , but I must point out to you that yours is a comfortable position - waiting until the risks and uncertainties have disappeared - and as with all comfortable positions , you will have to pay for it at the appropriate time .
You spoke of tackling fraud and preventing money from being wasted .
You are right .
We agree , and this Parliament has always been at the forefront of that struggle . However , I do not think it is very clever to spread the suspicion that taxpayers ' money is wasted in the European Union .
Investigate it and penalize it by all means , but do not spread the suspicion .
It is not true , anyway .
Lastly , Mr Cook , you had much to say in your speech about cooperation , the market , efficiency and pragmatism .
The world has changed since the days of Monnet and Schuman you said , and that is true .
But the ideals of that world have not changed .
Europe is not just a market , Mr Cook .
You tackled that aspect back in the sixties when you formed the European Free Trade Association .
Europe is much more than a market .
When you , the British people , decided in 1974 to join the European Communities , by means of a referendum called by a Labour government , you joined not just a market , but an extremely important political project .
I should like to hear the British Presidency saying more about Europe as a political project , not just as a market project .
That is very important , because this Parliament believes that the European Union is a political project , and we do not want the British Presidency to make any mistake about that . To quote Lord Halifax , we would not like you to experience what happens to people who do not know where they are going , and therefore can end up anywhere .
I hope that does not happen , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , and that your presidency is fruitful and productive for everybody .
Mr President , Britain is assuming the Presidency of the Council at a very important time in the Union 's history .
It has fallen to Britain 's lot to begin the accession negotiations with the new candidates for membership , and this time the candidates all have something different about them .
On the one hand , there are countries which were behind what , in the cold war years , we used to call the ' iron curtain ' , and on the other hand there is Cyprus .
The histories of Britain and Cyprus were closely linked and to some extent parallel for several centuries .
As a colonial power and later guarantor in Cyprus , Britain influenced the island 's course positively but in some cases also very negatively , and it has an obligation towards Cyprus : it must begin the accession negotiations with the government of the Republic of Cyprus in the spirit of the decisions repeatedly expressed in this Chamber , as well as by the Commission and the Council , namely that a solution of the Cyprus problem is not a prerequisite for accession .
As Commissioner Van den Broek also stressed , this means that Cyprus cannot remain hostage to the Turks for ever .
Besides , if I have understood correctly , that is what the President-in-Office of the Council too implied in his speech .
On the threshold of the new century , the European Union faces many other problems , but entertains many visions too .
After the exceptionally successful Luxembourg Presidency , which proved that so-called institutional arguments for the exclusion of the smaller countries from the six-monthly Council Presidency are simply groundless , Britain has in its hands the file on employment and the obligation to follow up the excellent Luxembourg Summit .
It must work on Agenda 2000 and give new impetus to the Union 's internal and external policy , in a world which has become almost without frontiers .
EMU is another huge chapter to which extensive reference has been made .
And that is not all .
Equal opportunities , policy for youth , health , culture , the environment , transport , telecommunications , agriculture , tourism , energy and so many other matters require further impetus .
The British Presidency takes office with the good wishes of us all , for the good of us all .
Mr President , Robin Cook started by recollecting the words of all presidents when they start ; the ambition , and so on .
It might be slightly amusing to recollect the concluding words of all presidents , namely the lament that six months proved so terribly short .
After this wish list it is perhaps salutary to be reminded of that .
I would like to focus on employment and social policy .
I base myself on a brochure published by the presidency under the heading : Europe working for the people , which contains two priorities related to employment .
The first is the so-called third way in Europe : economic reform based on employability .
The second is education and legislation .
I would like to focus primarily on this second point .
To my mind the significance of the combination of flexibility and security , a combination we here in the European parliament find quite important , is not done enough justice .
Nor is the economic significance of a good social policy with good social rules done enough justice .
This is not a plea for rigidity and bureaucracy ; but economic reform occurs most easily and smoothly if individual people have security .
This has been proven in various studies .
These same studies also show , for that matter , how retraining and extra training is best achieved when people are remunerated well .
It is a tragic contradiction ; the worse someone is paid , the less their ambition to seek additional training , and the less ambition amongst employers to invest in it .
Britain joining the Social Chapter was a great relief to us members of the Socialist Group working in the social sector .
We saw the signing of the Social Chapter as a choice by the United Kingdom of a different model , a different model for the United Kingdom , too , with a social dialogue , and better organisation and fairer distribution of working hours .
I call on the presidency not to let this vision be overshadowed by a too-restrictive call for flexibility and liberalization .
Liberalization which in my country has led to a gap in health care between the haves and havenots .
I am extremely satisfied with the fact that you wish to make more of Cardiff then a mere deadline .
That you first want there to be an evaluation of the national plans .
But may I start by pointing out that Luxembourg truly meant a lot more than education , education , education , and EMU .
Luxembourg was and is a choice for a policy mix , for a shifting of the burden on labour to other sources , and for a reorganization / redistribution of working hours .
Cardiff should therefore be far more than gathering or even evaluating plans .
In the follow-up of Luxembourg , attention should first of all be paid to the design of balanced economic management in the Union , and the development of a coordinated European employment strategy , including taxation .
I sorry to have to observe that as far as those aspects are concerned , the messages from the United Kingdom are extremely vague at the moment .
I hope some clarity will be given today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , further to the comments already made by colleagues in my group , I should like to draw the attention of the presidency to some of the written resolutions of this Parliament in December , which are of great significance both to the Commission as well as the Council .
In its resolution on the second reading of the budget the Parliament also formulated various criteria which are significant to the working programme of the presidency , and I should like to ask you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , whether you are prepared to comment on these today or to deal with them when the presidency participates in the individual committees .
On the basis of the successful budgetary procedure for 1998 we said that we anticipate an informal collaboration with the Council at the beginning of the year in order to put in motion the setting of realistic common budgetary objectives .
Secondly , we said that in view of the successful procedure for agricultural expenditure we anticipate that this procedure will be institutionalized and that we should have a discussion on this in March 1998 at the latest .
I should also like to say that in the resolution on the working programme of the Commission we urged that on the question of the legal basis we must finally come to an agreement between the institutions , and I think that the British Presidency of the Council should also devote itself to this tiresome subject .
I want to add that along the lines of what was discussed in Luxembourg and what has always been the view of this Parliament , preparations for the reform of the system of capital resources must also be made because this is a very lengthy process which cannot be dealt with within six months .
In view of what we learnt in the BSE Investigatory Committee , for me there is also really something missing from what must already have been discussed in the general Council under the Luxembourg Presidency .
It is good when you say that we want to have public debates in the Council in the interests of openness and transparency , but in the interests of positive and improved cooperation between all the institutions , and irrespective of the legal interpretation of Article 3 of the inter-institutional agreement on the right of the Investigatory Committee , I also expect the Council to formulate a declaration whereby in the future it is made clear that , irrespective of the legal interpretation of this agreement , national ministers will also say that in the interests of transparency and responsibility we will accept invitations of investigatory committees of the European Parliament .
I would be very pleased if you would provide a positive answer to this in your capacity as President-in-Office of the Council as well .
Two brief comments on agricultural policy .
Clearly , here you have also presented the traditional , historically determined agricultural philosophies of the United Kingdom .
I am very anxious to know whether during the course of your presidency of the Council you will - also in terms of the basic philosophy - manage to set in motion the necessary adjustment to the regulation of the banana market and harmonize this with the concepts your presidency of the Council has of agricultural policy .
This will be a very exciting debate and I would add that we must be very much on the alert in this respect .
Improvements are necessary with regard to the Agenda 2000 , which the Parliament is also discussing : liberalization on the one hand , increased levies for European agriculture and at the same time a reduction of expenditure , Mr President-in-Office of the Council .
This is in fact a crash course which no one can withstand .
What we must agree on is a necessary reform , an adjustment , to achieve a smooth passage enabling the implementation of a model European agricultural policy and at the same time the realization of a consumer protection clause within the framework of the WTO .
Mr President , concrete actions seem to be the leitmotif of British presidencies .
That is why I have several questions for Mr Cook , to whom I wish every success with this weighty and historic task .
First point , Algeria .
It is quite right that the EU should reach out a helping hand , but can the British Presidency indicate how it is to chart the activities of groups from Algeria , Bahrain , Egypt , who sent their aggressive plans simply from behind a fax machine in London ?
And what is the British Presidency going to do about this ?
Second point , the Asian crisis .
In June last year I suggested to the Council in a written question that it should consider a special EU ambassador for the region .
When will I get a reply ?
This person should have long been in Asia to help solve the crisis .
Yesterday we discussed the Transatlantic Agenda in this House .
On the eve of your visit to Washington I ask you to discuss the future of SFOR with the Americans and to plead for audiovisual products to be given access to the American market .
Will you be making a start on the necessary adaption of European institutions to make enlargement genuinely possible ?
Fourth point , Turkey .
I believe the relationship with the country should not be allowed to become secondary to the Cyprus question .
What are you doing to lift the financial barrier against Turkey ?
We are using Turkey as a NATO partner , but are not prepared give clarity on their chances of membership .
Mr Cook , you wish to be concrete , not abstract .
You have an opportunity here as far as the stability of Europe is concerned .
Mr President , I cannot begin to express my delight at seeing the presidency here today and at noting the presence throughout this debate of Commissioner Kinnock which recalls the effective cooperation between the two gentlemen in the past - particularly , of course , in a certain leadership campaign in 1983 .
I am delighted that the President-in-Office has made a commitment to making the foreign security policy more effective .
I would urge the Council therefore to start work now on those arrangements foreseen in the Amsterdam Treaty for making the CFSP more effective , particularly the planning and early warning unit .
So , as soon as the Treaty is ratified we can get to work on a more effective CFSP .
Clearly the immediate priority has to be Algeria , which seems to be a country currently drowning in its own blood .
But we also have to recognize that we will only achieve something in Algeria by quiet diplomacy , by confidencebuilding and by developing a dialogue .
And that , of course , is precisely what the Parliament has been trying to achieve with its hearing on Algeria and its intention to send a delegation to talk to parliamentarians in Algeria .
That I think shows that the Parliament , when addressing questions such as these and human rights issues in general , can play a responsible and effective role .
I would hope that the presidency would take advantage of this year , the 50th anniversary of the UN Declaration on Human Rights , to have a dialogue or trialogue with the Commission and Parliament to ensure that the European Union 's policy on human rights has greater focus and coherence than it has had in the past .
I would also urge him to pay attention to two areas which are likely to be lost in the sound and fury of other debates .
Firstly , in former Yugoslavia we have a potentially explosive situation in Kosovo which appears to be deteriorating by the day .
I hope the presidency can take initiatives in that field .
Similarly , in the Ukraine , I hope that we will push for the partnership and cooperation agreement to be put into effect properly and do all we can to encourage reforms in Ukraine where the situation is also deteriorating by the day .
Finally , I welcome the commitment to enlargement but I hope we can give attention to the European Conference because I believe it offers the opportunity for a genuine European political area which will allow us to develop dialogue with countries who are not yet ready to join the European Union or are negotiating , so that we can make them feel part of our family as soon as possible .
I recognize the commitments to Turkey and I hope that we can bring Turkey on board , provided it is prepared to accept the ambitions and vocation of the European Union in terms of enlargement , particularly in relation to Cyprus .
Minister , I have two minutes in which to address you .
Ten seconds of this I will use to express my sincere hopes for the success of your six month presidency , and to acknowledge your efforts in making your country a greater part of European construction .
That leaves me with one hundred and six seconds to mention four considerations , based on the declarations made by yourself , or your Prime Minister , today or during the last few weeks .
The first is regarding your very commendable concern to bring a united Europe closer .
I think that up until now we have not considered sufficiently the two notions of " proximity ' and " subsidiarity ' , which do not mean the same thing .
The need to prioritize the issues to be resolved , and the right level of response to be provided , are more important than a Europe which , wishing to be one people , involves itself in everything on a daily basis .
I hope that your pragmatism will enable intelligent progress to be made on this issue .
My second observation : you want to play a leading role in Europe .
Nobody is complaining .
But do you not think that by refusing to be involved in the euro , and even the EMS , from the start , when your economy is in a position to do as well as , even better , than some others , that you are considerably weakening your declared will ?
If you are too European for London but not European enough for Brussels , you must choose the path of the future with courage and , consequently , not leave others to deal with the teething problems .
Third observation : you judge very harshly the common agricultural policy .
However , you strongly desire a third path to be trodden between liberalism and protectionism .
This means that , faced with globalization , which brings more advantages than disadvantages but whose logic leads , all the same , to standardization , you are in agreement that a project of civilisation should be built , a truly European project .
Do not forget that one of the pieces of this project is a certain concept of agriculture , of rural development and of the environment .
Fourth and last observation : in European construction , each one of the great European nations brings its historic experience .
Often , this experience creates fears and stereotypes on the part of the others .
The continent frequently has the impression that , in the area of international politics , for you the Channel is as wide as the Atlantic .
Think about this , for it is you who is going to steer Europe for the next six months .
In conclusion , Minister , if you take these four observations into account , we French will forgive you the fact that you embarked on your presidency in Waterloo .
Ladies and gentlemen , as I have been trying to indicate all morning , we have a serious problem : we have now 30 minutes ' worth of speaking time to fit into 13 minutes .
Clearly it cannot be done .
We have two options .
All the remaining speakers are PPE and Socialist speakers .
Either those with three minutes agree to speak for two minutes and those with two minutes agree to speak for a minute and a half , or we conclude the debate now with the President-in-Office .
Would the groups agree to that ?
I know it is not very satisfactory but these are the two options .
The indication I am getting is that Members would prefer to have a shorter time to speak in the presence of the President .
Mr President , I will speak rather more quickly and apologise to the interpreters .
Mr Presidentin-Office of the Council , developments over the last few weeks concerning asylum policy in the European Union are causing us great concern .
We recommend that your presidency of the Council pays particular attention to them .
I recently had the opportunity to visit the Kurdish refugee camps in Italy and came to the conclusion that the official portrayal of the influx of refugees into the European Union is not in accordance with the reality .
I say this with bitterness because the public in Europe have been given the impression that we are facing a massive flood of people coming over from Turkey and from Iraq .
In reality this involves a few hundred people who are guarded by the Italian police and strictly controlled by the Italian authorities , and whose asylum cases are being conducted strictly according to legal and statutory regulations subject to the most stringent control and without freedom of movement .
This is my first observation , from which I infer a second : with the constantly increasing development of the economic sphere and the constantly progressive liberalization of the internal market , there is no analogy in the European Union with regard to the legal stipulation of basic civil freedoms and its organization .
There is no clear definition of the external borders and the powers for authorities to protect the external borders .
Nor do we have any right of immigration in the European Union , which leads to the right of asylum constantly becoming the criterion for immigration and ultimately lowering acceptance of a basic right , namely the basic right to asylum .
We do not need a five-year term to harmonize laws relating to asylum , immigration and external borders .
On the contrary !
The events of recent weeks show that this must be brought forward .
We would be very grateful to you if you also took this into account in your presidency of the Council .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I look forward to the new British Presidency which has a positive attitude towards further developments in the Union .
Since 1979 the governments of Margaret Thatcher and John Major have done everything to stop European social developments .
This led to a lopsided development of the Union , and at a certain point to unacceptable discrimination against employees in Europe .
Fundamental social rights were not applicable in the United Kingdom .
Thankfully the Labour government has ended this , and the Social Chapter is able to operate for the Fifteen , and can be adopted in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you have clearly underlined that you would like to make a success of EMU .
For the people , EMU will be a success if , likewise , a social Union is developed .
A social Union which upholds the principles of the social market economy , that is to say , social justice and solidarity .
The problem of the internal market is that the social dimension is not developing fast enough and concurrently .
I therefore fear that the British Presidency 's social programme offers too few perspectives on this front .
Too few legislative initiatives are provided to strengthen the social base with minimum standards , both on the areas of labour market policy and the social security .
The shock caused by the brutal closing down of the Renault factory in Vilvoorde a year ago seems to have passed .
The call for a more social Europe seems just a faint echo .
It would be a big mistake to underestimate how urgent the need is now for a more social Europe .
Social urgency which will play a part , when we are discussing the third phase of EMU , when we are discussing accession negotiations , when we are discussing taxes and especially when we are discussing employment , which should not merely be training , but also giving people jobs through transeuropean networks , community services , environmental investments , and so on .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , allow me to say to you : ' I was very pleased to hear that the major environmental spheres of water , air and waste are included in your list of priorities . '
If the British Presidency of the Council assists the European Parliament in this respect it will count amongst the progressive and successful presidencies .
However , I would also urge you to bear in mind that what you refer to in such general terms implies integration in other spheres of policy , and that when you are considering the revision of the structural funds regulation you see very clearly that environmental policy is applied in all structural funds , and also that you keep an eye on this over the next six months and tell everyone else about it as well please .
When I see the Commissioner for Transport nodding , at the same time I also applaud the fact that you link transport and environmental policy , because these are important spheres .
And I will be grateful to you if you can reduce emissions of noxious substances .
It is of course no surprise that I expect you to place consumer protection at the top of your agenda .
You did not mention this but I know that it is close to your heart .
So close , indeed , that on Friday I know you will take very attentive note of how the WTO panel decides on the hormone question , and will definitely ensure during the presidency of the Council that the European Union adheres to its prohibition of hormone and growth enhancers .
I will say something else about consumer protection , and that is what everyone now expects from me : BSE .
Of course I will say something about this .
It is certainly a coincidence that the Commission , right at the start of the British Presidency of the Council , will consider a partial lifting of the export ban , and I know that you , Mr Kinnock , have fought particularly strongly for this .
I am on your side if consumer protection and safety are taken into account , and I ask you , Mr President , to make it very clear that Great Britain - although , and precisely because , you have the presidency of the Council - will ensure in a completely unselfish manner that safety and vigilance are given top priority , that deception in the meat trade and other areas , for example , is combated and that you will not jeopardize the trust that you have also re-established in Europe , in the European Parliament and amongst the people .
( Applause from the Group of the Party of European Socialists )
Mr President , we welcome the British Government 's decision to place the fight against organized crime at the heart of its agenda for the presidency .
Whilst all crime is disturbing , organized crime is particularly repugnant because it infiltrates and feeds off society itself .
No civilized country and no union of civilized countries can be complacent or tolerant of organized crime , and the citizens of the European Union , in our view , have a right to expect the strongest action at a European level .
While I do not want to pre-empt tomorrow 's debate on the d 'Ancona report , to which reference has already been made , I cannot leave aside the issue of drugs on behalf of my group , because we feel very strongly that the drug trade is at the heart of organized crime .
You cannot fight organized crime unless you fight drugs .
Therefore , as a group , we expressed unanimous and vigorous opposition to the proposals in the d 'Ancona report to provide for the legalization of cannabis and the freer supply of all drugs under prescription .
If time had allowed , I would have expanded on this aspect but time does not apparently allow .
Furthermore , my group also supports and encourages the presidency 's objectives of promoting police and customs cooperation against drugs , of finalizing the establishment of a Europol with real powers and resources , and of cutting the supply routes of drugs into the European Union .
Our message to the Council is that it is not enough to put the right policies and organizations in place : policies and organizations must be supported , coordinated and well-resourced .
Finally , a reference to asylum policy , on which I had hoped to say more .
This is another area where the presidency should be more active , ahead of the incorporation of the Schengen agreement into the European Union .
I have to leave it there but we need to make a clearer distinction between political refugees and economic migrants .
Mr President , in the six months of the British Presidency of the Union , a series of important decisions will have to be taken as regards cooperation with developing countries .
As well as the specific dossiers on which the Council must decide , it seems to me that there is an essential question on which it will be necessary to concentrate attention , that is the definition of the negotiating mandate of the Commission on the future of relations with the ACP countries .
As the European Parliament already expressed by a large majority last October , the renewal of the Lomé Agreement assumes a fundamental importance , both from the symbolic point of view and in its concrete aspects : symbolically , because , depending on what decisions are taken , it will be possible to judge whether the commitment of the Union towards our partners in the poorest parts of the world , will either be confirmed or will be reduced or actually cancelled ; concretely , because it is also from how the objectives and rules of European development cooperation will be redefined , and especially its most important instrument , which will depend a great deal on the possibility for the Union to influence the world situation positively .


This House has already said that it would be appropriate to have , after the year 2000 , a fifth Lomé Agreement .
But what needs to be done , with much more consistency than in the past , is to bring into the agreement those objectives and concepts which have been affirmed in the great United Nations conferences of the last few years , as well as in our Community documents , but which have only rarely pervaded the practice of cooperation .
The objective is that of human development , participatory and sustainable , giving force to the growth of civil society and human resources in all the southern countries of the world .
But also important is the way in which the legitimate interests of the countries and the populations of the poorest countries are taken into consideration in the drawing up of the instruments of commercial policy and in the international economic agreements .
Decisive is the way in which the European Union participates in the international instances , like the World Trade Organization .
Even up to today some parts of our cooperation have had to beat a retreat faced with the supremacy of other strong interests .
The event of the banana panel is perhaps the most significant example of this .
The Council must pronounce itself on the new banana regulation which , as far as we know , threatens to penalize severely some of the traditional banana supplier ACP countries , particularly Somalia .
It will be necessary to avoid this situation and make it possible to guarantee that such countries can remain in the Community banana group .
We ask that , on all the legislative dossiers , like those on the NGOs , decentralized cooperation , human rights and similar questions , on which the presidency , the Council must express itself , the opinion of the European Parliament should be taken into due consideration .
In general , what needs to be reconstructed is a capacity , which only the European Union can have , of developing a political dialogue and a " strategic alliance ' with our developing country partners to be able face up to the challenges of globalization together .
Mr President-in-Office , I will not hide my astonishment from you .
Earlier , when you were talking of the initiatives for Algeria , you did not note that the European Parliament was the first to react to the situation in that country .
Many urgent resolution have been voted for since 1995 .
It was through the initiative of this Parliament that in September it was envisaged to send a delegation to Algeria .
For 48 hours we undertook an examination of the hostile forces , in conditions which were , however , calm and healthy , and we have been waiting for several weeks to be able to go to Algeria .
Now the Troika , represented for the moment by senior civil servants , is going to Algiers .
We hope - and tomorrow morning the parliamentary delegation will meet - to be in Algiers as soon as possible , that is , 7th or 8th February next , so that we can meet with all the representatives of the political groups who sit in the Algerian parliament .
We are assured that at this political level , which cannot be considered interference since we are discussing parliament to parliament , we will be able to make various contacts , not only with politicians , but also with civil society , and that we will be able to visit the places where people are suffering .
I would like you to tell us , as President-in-Office , what you think about this initiative .
Amidst the pity and overall compassion , at a time when the massacres are causing worldwide emotion , I believe it is time to recognize that Parliament has been the only institution which , for months , has demonstrated its horror , but we would today like ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , as our group leader has already said , we know very well that the Agenda 2000 debate on on the subjects of the CAP will take us into the second half of the year , partly too because there will be elections in Germany .
However , we confirm , we cannot just play a waiting game on an issue which is , moreover , very urgent .
Our group held a conference on the future of the common agricultural policy on 13 and 14 November .
We talked about a new social pact to be renewed , a pact between agriculture and society , highlighting how inertia is the greatest enemy of a CAP which wants to be more modern and renew itself .
We are concerned by the times , because since 1995 , when the strategy paper on the future of the CAP was adopted in Barcelona by the European Commission , unfortunately we are still at general statements , perhaps too general and generic , on the European agricultural model .
The Foreign Secretary , Mr Cook , has spoken of the taxpayer , the consumer and the rural community .
These are in fact the three basic issues .
I do not think the taxpayer should have to be faced with the dilemma of increasing the financial allocations to fund the common agricultural policy .
It is rather a matter of the better utilization of funding that already exists for the common agricultural policy , with more targeted , more transparent aid which responds better to the requirements of protection and valorization of quality .
This is the issue which also interests consumers .
It is not by dismantling the common agricultural policy , on the wave of a pure and simple thrust towards savage liberalization , that the consumer is best protected , but with a policy of quality which the experience of BSE has taught everyone .
In my opinion , Mr President , these are the fundamental points .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Algeria is a very ill country , whose illness has not been diagnosed , making it very difficult to treat at the moment .
Therefore I think there are two basic matters which need to be tackled urgently .
Firstly , to convince the Algerian Government that it is an absolute priority to supply all the necessary means to stop the dreadful killings of so many innocent people .
The European Union should collaborate and cooperate towards this objective , lending all the necessary material , political and diplomatic assistance which the Algerian Government may request .
Secondly , to tackle this conflict , we need an urgent diagnosis of the disease .
The visits from , first , the European Union Troika , and later the European Parliament ( which my colleague Mr Soulier mentioned ) should help us Europeans understand a little of what is going on there .
Algeria , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , is not just a producer of gas and oil .
It is a Mediterranean country with great human potential , which is asking for privileged relations with the European Union .
There is a constant flow of Algerian emigrants towards Europe .
The country 's history is linked to the history of European countries around the Mediterranean .
Its culture and religion are shared by millions of human beings .
None of the things going on there are irrelevant to European culture , economy and society .
The European Union and the Algerian Government should reflect jointly ( within the scope of their respective institutions and powers , and with absolute respect for them ) on the solution to a conflict with extremely serious repercussions for the peace , stability and development of the peoples of the Mediterranean .
( Applause from the Group of the European People 's Party )
I now give the floor to the President-in-Office to respond to the debate .
Mr President , I have found this morning 's debate genuinely interesting .
A lot of very valuable points have been made .
There has been a lot of support which I think we can build on in the six months ahead .
I have to confess also to a private fascination in trying to figure out how some people got 1 1 / 2 minutes , some 2 minutes and some 3 minutes .
As yet I have not come to an explanation of the principle but I am sure I will grasp it during the next six months .
By my count , we have had 37 speakers in the course of the last three hours .
I have ten minutes .
Much as I would wish , I cannot attempt to go back through each of the 37 contributions , all of which were equally interesting .
If I were to attempt it everybody would get only ten seconds .
So , I shall try to summarize what has been said and my response to it .
My starting point must be that , as I understand the discussion I have been listening to , my opening remarks got a pass mark .
I hope I am right in saying that , though I will be prudent enough not to put it to the vote !
There were many warm and welcoming contributions .
I even took as an endorsement the remarks that our presidency programme reminded one Member of rock and roll .
Even Mr McMillan-Scott gave a welcome to the British Presidency , although later on in his speech he appeared to move reference back of his own welcome .
( Laughter ) If I do not now respond to all the questions that have been raised and the points made , please do not think that they have not been taken careful note of and will not be borne in mind in the months ahead .
There has been a broad degree of agreement among the Members present with my opening remarks on our programme .
First of all , I am very encouraged by the large number of contributions which have welcomed the importance we are attaching to a programme of direct relevance to the citizens and the electors of Europe .
If we want to restore legitimacy to the European project among our peoples we have to make sure that we demonstrate how that project is relevant to the lives of our peoples .
During the British Presidency we will be doing it by means of direct involvement of our people in the presidency .
For instance , we have already involved young children from all across Europe in designing our logo .
We have a scheme to send some of our young people from Britain around Europe as ambassadors for a day .
I am pleased to say that some of my opposite numbers , such as Klaus Kinkel , have agreed to take a British student with them for a day as ambassador for a day .
I will be watching very closely how well they do because we are always on the look-out for another good ambassador !
( Laughter ) When we go to Cardiff - which , as Wayne David rightly said , will be a very important occasion for Europe , for Britain but also for Wales - we are also going to host an alternative summit of non-governmental organizations and others , who will be meeting for two days on the eve of the formal summit , so that they can among themselves explore the themes of a people 's Europe and subsequently make their recommendations and conclusions available to the Heads of Government summit which follows .
All of this will not achieve what we want unless we demonstrate that on issues of real substance the European Union and the British Presidency can work for the people of Europe .
The most common point made in the many speeches we have heard in this discussion was the repeated statement that Europe must give priority to winning the war against the drugs trade and the drugs barons .
Tragically , last year 6 , 000 people across Europe died as the result of misuse of drugs - overwhelmingly young people , an enormous waste .
Nor is that tragedy confined to those individuals .
The prevalence of drugs in our society threatens to corrupt parts of our civil society and all of us have an interest in making sure that we contain that drugs threat .
I give you an assurance that this will be high on the priorities of the British Presidency .
( Applause ) Also high on our priority will be the issue of jobs , which many of those who contributed to the debate also highlighted .
Cardiff will give us an excellent opportunity both in the Council and in Parliament to review progress on those action plans that were drawn up under the Luxembourg guidelines .
How much progress are we really making in Europe towards training ?
How much progress towards opening up opportunities to the long-term unemployed ?
How well are we investing and using the extra money that was found at Luxembourg to create job opportunities ?
And how much more have we done to remove the obstacles to the single market , to open up prosperity and opportunities for our people ?
But there is another dimension to the people 's Europe .
One of the most important benefits Europe can offer its peoples is the benefit of peace and security .
Enlargement will be a key part of that process .
But also , as a number of speakers in this discussion have pointed out , we must take active measures to bring stability to those areas on the borders of Europe which threaten conflict .
I entirely share the point made by a number of speakers that the situation in Kosovo is unacceptable and deeply unstable .
( Applause ) There is no other place anywhere in Europe or the Balkans where universities have been closed for six years , and that is not acceptable in the modern age .
The tragedy is that in foreign policy , work to prevent conflict never gets the same public attention as the reaction to conflict when we have failed to prevent it .
That must not distract us from the importance of taking every possible step we can to stabilize the situation in the Balkans and , in particular , to avoid Kosovo spilling over into wider violence .
As part of that general programme of promoting security and stability , I hope that in this presidency we will achieve that agreement on a code of conduct and arms licences for arms exports which a number of people referred to , so that we can have in Europe one clear , firm , common standard on the export of arms and so that none of the countries of Europe find that they take a stand on an issue of human rights only to be undercut by a partner .
Let us make sure that we confront this very important issue together and have one common standard on human rights and on arms exports .
( Applause ) It would be right to say that one of the other most frequent themes of the contributions was the worrying and deeply disturbing situation in Algeria .
I accept the observation made by a number of those who contributed .
Of itself , the mission cannot resolve the problem .
But it has to be the starting point .
I hope that mission will go soon .
I hope that mission will be there in time to report to the General Affairs Council on 26 January and that , from there , we will be able to take forward whatever concrete and specific steps Europe can take to end the terrorism .
In the meantime , since I have been rebuked on this point in my opening address , let me say that I fully understand the welcome lead given by the European Parliament on this matter .
The communiqué issued at the end of the Political Committee yesterday specifically encourages more parliamentary contact between Europe and Algeria .
I believe that is a very important part of the way of bringing Algeria to a more open , more democratic state .
Although much was said with which I can agree and little with which I would disagree , it would be wrong of me to finish my remarks without signalling out for disagreement the observation of Mr Gollnisch on trade .
We have to be quite clear that there is no way forward into the next century and a new millennium on the basis of reverting to the protectionism of the last century .
( Applause ) Millions of our people in Europe are dependent for their jobs on their exports to the rest of the world .
We cannot demand free trade to the places we export to whilst insisting on protectionism for ourselves at home .
( Applause ) Nor should we regard it as a threat that as a result of freer trade in the world , other parts of the world are becoming wealthier and richer .
On the contrary , that is our opportunity .
So long as people remain in poverty we cannot sell them our exports .
If they , themselves , achieve a prosperous economy then there is a bigger market for Europe and for the people who work in our factories .
I am very conscious , Mr President , of the remarkable efficiency with which you shut up people who over-run .
I have no wish to suffer the same fate .
So let me draw my remarks to a close by picking up some of the observations that were made about the position of Britain .
I come to you , not as the British Foreign Secretary . I come to you as the President of the General Affairs Council .
It is therefore not proper for me to address or to push particular national perspectives .
But let me say one or two things about the points that have been raised about the specific British position .
First of all , we will pursue reform of the common agricultural policy not because it is a British policy , but because it is a matter which is in the interests of the whole of Europe , and on which we have a report from the Commission .
( Applause ) Indeed there is an encouraging degree of consensus about that reform .
When the Agricultural Council met in November , 14 out of 15 Member States wanted to take forward the Commission 's proposals .
That is a good start on which we would want to build .
Secondly , concerning the single currency , we have looked at the issue very carefully .
The conclusion we have come to from our own national perspective is one firmly founded on an economic analysis , namely that we are at a very different point at the moment in the business cycle to most of the countries of Europe , and that there is not the correct convergence for us to join with safety .
But that is not an objection of principle , nor is it in any way a criticism of those countries of Europe who wish to proceed to a single currency .
Over our next six months in the Chair , we will make sure that we consistently act with regard to our duty as President , to provide impartial , effective and competent arrangements for those countries who wish to proceed with the single currency to do so with the best possible prospects of success .
( Applause ) We will also , of course , make sure that we do not allow any difficulties over beef to become a matter that comes between us , as presidency , and our duties as the presidency .
Since one or two colleagues have raised it , let me respond to what has been said by saying this : we have been absolutely open on the situation regarding both the risks of BSE and the health consequences in Britain .
Indeed , I stand before you as a member of a government which reversed the previous refusal to discuss this issue with the European Parliament .
( Applause ) One of the very first steps taken by our new Agricultural Minister was to come to the European Parliament and discuss it with the committee in the European Parliament .
I can give you an undertaking , not just on this occasion , as President-in-Office , but also as the British Foreign Secretary , that whether as the presidency or whether as the British Government , we will seek always to cooperate and be open with the European Parliament .
We will never ever succeed if we work against each other rather than sharing openly and frankly with each other what the problems are in the hope that we can better arrive at a common solution .
I close with one last national thought .
I was interested that many of the people who spoke from different countries , and different parties within those countries , nevertheless often portrayed a common national perspective on Europe .
The British are a very open and very honest nation .
We display our disagreements , even in front of everybody else in the European Parliament .
( Laughter ) I would hope that the British Presidency might achieve just one national objective , which I do not think any other nation in the Hemicycle will begrudge us : I would hope that the British Presidency may , by the end of it , have gone further to building a national consensus in Britain about our future in Europe ,
( Loud applause ) and that by the end of that presidency we may have a British public more content with our place in Europe , more at ease with our future in Europe , and recognizing that we can work in cooperation with Europe to our mutual advantage .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Thank you very much , President-in-Office .
Thank you for your cooperation this morning and , on behalf of the House , can we wish you , personally , every success in the next six months .
The debate is closed .
Votes
Mr President , in accordance with Article 60 , paragraph 2 , as rapporteur I would like to request a postponement of the draft resolution .
Yesterday , M. Bangemann , on behalf of the Committee , gave a very negative opinion on a large number of amendments . Even if he accepted some of them , the balance is , in any case , sufficiently negative for me to request a postponement of the vote .
Of course , the vote will take place soon , but prior consultation with the Committee is necessary .
Please note that for the four other dossiers , my request is identical , but I must formally repeat it .
( Parliament approved the proposal to defer the vote on the legislative resolution ) II. honey ( COM ( 95 ) 0722 - C4-0403 / 96-96 / 0114 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ( as amended ) )
I am sorry to sound repetitive , Mr President , but I am making the same request as for the previous vote , in accordance with Article 60 , paragraph 2 .
To clarify , I would like to add that we voted for a request to amend the legal basis , which is in any case an important element of debate .
I would like to insist , for the following dossiers , on the fact that the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights was given on the five Directives in September 1996 , that is , at a politically different time to today .
Everything concerning the food industry has become clearly more sensitive , and I therefore think our request is justified .
( Parliament approved the proposal to defer the vote on the legislative resolution ) III. fruit juices and certain similar products intended for human consumption ( COM ( 95 ) 0722 - C4-0404 / 96-96 / 0115 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ( as amended ) )
Mr President , for the third time , I again request the implementation of Article 60 , paragraph 2 .

( Parliament approved the proposal to defer the vote on the legislative resolution ) IV. certain partly or wholly dehydrated preserved milk for human consumption ( COM ( 95 ) 0722 - C40405 / 96-96 / 0116 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ( as amended ) )

Mr President , for a fourth time , I again request the implementation of Article 60 , paragraph 2 , that is , an adjournment of the final vote .
( Parliament approved the proposal to defer the vote on the legislative resolution ) V. fruit jams , jellies and marmalades and chestnut puree intended for human consumption ( COM ( 95 ) 0722 - C4-0406 / 96-96 / 0118 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ( as amended ) )
Mr President , I once more request a postponement of the final vote .
( Parliament approved the proposal to defer the vote )
Mr President , I voted for Mr Fayot 's report differently from my group , because life outside Parliament requires Parliament to take a quick decision on this issue .
Central to the resolution will be the acceptance or rejection of the document .
I am therefore in favour of Mr Fayot 's proposal for practical reasons .
This is no precedent for how things should proceed in future .
Regarding secondary issues in connection with the report on the third stage of economic and monetary union we would also like to deal with , the opportunities for doing so will no doubt present themselves .
Along with my colleagues in the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , I voted against the insertion of new Article 79a into the Rules of Procedure , as proposed to us by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
My first reason for this is the numerous irregularities apparent in the text : firstly , there is irregularity in the procedure for adoption since , as I said when I put my preliminary question , the version proposed in the House is not that which was adopted by the Committee and , moreover , corresponds to the text of an amendment which was rejected by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
There is irregularity also in the very content of new Article 79a , which has been drawn up in line with the assent procedure - already anticipated in Article 80 of the Rules of Procedure - and not as a compulsory consultation as anticipated by Article 109 j of the EC Treaty .
Furthermore , the parallel that can be made with the usual consultations of the European Parliament is illuminating .
In fact , the consultation of the European Parliament foreseen in Article 109 j , paragraphs 2 and 4 of the EC Treaty , is a compulsory consultation of a particular type , in which the European Parliament is requested to give its opinion to the Council , meeting in the composition of the Heads of State or Government , on the conclusions presented in the form of recommendations by the Council , that is the " Ecofin ' Council .
In this doubling up of groupings within the Council , the " Ecofin ' Council , in relation to the European Parliament , is playing the normal role of the Commission and the Council , meeting in the composition of the Heads of State or Government .
The terms agreed by the European Parliament in setting its consultation procedure should have , as with the normal legislative consultations of Parliament in the process of Community decisions , expected a report containing an explanatory statement , along with a proposal for a legislative resolution advocating approval or rejection of the Council 's " findings in the form of recommendations ' , or proposing amendments to those recommendations .
Similarly , the possibility of tabling amendments to that proposal for a resolution should not have been ruled out .
This solution is so logical that - and this is revealing - it is the very one which the European Parliament adopted on 28th November 1996 , when it gave its opinion to the Council , meeting in the composition of Heads of State or Government , on the recommendation drawn up by the " Ecofin ' Council in accordance with Article 109 j , paragraph 2 , of the Treaty .
It was then a matter of the decision to postpone the date of entry into Stage Three of economic and monetary union . The appropriate Committee had made a written report , drawn up by Mr Alman Metten and including a proposal for a resolution .
Twelve amendments were tabled in the House .
How can you accept that what was allowed at the time of the decision postponing the implementation of the euro should be refused at the time of the decision - fundamental for the countries of the European Union - on its implementation properly speaking ?
This is a flagrant violation of the basic rules of democracy by the majority in our Parliament , who often decry the lack of democracy in the European Union and who ceaselessly demand more democracy in many countries around the world .
Moreover , when it is consulted on a text comprising a number of recommendations , Parliament must be able to express itself , to amend , add , remove , and it is the right of each one of its Members to be able to amend these recommendations and to vote separately on each one of them .
As from today , I wager that when the time comes , Parliament will regret having taken such a strict position that forbids any discussion on the " Ecofin ' Council recommendations because of the obligation to accept or reject them as a whole package .
These recommendations could , for political reasons , be quite different from the positions taken by the Committee , on which Parliament will have had time to give a detailed opinion without the Treaty anticipating this .
The European Parliament , which is normally concerned to uphold or even extend its prerogatives - in particular in relation to the Council - has therefore adopted an extremely paradoxical position .
Our group are not satisfied with this , and will do all it can to ensure the preservation of parliamentary rights .
The report on inserting a new Rule 79a , presented by the chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , Mr Fayot , has been the object of prolonged and deep discussion within the committee .
As a result , wide agreement has been reached , but this is not shared by our Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left . We held a different view , namely that the procedure by which the European Parliament should deliver its opinion on the list of Member States fulfilling the necessary criteria for transition to the third phase of monetary union ought to involve the production of a written report with the potential for subsequent amendment .
In contrast , the majority position by far ( which produced the wide agreement necessary for its approval ) was that Parliament 's plenary debate should be based on the oral presentation of a proposal by the relevant committee , with no opportunity to present any amendments .
Our group has decided not to present Parliament with the amendments we fought for in committee , because we think agreement has been reached with regard to another procedure which , although it allows the European Parliament to deliver an opinion , does not do so in the manner and with the hierarchy which we think are necessary .
Therefore , although we have decided not to present Parliament with a series of amendments which we knew in advance would be rejected , and although we realize that Mr Fayot 's proposal gives the European Parliament a procedure by which to deliver its opinions , we have decided to abstain .
This is because we think that procedure is inadequate , and we believe abstaining is the best way to indicate our overall position .
There is no reason to depart from the Treaty and change the Rules of Procedure just because a timetable has been drawn up which forces such changes in order to be able to take the decision on the euro as planned .
It would be meaningless to talk of the independence of Parliament if we could not make any amendments or propose split voting .
If the Treaty could be circumvented so easily in this case , it would set a precedent for also doing so in other contexts .
on the Ford report ( A4-0400 / 97 )
We voted for the Ford report on changes in the Rules of Procedure in order to make the work easier for Parliament 's delegation in conciliations with the Council .
The report involves minor improvements of a practical nature .
At the same time , however , we would underline our fundamentally critical view of the procedure itself .
The conciliation procedure means that a central part of the actual legislative process takes place behind closed doors in the form of negotiations .
That is contrary to fundamental democratic principles , according to which lawmaking should always be done in complete openness and by elected representatives .
I have voted against Mr Ford 's report for the following reasons :
It does not relate in any way to the question raised by Parliament on the need to increase the number of Vice Presidents from three to five , as raised by the President , Mr Gil Robles , on suggesting the amendment to Article 75 ( 3 ) ; this amendment was deemed to be the fundamental requirement for the distribution of votes made by the President and applied since the beginning of the second part of the Legislature .

On making the detailed amendments to the other articles of the Rules of Procedure , leading to a request for the President of Parliament 's opinion , the report shows the hypocrisy of changing something so that it includes everything .
Consequently , the appointment of two more Vice Presidents by the President who , in practice , will not have any duties on the Conciliation Committee , is meaningless .
Besides the obvious discrimination in having Vice Presidents to perform the same duties , some by the first and others by the second , in this case irrespective of the nationalities of the new members proposed by the President , which never seems to have been the original intention of the President of Parliament , it must be noted that the overall solution presented is the result of the collective pressure exerted by several MEPs who are sometimes involved in conciliation and who do not want to lose the opportunity they occasionally get .
And also , irrespective of his competence in the office of presidency of the Conciliation Committee , the report reflects a reaction of defending the fortress and the inertia of the status quo which the chairmen of the most important political groups do not have the political desire to oppose or even clarify .
In these terms , the Ford report is an important report for the statistics of the Committee on Government and the rapporteur , but is no of no importance whatsoever for the future of the institution .
on the Lambraki report ( A4-0001 / 98 )
The Swedish Social Democrat Group has abstained from the vote on this report .
Our basic position is that the common agricultural policy must be fundamentally reformed .
However , this report proposes an increase in subsidies , although it concerns a very limited area .
The proposal means an increased burden on the EU 's budget of around ECU 30 million per year .
We are afraid that a subsidy trap is being made for the producers concerned .
on the Filippi report ( A4-0002 / 98 )
The Swedish Social Democrat Group has abstained from the vote on this report .
Our basic position is that the common agricultural policy must be fundamentally reformed .
This report concerns details in the area of rice production .
on the Chesa report ( A4-0003 / 98 )
I think that the common agricultural policy must be fundamentally reformed .
This premium for the abandonment of wine-growing areas is also very dubious .
Paying grants which lead to nonproduction does not necessarily guarantee that production will cease .
It can be moved , changed or return etc .
I am abstaining from the vote on this report because I do not think that this abandonment project can be regarded as a good use of money .
on the Cabrol recommendation ( A4-0004 / 98 )
We have voted against Mr Cabrol 's report on a network for the epidemiological surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the Community .
Mr Cabrol wants to replace the proposed network between the Member States with a permanent structure at EU level .
The rapporteur also wants to standardize the Member States ' methods and definitions in this area .
We regard this as the expression of an unnecessary centralism .
A direct cooperation between the Member States in network form should be sufficient to solve the problems which arise in this area .
Today the Danish Social Democrats voted for the report on the surveillance and control of communicable diseases in the Community .
We believe it is important that there is cooperation in this area because of the many diseases which do not respect formal national borders .
Nonetheless we doubt that an actual EuroCentre for communicable diseases is the correct way to go , unless such a centre fully fits into the international picture .
A EuroCentre which operates independently of WHO , for example , cannot be worth very much .
The aim here is of course a good one , namely the setting up of a centre for the control of infectious diseases .
However , I am very sceptical about the value of constantly setting up new institutes at ' Community level ' .
Sweden has already developed networks for this purpose , including cooperation with WHO .
If a network is to be set up in Europe , then it should be a pan-European structure .
These constant new EU institutions require resources , and these resources have to be taken from somewhere .
The positive choice of an EU institution may therefore perhaps require negative decisions at the national or global level , especially when we remember the negative attitude towards taxes in the Union .
on the Cabrol report ( A4-0406 / 97 )
Cases of asthma have been on the increase , and the cause of growing mortality , for the last twenty years .
There is a human , economic and social cost to this .
The most recent medical statistics collected by the World Health Organisation suggest that the increase in asthma is largely linked to the environment and to allergic factors in the atmosphere .
It all combines to cause an outbreak of the illness when these conditions encounter an hereditary predisposition to the illness .
As a doctor I can say to you that it has today become essential to look into this problem .
This is what the Cabrol report recommends , when it considers the different human , sanitary and economic factors linked to the reduction of solvent emissions .
The ten million jobs affected , in more than 400 European businesses covering nearly 20 different sectors of economic activity , are physically able to adapt to lower emission standards than those currently acceptable .
This is why it is important to harmonize emission levels in this area for all the Member States and for all companies , whatever their size .
If the implementation of this is not strictly enforced , we will leave the field open to the commencement of unfair competition , disguised as subsidiarity or support for SMEs .
I will therefore vote in favour of the Cabrol report , especially as the delay in transposition and application within different national legislations will enable , through its flexibility , an adaptation in time according to the efforts already initiated by companies for the protection of workers , users and people .
As a parent of asthma sufferers I welcome the production of this report and many of the proposals that it makes .
Volatile organic compounds and other industrial solvents contribute to the formation of ozone at ground level .
This unfortunately intensifies problems for those suffering from asthma in particular , but it also contributes to headaches , eye problems and heart disease .
I therefore support Mr Cabrol 's proposals to amend the Commission proposals .
He is correct when he rejects the Commission proposal to exempt those Member States which have drawn up national plans .
Harmonization on an EU-wide basis is the more correct approach .
It also ensures a level playing field and prevents unfair competition .
I hope that following today 's vote Member States will move quickly to implement its proposals , even in advance of the October 2007 deadline .
Rejection of application 40 to amend is completely unreasonable for SMEs .
Therefore rejection of the overall report .
This directive has been created on the basis of a real need to reduce emissions of so-called VOCs .
Especially in regions with a lot of industry it is an important task for public health to combat air pollution , and a task I can support .
The fact that VOCs also contribute to the destruction of the ozone layer and so lay us open to serious climate changes , only makes the need for action even greater .
On that basis , however , it is worrying that by implementing this directive we would subject small businesses and regional authorities to a long list of administrative burdens , the effectiveness of which we cannot be sure of .
In my opinion there are problems with basing controls on spot checks because in that way you punish the businesses which carry out thorough inspections and so have a greater chance of finding breaches of limits .
I think we should consider whether the control and administration set out in the directive are cost-effective and whether there are not possible alternatives .
The destruction of the ozone layer is a transnational problem .
That is why it is good that we are looking for common solutions to the problem of emissions .
However , we must also bear in mind that the emission of volatile organic compounds has regional consequences .
In areas with a lot of businesses which use these chemicals , the discharge contributes to creating smog with its subsequent health problems .
Against that background I can only support the Commission 's proposal that individual States may draw up their own plans to reduce this pollution .
The problems are not the same all over Europe .
As long as we stick to the requirement of a reduction in discharges , it is advantageous to allow the authorities which are close to the citizens to find the most effective methods .
I warmly support the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection 's Amendments Nos 2 , 17 and 20 which point out that there are also health aspects connected with the emission of VOCs .
We must not forget that people who work with organic solvents on a daily basis are exposed to a large health risk .
This directive will also improve the everyday life of these people .
I would therefore like to request that the reduction of emissions takes place by finding alternative products .
Mr President , in the reply to our contributions yesterday to the Lannoye Report and in particular to the proposal concerning honey , Commissioner Bangemann replied that it was not the objective of labelling to settle questions relating to the quality of the products , or even measures to support the beekeepers .
I must say that I was rather amazed at these statements because I - perhaps I am naive - have always assumed that the objective of labelling is actually to inform the consumer , including information about quality and origin .
If this occurs the consumer is indeed automatically informed about the quality of the product .
This then implicitly supports the high-quality honey of our beekeepers and the protected designation of origin , which the Commission indeed itself publicises with expensive advertisements and glossy paper .
A good use of European tax monies moreover , especially as the Commission also urges honey to be accorded just as much respect as St. Ambrosius .
This is implicitly a measure which can help to ensure that enough bees continue to be kept , thereby guaranteeing the valuable occurrence of pollination .
I am very pleased that colleagues here have lent such massive support to our applications , in order to ensure that the consumer can still distinguish between the high-quality agricultural product of honey from our Member States from the cheap imported honey of inferior quality .
I am also pleased that Mr Lannoye and the Parliament have resolved not to put the legislative decision to the vote .
We are therefore now spared from what happened to me with my report on the improvement of the production and marketing of honey in June .
Actually the Council completely ignored the fact that we had unanimously adopted 22 applications and my report here .
A few days afterwards it adopted as Point A the regulation in a downright undercover action , as the Commission had recommended to it .
In September I then discovered in talks with agriculture ministers that most of them had no idea that they had rejected our proposals .
( Interruption by the President )
As I value your presence in this House , I have granted you twice the allocated speaking time .
But please , do not take advantage of that .
I am not taking advantage .
I simply wanted to tell you , Mr President , how the Council of Ministers has dealt with our amendments .
I did not want to mention it yesterday as I did not have any speaking time .
When it is a matter of important problems concerning nature , the environment , production , we have no speaking time .
We have time to spend on everything that goes on in the world , except concerns of interest to our citizens .
There , Mrs Lulling , I can see that you are touching on a serious matter , but you will have to fight within your group and within the other groups for that to change .
I am obliged to enforce the Rules of Procedure .
Unfortunately .
It was you who voted for the Rules of Procedure , not I !
We voted against the resolution because we think that questions of sport are outside , and should remain outside , Parliament 's and the EU 's areas of competence .
Mr President , as the initiator back in December of the demand for a Commission statement on this matter of the withdrawal of a place in European competition from the winners of the Coca-Cola Cup , and author with my colleague , Tony Cunningham of the Socialist Group Resolution , I am delighted that Parliament will be backing the Football League in their dispute with UEFA .
UEFA 's action threatens the well-being of dozens of football clubs in the UK with the prospect of the Coca-Cola Cup losing successively : interest , spectators , television coverage and sponsors .
Why ?
As a punishment for the failure by the premiership to toe UEFA 's line on the size of the division .
But the Coca-Cola Cup is run by the Football League not the Premiership .
This is absolutely illogical and clearly at odds with Community law respecting abuse of a dominant position .
Football is a sport , but it is also an important European industry .
It cannot escape the consequences of European legislation .
The sooner UEFA wakes up to this fact the better it will be for them , football and its fans .
on the Souchet report ( A4-0410 / 97 )
The most important details are dealt with in recital B and chapter 8 , which requests less asymmetric and unequal relations with the United States . This is in particular true on a commercial level , but also in the areas of security and defence .
I have my doubts regarding recital H which congratulates the European-United States cooperation in the area of the crises in ex-Yugoslavia and the Middle East .
In our opinion , the United States has no role to play in the former Yugoslavia , which is a European issue in the broadest sense of the word and not an American one .
As far as the Middle East is concerned , we condemn the policy followed by the United States in Iraq , which will end up starving the civil population .
Finally , if it is true that there are common values between Europe and the United States , then there are also differences between the two : classic European humanism must be defended against a society exclusively based on money , which is too often the case in the United States .
Furthermore , it seems necessary to include eastern Europe , the Orthodox religion , including Russia , closely in the destiny of Europe .
The strengthening of ties with the United States is only justified if , at the same time , there is a strengthening of ties with eastern Europe .
If not , the world will be unipolar and exclusively dominated by American power .
I will abstain with regard to this report .
The extensive changes which the international landscape has been through since the 1980s have also changed the relationship between the EU and the USA .
The constant American flavour which has characterized most of the post-war period is no longer accompanied by a systematic willingness to intervene in the event of crises in Europe .
The new American attitude requires greater European independence .
The report recognizes the new situation , but also establishes that there is still a need for close cooperation across the Atlantic with a view to ensuring peace and stability in the world and respect for values like democracy and human rights .
The differences of opinion between Europe and America relate in particular to the areas of economics and trade .
As the rapporteur so rightly points out , the EU and the USA will work on reducing these disagreements to a minimum .
I am delighted at the adoption by the vast majority of this House of the report I presented on future relations between the European Union , its Member States and the United States of America .
The success of transatlantic economic dialogue , which will from now on be at the centre of our relations with the United States , seems to me to be dependent on a number of conditions .
It is first of all essential that Europeans are able to discern and clearly formulate their own interests .
It is also essential that common Euro-American interests are clearly , relevantly and realistically defined , that they are concretely identified and that the themes for dialogue are the object of a rigorous and concerted effort to define them .
The two partners will from now on have to show themselves capable of making progress in the satisfying of these interests through dialogue , in particular regarding the question of the remaining obstacles and that of the optimal management of the numerous frictions that such an interweaving of interests necessarily implies .
The management of disagreements is one question which will have to be tackled frankly and deeply , not limiting it to a simple warning mechanism .
Success in transatlantic dialogue also assumes an active participation of Member States and business circles .
Without such participation , this instrument risks being put to the better advantage of Americans than Europeans , given the important differences in the nature and way of functioning which separate the European Union from the United States
The characteristic of transatlantic dialogue is that it is necessary to be better armed than the others in the tackling of all subjects , including the most sensitive , whether it be a question , for example , of financial services , of social or environmental standards , or extra-territorial legislation , which are factors of legal insecurity for foreign investors .
It could be considered that these different issues have , until now , been carefully avoided within the more recent and more delicate dialogues that the United States have embarked upon , in particular within the context of APEC or the Americas Summit .
Transatlantic dialogue can only be truly profitable if Europeans are able to defend firmly and cohesively the interests they identify in common .
Our American partners are able to defend their national interests pugnaciously .
They expect us to do the same .
This is why the Commission must make extremely sure that there is a strict reciprocity in concessions , a symmetry of allowed advantages and a globalization of negotiations when concerning issues of foreign trade relations with the United States .
It is also essential that the European Union is able to have at its disposal permanent instruments which are likely to form , if necessary , a credible threat of reprisal with regard to our partners .
Finally , given the essential role played by the American Congress in the area of foreign policy , and in particular foreign trade policy , interparliamentary dialogue with the United States assumes a particular importance : if managed well and firm in the decision to tackle all subjects , it can play a very useful role in reciprocal direct information and conflict prevention .
If all of these conditions are met , we can anticipate a good future for the new transatlantic dialogue .
That concludes Voting Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Continuing training
The next item is Mrs Waddington 's report ( A4-0405 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission report on access to continuing training in the Union ( COM ( 97 ) 0180 - C40208 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since today is a special one for the UK Presidency it is appropriate to quote from a statement entitled ' Partners in Europe : Learning and Working together ' the first words are that ' Success in promoting employability and tackling unemployment will be a key test of whether the EU is making Europe work for people .
Employability is vital both for a competitive labour market and to provide people with security of employment by equipping them with the education and skills they need to adapt to a changing labour market ' .
It is therefore very timely that the European Parliament and the Commission are now studying a report on access to continuing training which was produced as a result of the Council recommendation in 1993 .
That recommendation identified 15 areas where it was felt that Member States needed to take action to encourage the development of access to training .
However , the Commission 's report produced as a result of this recommendation does not provide us with the data which is necessary to determine if progress has been made , nor does it assess the impact made by the European Training Programmes and the structural funds resources on the development of access to training and its impact on employability in Member States .
The report in the main simply provides examples of best practice collected from Member States in 1993 .
In fact the latest statistical data that we have on participation by European adults in training was produced by Eurostat in 1996 .
Eurostat examined training participation of people aged over thirty during a four-week period in 1996 and they discovered that only 3.6 % of Europeans had been involved .
There were considerable inequalities of access and this evidence of inequality is backed up by many other studies .
People who gain access to training are much more likely to be employed , to be in professional or managerial jobs , to be younger and more highly qualified , to be Northern Europeans and to work for larger companies .
There is , without doubt , clear recognition by the European Union , Member States and the social partners of the need for greater access to education and training for adults in order to increase employability , job security , flexibility and competitiveness .
It is therefore necessary to address the issues of low and unequal levels of participation in training and to determine measures that should be taken to make progress .
Here the Commission has a vital role to play .
The report from the Employment and Social Affairs Committee contains some very concrete proposals which are within the Commission 's powers to implement and I believe that the European Parliament expects the Commission to take them up immediately .
In summary , the Commission should present proposals for a common set of qualitative and quantitative indicators in order that a monitoring system can be established on access to training across the EU , to measure progress and provide benchmarks .
Secondly , action research should be undertaken to assess the quality and quantity of training available to unemployed and underqualified workers , including older people and those in a typical and insecure employment .
Thirdly , a dissemination strategy should be developed so that successful initiatives taken by Member States and those taken with EU resources can be shared more effectively .
The Employment Committee is suggesting that ' showcases ' of good practice should be presented at education and training fairs across the EU .
Fourthly , pilot projects to encourage individuals to assess their future training needs and receive guidance and to enable firms to develop their skill forecasting systems and training plans should be established using European resources .
Fifthly , and very importantly , the work and programmes and forward planning of the Commission in the fields of training and employment need to be coordinated .
This could and should result in a concerted approach between labour market related programmes such as the European Social Fund and training related programmes such as Leonardo da Vinci .
In future training at EU level should not be considered in isolation from other employment related issues such as work organization and job creation .
Finally , it is time for the social partners to conclude a framework agreement on access to training .
They must be encouraged to do so , since there is considerable agreement between them on the need for progress and the Luxembourg Job Summit has provided them with a further incentive .
However if the social partners fail to make progress , the Commission should bring forward proposals of its own without delay .
Really there has been no better time for the EU to seize the opportunity to work with Member States and the social partners to make life-long learning a reality for European adults , the employed and the unemployed .
The UK Presidency has promised to concentrate on securing progress towards adaptable labour markets which are responsive to economic change and on ensuring that individuals can acquire the skills they need in a modern competitive economy .
I believe that the recommendation of the Employment and Social Affairs Committee on access to training provides an action plan and some new ideas to make progress a reality .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this almost seems like the midnight sitting which is to follow later , but I do not wish to draw any conclusion from this about the significance of our subject .
In the Committee for Culture , Youth , Training and Media we formed an opinion on the report of our colleague Mrs Waddington , and of course we see a few other key points and perhaps we view one aspect or another differently .
One thing seems important to me : on the question of access to further training , a distinction must be made between two areas , namely on the one hand the area of job-related assistance , so to speak , i.e. the development of skills which serve to advance a career in the occupation already being pursued , and on the other hand measures aimed at qualifying someone in order to be able to succeed amongst the competition as well as on the labour market .
In this connection , in our report we also referred to those women who , because their careers are structured differently , sometimes do not fit in the same way into the pattern on which the overall trend is based .
I should like to share the rapporteur 's criticism of the paper submitted to us by the Commission .
It is also my complaint that no clear structure is discernible and that although a collection of individual examples can certainly provide one suggestion or another , this ultimately fails to create a basis which can be further developed .
There is one point which we from the Committee for Culture , Youth , Training and Media - and which is also referred to in our own application to amend submitted by my group - would like to stress ; it relates to something also mentioned by the rapporteur , namely that one must have a certain amount of skills to actually take advantage of offers which are made .
Therefore , we in the Committee for Culture , Youth , Training and Media consider it particularly important that as early as the basic training stage the ability to continue learning , pursue lifelong learning and develop own initiatives is taught so that available offers can be taken advantage of with real effect .
With regard to the evaluation of quality and quantity , we should also like to point out that there will certainly always be categories of occupations for which there is greater scope for further training and others for which this opportunity cannot be provided to such an extent , for example in markedly practical activities . So the focus should not only be on the cognitive sphere , but other spheres should be incorporated as well .
We thank the rapporteur for her work and hope that the suggestions fall on fertile ground at the Commission !
Mr President , as draughtsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights I am pleased with the Waddington report .
The majority of the Commission 's proposals have been incorporated into the resolution in close consultation with the rapporteur , and I thank her for this , and in close consultation with the Committee on Social Affairs .
The constructive criticism of the Committee on Women 's Rights concerns particularly the following points :
Firstly , we deeply regret the fact that in the European Commission 's report no survey had been held within a number of sectors which are so very important to women , such as public administration , health and education .
Secondly , too little attention has been pad to access to training for part-time and other flexible workers .
We regret this , as it largely concerns women .
We would like to see an intensive target group policy , with special courses , amongst other things , aimed at women .
Thirdly , women in small and medium enterprises , and female entrepreneurs must be given more attention during professional training and life-long learning .
Women must be encouraged through targeted training to start their own businesses , and ta take full advantage of new technology .
Finally , the European Commission is always talking about mainstreaming and there some good plans on the table , like the one on the integration of equal opportunities in general policy .
I wonder why then , when reading the evaluation report , I get the uncomfortable feeling that the focus on women 's training opportunities is primarily founded on arguments like ageing or demographic factors .
Just like men , women are a valuable human resource who should be used now , and they should be given opportunities for training and life-long learning .
We believe that as long as women have a disadvantaged position , positive action is needed .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for , as usual , a well drawnup and very good report .
Society is changing ever more rapidly .
In the old industrial society it was the person who owned the money who had the power and influence .
In the new society which is emerging , it is increasingly the person who possesses knowledge who is also going to have power .
In the old society power was unequally divided between those who had access to money and those who did not .
There is also a risk of such an inequality in the new society , if we do not ensure that everybody benefits from education .
That is the most important issue .
Education is going to be increasingly important .
If we are to have an equal society in future we must ensure than everyone , men and women , those who are now poorly educated , the unemployed and others can share in the education society , can share in basic education and can share in life-long learning .
That is one factor .
The other factor is that we must ensure that when we obtain an education we obtain one which can be used for a long time .
There has to be a broad basic education , because society is changing ever more rapidly .
It is not possible to have a quick education .
Furthermore , there has to also be life-long learning .
Working life and education must be fully integrated .
Both society and the social partners have a responsibility in this work .
Society has a responsibility by providing sufficient resources , by creating an active labour market policy , by creating a tax policy which encourages education and by creating a social insurance system which also provides the opportunity for education .
The social partners have a responsibility , because in future it will not be possible for people to simply sit down and negotiate about loans and general terms of employment .
It will be increasingly important to include education as part of the negotiations .
I was myself responsible for a report a month ago concerning changes in the organization of work .
There are clear connections .
The most important question if we are to develop new organizations of work is to have a welleducated workforce , and a workforce with a broad education , because organizations of work are going to have to be changed according to the needs of the time .
So a workforce is needed which is also capable of meeting the needs of the new era .
Finally , I would once again like to thank Mrs Waddington .
These are excellent proposals , concrete proposals on best practices , on using the structural funds and on improving the statistics .
I hope that the Commission listens to them .
Mr President , I must firstly offer the rapporteur my very sincere thanks .
Her task was not easy , but she managed it very well .
Access to further vocational training is of crucial importance to all employees .
Conversely , well-trained employees are the basis for commercial success for every employer .
Completely inadequate information and obsolete statistical data cannot form reliable bases for a good and meaningful analysis .
To this extent the Commission 's report is unfortunately not very informative .
On the other hand , the Commission has presented no evaluation at all of the contribution of the joint programmes in its initiatives .
Although on a European level the social partners are in agreement about the factors which are significant for the promotion of access to further vocational training , but unfortunately there is a serious difficulty because there is no agreement about the measures to be taken and the implemental levels .
Further action must therefore be taken here because this makes it difficult to establish common prerequisites and the performance indicators proposed by the rapporteur .
In the relevant training programmes the financing of pilot projects must definitely be taken into account .
The measures should in particular include women as well as small and medium-sized companies .
Information events with the participation of the social partners could in fact represent useful aids .
A coordination of the projects in the particular sphere of employment with those in the sphere of further vocational training is required .
A framework agreement on the opening of business enterprises for vocational training is certainly desirable .
However , I would venture to doubt whether our own assessment and advisory services , which would again incur costs , are absolutely necessary .
Allow me to point out a danger .
In the opinion of the social partners the recommendations of the Council in 1993 on access to further vocational training unfortunately scarcely had any effects on developments in the Member States .
And in the opinion of the ETUC there is only a very limited number of successful examples .
This means that the lack of reliable and stable structures and mechanisms is hindering successful work in this area .
The social partners have so far failed to agree as to whether a Directive is necessary .
This must be considered in detail , and it is also a question of subsidiarity .
This question therefore involves the principle of subsidiarity .
There are still some hurdles to be cleared for a successful implementation of the guidelines to this report They must , however , be overcome forthwith in the interest of employees and employers .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I of course would also like to thank the rapporteur for the work she has done , as well as the rapporteurs of other committees , who have come up with good issues .
I would like to ask a fundamental question , however .
I wonder whether the European Commission is able to manage this major problem in the right way .
We are dealing , in fact , with an issue of subsidiarity .
Competition policy is on the tip of the tongue of some very highly placed individuals in various Member States .
I have a feeling that the degree in which it is thought that education can be used to a certain extent in competition policy , plays a part in the dissemination of information .
The reports by the Member States contain too little information .
On that front , the European Commission has also failed to monitor a number of issues , such as government , health care , education , and life-long learning .
We do not really have any information on these .
When we look at the Eurostat figures we have to conclude that people working for big companies have a lot more opportunities for training paid for by the social partners than those who work in small and medium-sized enterprises .
Strategies should be developed together ; the European Commission working together with the Member States .
In my opinion too much is still missing at the moment .
Maybe following the Employment Summit a few things can still be done on this front .
We are talking about employability .
If there is one thing which will give people the opportunity to return to the labour market and to allow them to be more competitive with people who have completed the right training , it is life-long learning , and the attention it is given .
It is the responsibility of the Commission to get the Member States to put aside their own interests in favour of the general European interest .
I call on the Commissioner to give this point in particular more substance .
Mr President , Mrs Waddington has once again succeeded in producing an excellent report on an important issue .
Opportunities for adult education and training are becoming more and more vital with ageing populations and increased demands at work .
The report also states that training must be targeted at women , the unemployed , the poorly educated , and older workers .
I myself would like to remind everyone particularly of the right older employees have to further education and training .
A 45 year-old person is only pretty much half-way along his career path , and is therefore worth investing in .
The over-45 's have generally had a poorer education than their juniors .
This is worth bearing in mind .
Another group it is difficult to cater for as far as further training is concerned is people working in non-standard employment relationships , of whom most are women .
These people particularly need to be better trained so as to prevent the permanent division of workers into two main castes : skilled workers in steady employment , and the reserves , picking up the scraps as and when needed .
Mr President , I would like to join in the congratulations for Mrs Waddington 's excellent report .
I would like to congratulate the whole of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , partly on this report and partly on the report which we adopted a few months ago concerning life-long learning Both of these reports are very important .
A lot of good things are written about life-long learning , about further education and about education in general .
There is no great disagreement about the necessity and value of further education .
This issue has also come very much into focus now in connection with the summit in Luxembourg where people also discussed and focused on how important further education and labour market training are .
However , reality looks a little different .
We can really question whether education has improved .
We all know that basic education is a precondition for people to be able to benefit from further education .
But still there are daily cutbacks in basic education in schools .
There are , for example , teacherless classes and a shortage of school materials .
The classes are too large , so pupils who need help to learn reading , writing and arithmetic cannot get the help they need .
These pupils are therefore already excluded when they leave school .
I would like to stress that we all have to accept our political responsibility when it comes to safeguarding a good basic education as a precondition for being able to take advantage of life-long learning .
Where the social partners are concerned , as is taken up in the report , it appears as if their discussions about the level at which decisions about further education should be taken have stalled .
I am a bit sceptical about the wording of paragraph 15 , i.e. that if the social partners cannot reach agreement , then they will be overridden and a directive will decide what level this should be .
I do not believe that is a good way to proceed , because it will become apparent that countries , or societies , which do not invest in further education and good education are the major losers .
I think that is also clear from the report .
Mr President , on the basis of the document from the Commission and the Waddington report , this debate on access to continuing training in Europe needs to be considered on three levels , economic , social and cultural .
In the face of the tragedy of unemployment , to which we all give priority , we should more closely examine what the expressions " race for competitiveness in the world market ' and " intensification of competition ' mean .
In fact , behind this debate there is another more fundamental debate on the very concept of the world market , the common market , the single market , linkages with the world market , a debate which needs to be held .
What kind of market economy do we have ?
What market economy do we want ?
Do we want it more in keeping with the culture , with the personal and social interests of our different countries ?
I do not unfortunately have time to go into this issue in depth .
For the moment , I would like to follow up the interesting comments contained in Mrs Waddington 's report on a particular point .
With this in mind , I address myself to the Commissioner , who was not insensitive to this point when I expanded it in her presence two years ago , in the Committee on Women 's Rights .
If it is normal to take into account a break in the careers of mothers wishing to return to the job market , the " re-entrants ' as they are called , to use a rather ugly word , then the problem of young women - and this is the point you were open to , Mrs Cresson - who marry young and have children after having started training , even when they were sometimes about to finish that training , should also be taken into account , since they find themselves totally excluded from all the proposals mentioned precisely because they are married and have brought up their children .
Is this not an injustice that should be rectified ?
They , too , have a right to continuing training .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our modern giddy-paced industrial society lifelong learning is an absolute must in order to master the new challenges constantly facing everyone .
This trend is most clearly visible in the world of work where the completion of further vocational training courses and the acquisition of specialist skills is a prerequisite for the professional advancement of the individual , but also for the maintenance of the company 's competitiveness .
It is a political responsibility to secure access to vocational training and further training and to make it equally available to everyone .
It is not good enough for further vocational training to be reserved only for those who are already the best and most highly qualified .
Must we not rather also offer employees with a low level of training opportunities to acquire further training to give them the chance of a longterm job and open up prospects of advancement ?
And must we in particular not also take women into account , who often have to curtail their careers in any event as a result of the additional burden of family / occupation , by paying attention to their needs and integrating them better into further training ?
Governments are therefore urged to point out these defects and adopt measures to counter them .
Only through widespread information about further training opportunities and promoting further training by creating and extending occupational incentives and by removing all access restrictions can further steps be taken against increasing unemployment and social peace be maintained .
Mr President , I congratulate and thank our rapporteur , Mrs Susan Waddington , on an excellent report characterized - as Susan 's work is always characterized - by completeness , perspicacity , and political and social sensitivity .
We are talking about vocational training , its efficacy and its democratic development , in other words about how it can be made accessible to all Europe 's citizens , as it should be , and worthwhile for them all .
That effort should be made not just to be of use to us in our own countries or to ourselves in the European Union as a pretext or an alibi , but as a substantial ingredient of a sincere and bold effort to combat unemployment .
New and ambiguous terms are becoming current , such as employability , adaptation , flexibility of labour , terms which are of our times but which need to be freed from sinister connotations and defined clearly , because it is natural that in a climate of unemployment such terms and approaches could create fears in our fellow citizens .
Reorientation of our approach to work and hence to vocational training as well , is a demand of our times .
That is what present-day needs impose .
Of course , the weight of our responsibility here in the European Parliament and in the European Union as a whole , faced as we are by the nightmare of unemployment , gives no cause for celebration .
Yet , I would like to stress the fortunate timing of today 's debate on the subject , just after the appearance of the British Presidency 's programme in which unemployment has been given high and innovative priority , and just a few days , a few weeks after the special conference on employment and in anticipation of the implementation of special action to deal with unemployment and in anticipation , precisely , of the next Summit in Cardiff .
Here are two fundamental thoughts : I believe that in the effort , which Susan 's report mentions analytically , to develop special methods and surveys , we could see , and you too , Madam Commissioner , could look into how to make the best use of Cedefop in Thessaloniki to carry out such surveys .
And as a last additional thought , I would like to mention that in the Eastern European area and in anticipation of enlargement , both during this transitional phase of intensified pre-accession procedures and in the long term with the future prospect of the new countries , we should already be considering how to extend vocational training to make it accessible to all .
Mr President , once again I can comment on a report which originates from Sue Waddington .
I again applaud her precise work and expressly her constructive criticism of the weak spots in the Commission 's document .
The approach , Madam Commissioner , is to be welcomed as an initial attempt to analyze progress in vocational training in the Union and Member States .
It is understandable that there are shortcomings wherever systems and measures vary too greatly in quality and quantity .
However , it is not acceptable that there is no clear distinction between business sectors and between target groups - from those actively employed to older people .
In this connection CEDEFOP and EUROSTAT must be incorporated to a much greater extent .
The situation of women should be particularly emphasized .
As a result of their employment often being part-time and seasonal , they are often excluded from learning about new technologies and acquiring new knowledge , although they have just as much intellectual potential as well as a high degree of flexibility .
In the Commission 's report there is no review of the joint programmes , i.e. European Year , LLL lifelong learning , or the ADAPT initiative .
Various colleagues have already pointed this out .
The coordination of the training programmes - such as LEONARDO DA VINCI - with the programmes in the structural funds is also still outstanding .
Further important actors are the social partners .
They are in agreement about special support for SMEs , in agreement about new training methods and the better mutual recognition of diplomas , but not in agreement about the decision-making levels .
Right at the top of the agenda must be a framework agreement geared towards the demands of modern work organization .
At times of crisis further vocational training is judged to be the most dispensable area in the public sector as well , a grave error .
For how can the shortage of specialist workers in companies otherwise be remedied ?
Given increasingly shorter product cycles , changes in production and higher market demands , how can employees keep up to be prepared for the 21st century ?
In the global competitive environment the consistent promotion of the most important resources - human resources - through further training is essential .
In addition , it is indispensable for intellectual and physical mobility and the personal development of the individual !
Mr President , Commissioner , as Mrs Waddington in her excellent report stresses , and as has been often stated here , we need proper information on the feasibility of structural funds and Community programmes for training before we can take decisions on their reorganization and continuation .
Training , employment and competitiveness are firmly interconnected .
For that reason Community actions in these areas must be better coordinated .
The EU must not , however , aim at a united system or programme for further training : on the contrary , I believe that differentials between Member States and the multiplicity of their training solutions is a rich resource that all can draw on .
In place of a uniform system we must strengthen structures of cooperation .
In this way we will be able to effectively spread the word on expertise and exchange experiences to learn from one another .
I would particularly like to emphasize three matters to do with the attainability and quality of further education and training : equality , entrepreneurship and getting prepared for the information society .
There is greater need for further education and re-training to address the needs of women 's equality .
Naturally the quality of school education plays a key role in the effectiveness of further education and training .
The skills and will to face the prospect of lifelong training should be the goal of the school curriculum .
Similarly , school should also prepare women for the multi-faceted nature of women 's professions .
Those who work in or intend to become entrepreneurs in SMEs need special support in the organization of suitable further education and training .
The right type of training could encourage women to even found their own small businesses and learn production skills .
Upheaval caused by the new information technology is the main challenge to further training at work .
Training has to be extremely flexible and diverse , giving consideration to greatly differing needs and individual circumstances .
Rapid technical development puts adaptability to the test and good-quality further training should , along with providing purely professional skills , strengthen people 's ability to take control of change in their lives .
Training should also include cultural elements , and the ability to improve people 's skills of participation and interaction .
Mr President , I too would like to say that Mrs Waddington 's report is very positive , particularly when seen against the outdated figures presented in the Commission 's document , and the bureaucratic and both quantitatively and qualitatively inadequate situation of continuing training in the Member States , or at least in Greece .
Alongside the important vulnerable and particularly sensitive categories , such as women , I want to point to three other important categories , which other speakers too have mentioned .
First , people approaching the end of their productive years , who become unemployed , have problems with training , but also have a very short time during which to continue their productive life .
A characteristic example is radiotelegraphists who no longer work on ships.-Secondly , the very young , who come out of university and tertiary education but without training for employment.-And thirdly , immigrants .
Certain interventions in the area of language , knowledge of the laws and other educational factors would be important in assisting their incorporation into the labour market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should also like to begin with thanks to Sue Waddington for her report , which as we are already aware has been submitted as a document of very high quality .
She has very accurately recognized the shortcomings in the Commission 's report and I share her criticism of the Commission .
It is certainly well meant , Madam Commissioner , but in our opinion your concept for the future is too defensive .
All respect to subsidiarity , but the networking of the economy , the internal market and also the euro make a European strategy necessary .
This is no contradiction , but a plea for more cooperation .
The insufficient cooperation of the Member States , which the Commission also ascertained , shows this shortcoming in European thought .
For some sectors no data were even available , including - conspicuously - data for the training sector .
The figures on participation in further training measures are also interesting , and the unemployment figures are particularly negative .
I think , and indeed we all hope , that this will now change as a result of the Amsterdam guidelines .
For we all know - and I should once again like to specifically point out - that over 50 % of the long-term unemployed in Europe are inadequately or wrongly trained and further trained .
This demonstrates the special significance of further training in Europe , particularly in connection with the combating of unemployment .
Formal access to vocational training is certainly guaranteed in all 15 Member States , but the reality - the opportunities for European citizens - varies considerably .
I refer here quite specifically to the demands of Mrs Waddington in points 10 and 11 of the report .
The various sectors are also different : for example the building sector , which quite urgently requires a further qualification , because there as well the working materials and the methods are new and they are developing further .
In the building sector only 15 % are engaged in further training compared to 57 % in the insurance and banking sector .
There are good approaches and opportunities in many countries , including Germany .
However , I discovered that all the projects I saw interestingly have a European context .
They have either been co-financed via Europe through joint initiatives or they are European in-service trainee ships which have been arranged by farsighted teachers .
The German Federal President Roman Herzog recently gave a remarkable speech , which I do not agree with on every point .
But in each case I share his criticism of the provinciality of Germany and other Member States .
We will not achieve competitiveness in Europe by cutting back social rights , but only by promoting lifelong learning .
Mr President , I too wish to congratulate the rapporteur sincerely on the excellent work carried out .
The subject of education and training is certainly one of the most fascinating and important for the cohesion and advance of any evolved society and , on the eve of the Twenty-first Century , I think we must find a new way of dealing with some of the tensions and contradictions we have before us and which only education and training can help us overcome .
First of all the relationship between the process of globalization , increasingly extensive and inevitable , and the defence of the values , the roots of each one , the values of the local Community .
Then there is a need to know how to resolve the conflict between tradition and modernity , because only with a just balance between these two factors is it also possible to govern the more global transformations .
A third central element is the relationship between the need for competitiveness and the preoccupation with equality and guaranteeing opportunities to all , especially the weakest and the excluded .
And at least the correct analysis of these three elements can lead to more focussed reflection on the problem of continuous education and training , which must become a central objective of the action of the European Union and the initiative to be adopted at all levels , European and national .
This concept of lifelong learning may be one of the keys to success in the next century ; this has been talked about for a long time , but still too little is done and the Commission 's communication , which we are debating today , demonstrates that .
This concept must be rapidly translated into operational choices , contractual incentives , investments .
At the Luxembourg Council a precise commitment was made in this direction ; we will check in Cardiff whether the Member States will demonstrate consistency .
I also hope that the Commission will incorporate into its own future work the valuable and important pointers contained in the Waddington report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as I highlighted in my address to Parliament 's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs last July , the Commission is very happy with the particular attention granted by Parliament to this report , which has been discussed within three parliamentary committees , the Committee on Women 's Rights , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , which has been the lead committee .
I thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Larive for the Committee on Women 's Rights , Mrs Günther , for the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , and especially , of course , Mrs Waddington for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , for the quality of the debate within these committees , as well as the opinion and the draft resolution from Mrs Waddington .
I can but be satisfied with the support provided by Parliament to the approach taken by the Commission in this first report on the state of affairs in the area of access to continuing training in the Union .
The Commission shares Parliament 's point of view when it notes that regular monitoring in the area of access to continuing training is of great importance in the formulation of the necessary policies and that particular attention should be paid in the future to defining common qualitative and quantitative criteria which will enable results obtained in different countries to be compared .
Like Parliament , the Commission considers that Eurostat and the CEDEFOP should play a more active role in this follow up .
From this perspective , the Commission therefore accepts Amendments Nos 2 and 4 proposed by Mrs Waddington , along with the amendment corresponding to conclusion 2 of the opinion established by the Committee on Women 's Rights and the amendment corresponding to conclusion 4 of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
The Commission also considers that it is very important to provide a means of dissemination , at Community level , of good practice in the area of continuing training at all levels , within all industries and fields etcetera , by actively involving the social partners in this step .
The Commission therefore accepts Mrs Waddington 's Amendment No 6 .
Another point of agreement between the Commission and Parliament concerns the particular role of the social partners in the promotion of access to continuing training .
They should be able to define , together and at the appropriate level , a certain number of minimal conditions of access , particularly in the light of the Member States ' employment guidelines .
The Commission therefore accepts Mrs Waddington 's Amendment No 3 .
Furthermore , the Commission is of the opinion that all future initiatives for the encouragement and monitoring of access to continuing training and the development of new forms of skills acquisition , in particular those associated with modernization of the working environment , must be taken at the level of both Member States and the Union , in close collaboration with social partners .
These initiatives should be in coordination with the employment guidelines , taking particular account of the conclusions of the extraordinary European Council on Employment , in Luxembourg .
In this context , I am counting on the British and Austrian Presidencies to widen access to training to an increasing number of our citizens .
The Commission will watch over the complementarity of these different programmes and Community initiatives in this respect .
The Commission therefore accepts Amendment Nos 5 , 7 and 8 of Mrs Waddington , as well as the oral amendment regarding point D and Amendment No 5 .
The Commission also accepts the amendment from the Committee on Women 's Rights , regarding conclusion 1 of its opinion .
In addition , the Commission will give greater attention to the issue of equal opportunities in the promotion and follow up to access to continuing training .
It therefore accepts the amendments corresponding to conclusions 8 , 10 , 11 and 12 of the opinion drawn up by the Committee on Women 's Rights .
Finally , it will take into account , in future initiatives in the area of access to continuing training and skills acquisition throughout working life , the present resolution of Parliament .
As you know , since the meeting of Heads of State and of Government in Essen in December 1994 , Europe has given priority to investment in professional training , which was confirmed in the preamble to the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The rise and development of the competence of the work force is today considered a determining factor in the employability of individuals , as well as in the adaptability and competitiveness of businesses .
Improvement in access to continuing training and the perspective of training which develops throughout one 's working life , enabling continual acquisition of new areas of competence , are at the heart of active employment policies , as the conclusions of the extraordinary Council on Employment on 21st November last and the guidelines for employment policies adopted by the European Council last December showed .
This direction had already been clearly declared in the national reports of several countries such as Denmark , Finland , Ireland , the Netherlands , Sweden and the United Kingdom .
The present report , presented today , has three important results .
Firstly , it shows that the objective of access to continuing training for all workers in the Union remains to be achieved .
On average , in the Community , only a little more than one worker in four has participated in some form of further education during the year , and less than two out of every three businesses could be considered to be developing a policy regarding ongoing training .
These figures constitute an encouraging base , but are insufficient in light of the speed of the technological and demographic developments previously highlighted .
Secondly , Europe must face up to the problem of inequality of access to continuing training .
Large differences exist , both between categories of businesses and workers .
Generally speaking , the countries where companies are at the top of the scale also seem to be the most dynamic .
There is therefore a clear risk of seeing differences forged within the Union .
Finally , the fact that initiatives in the area are numerous is an encouraging phenomenon , which stems equally from State authorities as from the social partners or businesses .
This dynamic of initiatives is an interesting and encouraging opportunity to disseminate best practice and to ensure more favourable development as the whole .
It seems to me important to refer to the follow up the Commission intends to give to the report , in particular the proposal for commencing a process of consultation with the social partners .
The Commission has noted the new dynamic of Community social dialogue with regard to the agreement reached on part-time contracts with a great deal of interest .
In addition , if a new phase of social dialogue commences on the theme of information , of worker consultation at national level , it would be possible for training to be fully a part of this , choosing the themes through consultation with the social partners .
Before any new proposal for follow up to this report I , along with my colleague Padraig Flynn , who is in charge of the issue of social dialogue , wanted to be able to have an in depth discussion with the social partners in the Community on the different paths possible .
We have also noted that the welcome given to this report by the different Community bodies has been extremely favourable .
This process of cooperation between the Commission , Member States and the social partners has enabled the establishment of the necessary bases to put in place progressively at Community level a framework enabling each Member State and the social partners to appreciate better the progress achieved , to situate its own actions in relation to others , and to gain inspiration from the experiences of others .
We therefore have the intention of reconsidering the possibilities for a proposal for a Community instrument which would set up a method of regular monitoring , on the basis of common criteria , established at Community level .
Thank you , Commissioner Cresson .
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Participation in profits ( PEPPER II )
The next item is Mrs Hermange 's report ( A4-0292 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission report on PEPPER II : promotion of participation by employed persons in profits and enterprise results ( including equity participation ) in Member States , 1996 ( COM ( 96 ) 0697 - C4-0019 / 97 ) .
Mr President , the report I am today presenting is in line with the Council recommendation of 1992 regarding the promotion of worker participation in company profits , which was a follow up to a Commission report on the situation in 1990 .
In this non-binding instrument , the Council made eight recommendations to Member States for the promotion of participation and asked the Commission to draw up a report over four years on the development of participatory systems in Europe .
It is this PEPPER II report which constitutes the basis of our reflection today .
This basis must , however , be improved upon since , if we are delighted at the existence of this report and its contribution to the relaunch of the European debate on financial participation , it has to be noted that it raises , Mr Commissioner , a feeling of frustration insofar as it highlights the weak follow up to the Council 's recommendations by the different Member States and proposes no concrete actions for the European Union .
It is for this reason that our Committee wished to present a certain number of concrete proposals with a view to studying the conditions of implementation and the effects of the PEPPER systems , with the aim of promoting them in Europe .
The very diverse methods of financial participation vary from profit sharing to share holding , passing through fixed formulae or business plans .
Furthermore , we all know that legislation varies greatly from country to country . Great Britain and France probably have the most advanced legislation in this area , whilst in many countries the issue is left to the discretion of the social partners .
Financial participation has three associated objectives : to involve workers more fully in the running of the company , to encourage the setting up of collective savings and finally , to develop investment .
In this way , both employers and workers can be satisfied through a well understood mutual interest . On another level , the State is also satisfied .
Why are the employers satisfied ?
Because they often note an improvement in productivity and competitiveness .
Why the workers ?
Because they obtain a supplement to their salary , have the chance to build up a progressive capital sum and feel more involved in the success of their company .
Finally , as far as the State is concerned , it can be observed that participation strengthens the competitiveness of the economy as well as worker satisfaction and could possibly be one of the answers to the problem of modernization of the state pension system in Europe through the financing of complementary pension funds .
From this point of view at least , the discussion is worth being had .
Finally , it seems that PEPPER systems may have a positive effect on employment , insofar as worker participation brings about new behaviour and new equilibria within the company .
This question of employment is at the heart of our concerns these days .
It is the reason why we are asking the Commission to carry out rapidly a study on the effects of PEPPER systems on employment , production and flexibility of salaries .
This study should also concentrate part of its analysis on financial participation in SMEs .
With this in mind , I would like to say to Mr Menrad that I am in complete agreement with the amendment he has introduced , apart from one or two inaccuracies in the French version .
In my opinion , the question of participation in multinationals must also be subjected to close scrutiny .
This is the reason why , Mr Commissioner , we in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs proposed the creation of a working group made up of representatives from the social partners , Members of the European Parliament and experts from the Commission .
We would like you to give your opinion on this proposal and , if need be , a timetable along with practical ways in which this working group can be set up .
Finally , we proposed the establishment of a programme aimed at promoting exchange of information regarding good practice .
In this respect , a commentary on this programme has been included in the 1998 budget line relating to social dialogue .
In this spirit , I would like to note that on 7th and 8th May next , a first meeting of worker shareholders will take place in Brussels , which will give rise to the establishment of a European federation of worker shareholders .
We hope that this programme may be financed within the framework of the promotion of exchange of information .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner ! Mrs Hermange has drawn up for the Social Committee an excellent report on the participation in profits and equity of employees and on the Commission 's PEPPER Report .
Many congratulations !
In this connection I can submit the response of the Economic Committee for which I have been given three minutes speaking time additionally by my Group of the European People 's Party .
Therefore , at the end I will emphasize those principles of my group which have been incorporated into the response .
The PEPPER Report contains an overview of the voluntary participation in profits and equity models in the EU and deals with what can be learnt from the collective experiences .
As we heard , major experiences have been gained above all in Great Britain and France .
The successes in these Member States with a large number of models are connected in that the idea of statutory framework conditions to promote the financial participation of employees is inspired by many different political powers there .
Mrs Hermange requests the Commission to reinforce the exchange of information via participation systems amongst the Member States and to start information campaigns in these states , mainly with the social partners .
The report of the Social Committee adopts the idea of a wages policy which is oriented towards productivity .
Since the White Paper on Employment it has been recommended time and again by the EU to employers and employees .
The employees know that in clear text this means restraint in increases in cash wages .
A franc or a mark can only be spent once , in cash or for investment .
The report and the response make it clear , however , that it is not enough to fob off employees with a ' thank you ' for their understanding .
They should rather be given interests , on the basis of voluntary models , in profits and investments which would not arise at all without their restraint .
The PEPPER Report relates rather one-sidedly to employees ' corporate equity investments , where they are documented through securities such as shares , employees ' shares , stock options , bonds and convertible bonds .
The Economic Committee rejects investment alternatives if there are no corporate opportunities .
It also wants to include the promotion of forms of investment in the discussion because they predominantly occur in small and medium-sized companies .
In Austria and Germany these are undisclosed partnerships .
This also corresponds to application 4 to amend .
Application 2 to amend of the Greens Group in the European Parliament seeks to strike from the report the idea of a supplementary retirement pension through property formation and thereby remove it from the debate on capital formation policy .
Indeed , the PEPPER Report is not a legislative initiative but a stimulus for discussion , and this aspect of capital formation policy should be discussed in any event , especially as it in no way relates to a replacement of statutory social insurance .
Mr Wolf , I prefer what the speaker for the Greens , Joschka Fischer , recently said at the budget debate in the German Bundestag . ' A broad participation of employees in the capital gains in a company of coowners is the prerequisite for pension security ' .
The concept of property formation in employees ' hands belongs to the most important demands of the Christian-social movement .
Nell-Breuning , who undertook the essential preparatory work for the social encyclic Quadragesimo anno , once said that partnership and the participation of employees would only take hold as pincers with two jaws .
One jaw was information and participation .
Here we commit ourselves to the rights of information and consultation of the European employees ' councils .
In addition , we demand the opportunity to participate in the planned European limited company .
The other jaw was the participation of employees in productive assets .
The idea of participation of course not only has Christian-social roots , but amongst other things roots in the Enlightenment as well .
Francis Bacon , the great English thinker and statesman handed down the maxim : ' Ownership is like dung . It stinks in a heap , but brings rich blessings when widely spread ' .
Today , the demand for a broad spread of productive assets corresponds to this 400-year-old proposition .
It is not about a backward-looking distribution of ownership .
The objective is to provide more assistance in the future to those who have been disadvantaged in the past , by adopting supportive solutions .
Primarily , the social partners are called upon to provide tailored participation models within a national framework .
The right response of our time is : partnership instead of class conflict .
With this in mind , I ask you to approve the report by Mrs Hermange , whom on behalf of the Economic Committee I would once again like to cordially congratulate and thank .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to cordially congratulate Mrs Hermange for her excellent report .
She assimilated the suggestions of the members of the Social Committee into her report , and so the overall report was never contentious .
My group is therefore against the first three applications to amend which were submitted , and in favour of application No 4 because this is a sensible supplement to the report .
In June 1992 the Council adopted a recommendation to promote systems relating to the participation of employees in operating profits .
It resolved - and I am presenting a summarized account of this - to create legal structures for the introduction of such systems of participation , to examine the possibility of whether tax incentives could be introduced , to promote the systems by way of an information campaign and to take into account the findings from other Member States , to ensure that legal and administrative provisions were formulated in such a way that a broad range of systems would be available and would be the subject of consultations between employees and employers , and in particular to take this into account in tariff negotiations .
After three years all national data were to be made available to the Commission for a new overview .
These national findings are now presented in the Commission 's report and they are , to put it mildly , inadequate .
Apart from France and Great Britain , practically no Member State has taken any initiatives and there is a complete absence of an international exchange of information .
Unfortunately , the outcome of this report proves once again that recommendations which have no binding legal force are adopted by the Council only for show .
After the adoption of resolutions the Members of the Council submit cloudy press releases and leave the recommendations to disappear in the bottom drawers of their desks .
But we want to see action !
The participation of employees in operating profits itself is accompanied by improved productivity .
It encourages employees to obtain qualifications , at least these are the experiences from France and Great Britain .
And also , at a time of high unemployment it could , with the introduction of the company participation systems in smaller and medium-sized companies , also ensure better and more secure employment
We therefore expect the Council to adhere to its own resolutions of 1992 .
But from the Commission we expect more than merely a report with a description of the facts .
It should carry out investigations on the effects of the PEPPER systems , set in motion a programme for the exchange of information , set up a working party to promote the introduction of PEPPER systems particularly in international companies and consider a Community initiative on capital formation policy to solve the problem of participation rights for migrant workers as well .
Model projects should also be developed for the central and eastern European countries .
However , we expect the social partners to provide information and inform themselves about the PEPPER systems , as well as having regard to these systems when conducting their negotiations .
Mr President , this is a recommendation from 1992 , which according to the Committee and the report has not led to very many national measures .
Now the Committee is largely behind this report and the proposals for measures we want to introduce , tax relief via the State , grants etc . , to increase profit sharing by companies and worker influence .
That is good , but I think that we should state very clearly that it cannot progress more quickly than the Member States themselves want .
You cannot dictate from above that this is what people should do and expect that things will necessarily be so .
I would particularly like to point out some examples which have worked quite well in my country , Sweden .
We have had cooperatives for a long time , both producer cooperatives , such as in agriculture , and consumer cooperatives which work very well .
There people go in with one share and have one vote , so it does not work in the same way as the share system , where people go in and buy as many votes they like by buying lots of shares .
These cooperatives therefore work well .
Most of them can be developed .
In addition , there is the possibility of also using economic societies , as they are formally called , i.e. cooperatives , for small companies .
I think it is important to stress that , and I would like to point out that perhaps people should concentrate more on measures of that kind .
I personally am also very much convinced that people support companies which are wholly employee owned .
It provides a totally different way of creating a sense of belonging in a company and a sense that this is something people are doing together .
That is hardly mentioned in the report .
However , on the whole the report is positive and we in our group think it is important to strive in this direction .
We also believe that this can create employment in Europe 's Member States in future if it is drawn up in the right way .
However , it must happen at the speed and in the way which each Member State itself desires .
On the whole we are also able to support the amendments with some exceptions .
Mr President , I would like to begin by reminding all of us that the left , both the political and the trades union left , has never in any way been against the people working in companies also having a very , very large influence over the business , both over the corporate environment as a whole and over the use of profits .
But I think that to begin one-sidedly to emphasize personal shares and personal shareholdings as a driving force for increased productivity in this way is extremely biased and very blinkered .
What we want instead is a dynamic and creative development with regard to corporate democracy .
It would have been very good , I think , if both the Commission and the rapporteur had included the need for companies to invest in funds for the future and what we recently talked about , life-long learning , so that there is investment not only in personal ownership , but also in short-term training in order to increase expertise , not just for the individual , not just for the company , but also for society as a whole .
Mr President , what follows from this ?
I believe that this must once again be clarified .
It is not a general question , Mr Menrad , of partnership or class conflict .
I cannot help commenting here that anyone who cannot engage in conflict will not be taken seriously as a partner either .
It is a question of how participation systems can be developed beyond the Ford factory , i.e. beyond the large company , with co-management or other means of involving employees arranged by the trade unions .
We know that the low-denomination share is no answer .
The shareholder is torn one way and the other between the shareholder value , which calls for sackings , and his interest as an employee , which calls for employment .
That is the case at Volkswagen , that is the case at Renault and that is always the case wherever low-denomination shares are broadly scattered amongst employees .
We must urgently examine to what extent we can expand the corporate concept which focuses on the functional context instead of the mere formation of property ; modern franchise company chains should be examined in this connection .
We must also consider the redefinition of the boundaries of corporate and social democratisation .
In this respect I disagree slightly with the GUE , because local and regional coordination also calls for new forms of incorporation and in that case a reliance on ownership makes complete sense .
However , in particular this is a matter of genuine participation in profits , not of wages being paid out over an extended period of time , and also of the necessity for providing official cover for the employees ' shares .
We have submitted the appropriate applications .
We can also support the applications of Mr Menrad , since it seems to us rational to once again support rational privatization with appropriate participation strategies ; a specific concentration on small and medium-sized undertakings also seems to us to make sense , provided their particular circumstances are adequately taken into account .
However , the fundamental issue is to deal with the question which has already been raised in connection with the Meitner plan in Sweden in the full bloom of Fordism : how can a mechanism be effectively installed which cancels out the automatic process whereby the holders of capital accumulate the corporate wealth and the dependent workers can at most reproduce their own working capacity ?
This is the question we are faced with , and in this respect the PEPPER Report is really only a precursor , as much as Mrs Hermange is to be thanked for drawing something positive from it with the Committee for Employment and Social Affairs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , recognizing the right of subordinate employees to participate in the profits and success of the company has always been one of the priority objectives of the Italian political right .
For fifty years we have been maintaining that overcoming the class struggle and eliminating the conflict between capital and labour must essentially come through the participation of employees in the company capital .
That is why the parliamentary group of the National Alliance is delighted to welcome the reproposing of this subject and congratulates the rapporteur , and we also note the fact that even about six years after the recommendation of the European Council , little or nothing has changed in the various Member States .
We have the clear sensation that in Europe the issues of occupation and industrial democracy , of a different and qualified role for employees , had become commonplaces , slogans to be used only to display goodwill which then do not find any concrete expression .
In fact , excluding France and the United Kingdom , where progress has been made in the last five years on the ground of financial participation of employees , in the rest of the European Union a sterile debate continues about understanding whether these new participation systems should be the responsibility of government or the social partners .
The European Union must demonstrate more courage , more determination in this delicate matter , that is it needs to move from words to deeds , if only through the establishment of a European participation council , with the task of promoting the introduction of participation systems under comparable conditions throughout the Community .
It is necessary to act so that the social partners include this system in their negotiations and operate so that a regulatory framework is available in the Member States .
At a time when unemployment remains the most serious economic problem in the European Community at this millennium end , Europe must make every effort to induce the governments of the Member States and set out down a secure road , already successfully tested but so far only used by few .
Grand intentions are no longer enough !
Mr President , I am very pleased about this initiative from the Commission .
It places emphasis on the advantages there can be in employees sharing in the profits of businesses .
Profit sharing can make employees more satisfied and motivated , put more in their pay packet and create a better psychological working environment .
It can make the profits of European businesses grow if productivity increases and it could possibly help improve employment in Europe , which is needed .
Profit sharing can appear in an infinite number of variations .
Financial profit sharing , financial democracy or employee shares .
Favourite children have many names .
The model which is chosen in the Member States will depend on how the labour market is set up in the country concerned .
When the Commission 's report states that there is no profit sharing in Denmark , that is incorrect , Mr Flynn .
Employee pension funds own a large share of Danish businesses .
That means in fact that wage-earners have a large stake in capital in Denmark .
We should not therefore stick to a rigid picture of what profit sharing means or a narrow European model .
We should start with the countries ' different traditions and learn from each other 's good and bad experiences .
I would therefore support a study into how the various schemes function in the Member States .
It is also a good idea to set up a working group which should include the social partners .
This working group could , among other things , examine questions of a transnational character , such as profit sharing in multinational companies .
In Denmark we do not believe that European legislation is necessary , but we are pleased that in this way we can put the subject on the agenda in the EU .
This is an area in which we should take the voluntary path .
It would be wonderful if we could make businesses aware of the advantages of profit sharing through the exchange of experience and studies , but decisions on the introduction of profit sharing should either be left to the individual business or be made the subject of agreement between the social partners .
Mr President , first of all let me thank Mrs Hermange and the Committee for Employment and Social Affairs on the thorough work that they have done on the PEPPER II report .
The PEPPER II report gives an overview of the way that the Member States have promoted financial participation of employees in profits and enterprise results since 1992 , following the adoption of a Council recommendation on this very issue .
Since the adoption of the PEPPER report last January financial participation has , amongst many other topics , been discussed in the context of the Green Paper on partnership for a new organization of work .
The employment guidelines that were adopted in December also invite the social partners to negotiate agreements to modernize the organization of work , with the aim of making undertakings productive and competitive and achieving the required balance between flexibility and security .
In this context , the participation of employees in profits and enterprise results could assume a greater importance .
As the PEPPER report shows , profit-sharing is in all cases associated with higher productivity levels , no matter what methods , model specification and data are used .
Other positive effects of the schemes are on wage flexibility , employment and employee involvement .
The Commission agrees with Parliament that the impact of financial participation schemes on employment , productivity and wage flexibility should be further studied .
We agree with Parliament here - measuring the exact impact of such schemes can often be very difficult , particularly given the different fiscal and social security schemes that exist in the Member States .
The Members will be aware of the great diversity here and it is very hard to get the proper assessment and comparable data analysis in place .
Furthermore , since it seems that the lack of comparable information may be an obstacle to the promotion of financial participation schemes , the Commission supports the idea of launching incentive measures to promote information exchanges between Member States , provided adequate funding is available .
I think this is a key request which the rapporteur and Parliament are making today .
The applicant countries could also be invited to participate in this particular understanding , insofar as exchange of good practice and information is concerned .
As regards other actions proposed by Parliament , the Commission would prefer to wait until the final results of the consultation launched on the basis of the Green Paper on work organization , plus the issue of setting up a working party , could be considered in the context of the possible follow-up to the Green Paper .
Thank you Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Kurdish refugees
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation of Kurdish refugees and the position of the European Union .
Mr President , thank you for your introduction and for the opportunity to address Parliament this afternoon .
This is my first opportunity and it is one that I relish .
This is a very important issue which is being debated today and it is a privilege to take part in your debate .
The presidency shares many of the concerns expressed by the European Parliament .
The scenes we have all witnessed during the last few weeks of large numbers of distressed and vulnerable people arriving on the shores of Europe are deeply disturbing .
Some of these people are genuine refugees entitled to the protection of the international community .
But many are economic migrants in no real danger of persecution in their countries of origin who are merely seeking a better life in the European Union .
Both categories appear to be being exploited by unscrupulous racketeers who take their money in return for attempting to smuggle them illegally into the European Union .
As the presidency we are determined to deal with this difficult and complex problem in an effective but humane manner compatible with our international obligations towards genuine refugees .
This is not just a Schengen problem ; it is a common European Union problem .
It is a problem which challenges our ability to act together both in European Union domestic policy terms and in foreign policy terms .
The presidency has drawn up proposals to tackle this difficult problem .
On the domestic front , immigration and asylum policies of the Member States need to be fair and firm .
External border controls need to be rigorously enforced .
We are looking within the European Union at what further steps we can take .
We have suggested that we could be more rigorous in applying sanctions against airlines and other carriers who bring undocumented passengers into the European Union .
We can ensure that our embassies and consulates , where applications for visas are made by Iraqis , have adequate training .
We can train airline staff in the detection of false documents .
But this in itself will not be enough .
We have to track down and bring to justice the organized criminals who are trafficking in human beings by encouraging people to leave their countries and part with their savings for an illegal passage to Europe , often in appalling conditions .
The meeting of police chiefs in Rome on 8 January was an important step in this direction .
Several representatives of those European Union law enforcement agencies most directly affected by the problem were able to pool their knowledge .
The presidency will seek to build on this .
We will continue to ensure our law enforcement agencies have the political support they need to be able to work smoothly together to confront this kind of international crime .
As the presidency we will do what we can to achieve this .
Since some of the people being smuggled into Europe are genuine refugees fleeing persecution in their own countries , our actions have to be consistent with our international obligations towards such people .
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees will be kept advised of any measures being planned .
In turn , the presidency has sought - and we will continue regularly to seek - UNHCR 's advice on the humanitarian situation in the regions from which the migrants come .
But the measures we take domestically will not be able to stem the human tide unless we are effective on the foreign policy front as well .
We have to look at the root causes of these migratory pressures : the human rights and humanitarian situation in the region and the repressive nature of the Iraqi regime , as well as the fighting in which so many civilians are caught up in Northern Iraq and the south-east of Turkey .
We have to think hard about what we can do together to solve these problems .
In particular , we have to support the efforts of mediators in the reconciliation process between the Kurdish parties in Northern Iraq .
Through humanitarian intervention we need to help create the conditions in Northern Iraq that will remove the incentive for people to leave .
Turkey has a key role to play in handling this crisis .
The presidency has discussed the matter with the Turkish Government which is taking the problem seriously and has tightened security measures at ports .
The presidency has attached the highest priority to work on the action plan on illegal immigration from Iraq commissioned at the Luxembourg European Council .
This crisis is a real test of the European Union 's ability to take rapid and effective action within the framework of both the second and third pillars to deal with a serious problem .
The presidency intends to do what it can to see that together we pass the test .
Mr President , the Commission also welcomes the opportunity to discuss this important issue in your Parliament If we want to do justice to those who justly lay claim to protection as refugees on the one hand , but if on the other hand we want to protect our citizens against the problems of illegal immigration , the European Union will increasingly have to strengthen its cooperation and harmonize its asylum , immigration and visa policy , or as the case may be , coordinate more decisively .
Mr President , the European Union understandably exerts an attraction on many outside the Union who find themselves politically or economically oppressed .
When the European Union does not offer a common policy in exchange , the pressure of illegal immigration will only increase , resulting in the genuine refugee becoming the victim .
This is not acceptable .
We owe a more effective policy to the Member States who are presently carrying the heaviest burden as regards receiving refugees .
Mr President , when we are talking about the recently observed , increased inflow of Kurdish people , it seems to us that this cannot be primarily attributed to new political or economic causes .
The Kurdish question is , as we all know , past history , yet unfortunately it should be recognized that a solution cannot be expected in the near future .
Nonetheless the European Commission is trying for its part , through the MEDA programme amongst other things in the south east of Turkey , but also in northern Iraq through the ECHO humanitarian aid , to improve living conditions there , with the aim of preventing migration as a first option .
The extra negative dimension we are presently witnessing , and the presidency pointed to this just now , is an increasingly large scale smuggling operation in which criminal organisations earn big money from the misery of thousands who , for whatever reason , wish to live in Western Europe .
These criminal practices cannot be combated toughly enough .
We therefore very much welcome the talks between police chiefs which recently took place in Rome .
Mr President , on issues concerning the third pillar , in which the national authority of Member States dominates , the Commission has taken the necessary initiatives and has submitted proposals , a number of which I would like to mention here .
The Commission has submitted the proposal for the ODYSSEUS programme , which aims to promote exchange and training of functionaries who work in the field of emigration , external borders and asylum issues .
This proposal is presently still being discussed in the Council of Ministers .
We would like to point out the joint action of March last year to recognize temporary protection of asylum seekers , to which your Parliament has given its support .
The recent events indicate the need for temporary protection , and the Commission hopes that the Council will be able to reach a decision soon .
Already in 1995 an institutional framework had been adopted for cooperation between Europe and Turkey in the fields of justice and internal affairs , but the mechanisms for implementation have , unfortunately , for well-known political reasons .
The statement of 16 July last year on the deepening of the relations between the European Union and Turkey contains proposals for further cooperation in the sphere of police and customs ; this is backed by financial resources .
The European Council of Luxembourg considered the consequences of the large tide of migrants , and then , too , the issue of Kurds from Iraq was discussed , and , as you know , the Council is preparing an action plan in which third and second pillar aspects are gathered .
In this context the Commission wishes to point to the complementary nature of the Union initiatives on the one hand , and action as part of the Schengen agreement on the other .
This is important because the Schengen agreement was incorporated into the Treaty of Amsterdam , and because current developments might endanger the implementation of one of the objectives of the Treaty , namely the abolition of border controls .
Yesterday a task force met to discuss a whole range of practical measures to control external borders on the basis of a list drawn up on 15 December .
Mr President , in conclusion the Commission would like to express its appreciation of Italy 's efforts to respond adequately to the pressure of hundreds of new immigrants , and to do so in compliance with the obligations of international conventions , such as offering humanitarian aid and the opportunity to submit an application for asylum , whilst at the same time meeting its obligations to protect the external borders as effectively as possible .
Mr President , the joint action plan which is being prepared by the Council , will try to gather together all policy areas .
The Commission on its part will vigorously support the presidency 's efforts for far-reaching agreements between the Member States .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe the two statements have shown that there are very many points of agreement between the institutions of the European Union .
Firstly , it is important that the right of asylum is fully safeguarded in this Europe .
Secondly , however , it is important that we put an end to criminal organizations , which cannot be tolerated or sympathized with because they commit the ultimate sin of exploiting human misery out a lust for profit .
Thirdly , I should like to fully support what the President-in-Office of the Council also mentioned : it is a question of combating the causes of migration , as you also stated , Mr Commissioner .
I believe we must all endeavour to solve the problem of the Kurds - the economic , social , political and cultural problem of the Kurds , not only in Turkey but especially in Turkey .
However , I would like to take this opportunity to state quite clearly that to many people it appears to be no coincidence that this immigration occurred a few weeks after the Luxembourg summit - this reaction appears to be no coincidence .
It may indeed have happened with the knowledge of the Turkish authorities .
We must follow up several reactions closely .
We must be patient .
We must continue the dialogue with Turkey despite all the problems this involves , because a problem such as that of the Kurds can ultimately only be resolved jointly , with mutual support and assistance .
We must also convince Turkey that it is not only an internal problem , not only a problem to be resolved politically or even militarily , but a socio-economic and cultural problem which is to be resolved ; and that Europe wants to help , not oppose Turkey , and would like to point Turkey in the direction of assistance .
Fourthly : the burdens .
The Commissioner also addressed this matter and others have addressed it - if we want to combat the xenophobia , which there most unfortunately is , and in some cases also the hysteria which accompanied it , we must consider how the burdens and the responsibility incidental to the refugee question can be better apportioned .
We also addressed you on the matter , Mr Commissioner in the Committee for Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
I believe that more must be done to make it clear that in the event that some countries - Italy has on many occasions acted in an impeccable manner in this connection - becoming directly affected by floods of refugees , other countries in Europe cannot say that this does not concern us , that is their problem , or perhaps react in an even more negative manner .
In Europe we must assume responsibility for this jointly , and jointly create a rational asylum policy in this Europe .
This has not yet happened , and there will be other colleagues addressing the subject .
The common foreign policy must ensure that the right of asylum is safeguarded in this Europe , that no fortress of Europe comes into being , but that a rationally controlled immigration policy ensures that xenophobia is eliminated and that we are an hospitable Europe , but for those who really need our help and support .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I think Commissioner van den Broek was right to recognize that the problem of the Kurds cannot be regarded just as an operation of police containment or security to be progressed with exclusively containment operations , given that it is a matter of an eminently political question which goes precisely to the root of things .
Twenty million people , divided between five states , a people without a land , an ancient cultural identity torn apart , people without citizenship , subjected to harsh repression and authoritarian regimes .
All this cannot be removed from the European conscience .
I believe the problem must be approached with due caution but also putting the issues back into proportion .
Only 2 646 Kurds have disembarked on the Italian coast , 1 500 Turkish and 1 384 Iraqi .
Italy has operated , and I want to give credit to Commissioner van den Broek for having recognized it , according to the international agreements and respecting the Schengen Treaty , strengthening the controls , expelling the clandestine immigrants - 54 000 and 38 000 in 1997 - sticking to all the obligations which are necessary but also adopting the measures which must be taken to be able to respect the right of asylum , without unloading its own responsibilities onto other countries .
But the question must be dealt with in a unitary and political way , also seeking to develop a different kind of policy towards Turkey which remains , precisely , a central country in decisions in respect of the Middle East .
I would like to say here that Europe is not only the Europe viewed horizontally , as Mr Cook viewed it this morning , framing it from Edinburgh to Vienna , but it also goes from Edinburgh to Barcelona , to Naples , to Athens .
Only by looking at Europe in comprehensive terms can these problems be dealt with , applying that due wisdom and also that due humanity which is imposed from the start to these problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when in days gone by Kurdish refugees disembarked in Italy and to the appeal for solidarity launched from my country for a common European action came the response that the problem was entirely Italian , our European citizens had the proof , once again , that they belonged to an acephalous Union , a Union which imposes rules on everything that can be regulated in everyday life , but which then goes into hiding when world-scale events become urgent for our continent .
The disembarkation of the Kurds in Calabria and Puglia is just the latest chronologically and the Union will increasingly be considered a priority destination by refugees .
There are two points I consider fundamental , the first political , the second legal and institutional in nature .
We who have contributed to the dissolution of the eastern regime , we who have started action to strengthen the weak democracies of those countries , we who have opened up the Union to enlargement to the other countries operating , in fact , a choice which also opens up new fractures , we cannot ourselves turn away before such emergencies .
So a coherent and tangible policy is needed , also to promote economic development of the regions of Asia Minor , the Mediterranean and its peoples .
As regards the legal and institutional aspect , I would mention that Title IV or the new treaty confers on the Council the task of defining , within five years , common rules for crossing external frontiers , visas , asylum and immigration .
Given that the southern coasts of the Union are no longer national boundaries but frontiers of the Union , we ask that common and lasting solutions be urgently found .
Mr President , I think the Council Presidency and Commissioner van den Broek are very clear that it is absurd to think that they can stem the Kurdish migratory flood without a radical change in the situation in the places where they live today .
I am thinking primarily of Turkey and Iraq .
The causes of the migratory flood must be understood , it has been said . The causes are simple : war is being waged against the Kurds in Iraq , and the Turkish army has carried out massacres against villages inhabited by Kurds .
Those are the causes of this flight : political causes , primarily political , which make the Kurdish question a political question .
I believe that all this makes it urgent and necessary to hold an international conference on the Kurdish question .
That is a very pressing necessity and the European Union can and must take this problem on board .
A commitment from the Commissioner on this issue would be important .
I only want to add that I too consider important the recognition shown for the positive role played by the government of my country .
It has not been a pretty sight to see other governments say that the problem of migration was just an Italian problem ; I think it is now time to pose the question of a common political asylum policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate concerns political responsibility .
It is a question of dealing responsibly with the subject of ' flight ' and a coherent European response to the question of helping refugees who are seeking protection .
This debate is about refugees and helping refugees , not about preventing refugees from taking flight in the first place .
We are experiencing precisely the opposite .
Refugees are being criminalized indiscriminately and the medium of Eurodac , Mr Wiebenga , is a means of criminalizing refugees indiscriminately .
They are per definitionem being turned into illegal immigrants , and now an entirely new concept is being introduced into the debate : that of the illegal exit .
I am familiar with this concept from the linguistic usage in the GDR , and Mr Swoboda uses this concept when he demands that Turkey as it were prevent refugees being able to escape from Turkey in the first place .
With the calls for Schengen to be repealed , which is only possible if there is an actual threat to public order and internal security , 2 , 000 people in flight are declared to be a threat for 370 million EU citizens .
This is demagogic and represents an exploitation of the misery of people in flight for party political purposes , for election purposes and for purposes quite different from ensuring that the right of asylum is upheld here .
When now above all the Federal German Minister of the Interior , who over the last few days has posed as the taskmaster of Europe , criticises Italy this is an open call to violate prevailing asylum law .
He also calls for the Geneva Refugees Convention to be violated !
He calls for the European Convention on Human rights to be violated !
Indeed , where have we arrived at here if European responsibility now only means undermining the law of asylum as far as possible .
The Kurdish problem is not a police problem
Please allow me to say one more thing : four weeks ago Mr Juncker said here in this room that he would not sit at a table with torturers , and he was referring to the Turkish Government .
Four weeks later these very people are being cooperated with , the Turkish police are being cooperated with and there are discussions with the Turkish police as to how the culprits can combat the victims
( Applause ) This is deceitful and cynical and makes it clear how seriously human rights policy is conducted !
( Applause )
Mr President , many colleagues have highlighted the cacophony Europe and some Member States have demonstrated faced with the issue of the flood of Kurdish refugees into Italy .
I associate myself with those criticisms , I say that the Italian authorities have acted properly and have shown , from this point of view , a great sense of responsibility , but at the same time I answer the fact - if I may - that , if we had thought in time that these frontiers and these asylum measures for refugees are measures to be taken henceforward at the European level , it cannot but be recognized that neither in the Treaty of Amsterdam , nor in the action of the Council , which has blocked a draft convention on external borders since 1991 , are there encouraging signs .
Europe is there , but when it is needed it is missing and missing too often !
It is a task which the British Presidency will surely have to deal with to bring order to a situation which can no longer be left to the national governments .
Having said that , may I say , Mr President , on the text that we will be voting on , that we are preparing to vote unilaterally , without dwelling for a moment on the Turkish question which was left in suspense in Luxembourg , and voting on a text of this kind risks being another slap in the fact to that willingness to re-open the dialogue on the participation of Turkey in the European Conference which we are all looking forward to and on which we are working , but which , unfortunately , has had no reply from Parliament .
Mr President-in-Office , I would first of all like to wish the British Presidency the best of luck .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the influx of hundreds of Kurdish refugees into Europe gives us the opportunity to question ourselves on the functioning of the police cooperation foreseen in the Schengen agreements and in the section concerning the total abolition of border controls on movements of people .
The assessment is clear .
This arrangement is inappropriate .
Italy joined the Schengen group on 26th October last , and yet nearly 10 , 000 illegal immigrants pass through southern Italy every month in order to gain entry into the rest of Europe , benefiting from the internal borders which are easily crossed .
Austria , who joined Schengen on 1st December 1997 , has just invoked the safeguard clause in order to increase controls at the Italian border .
France , which already uses this clause on its northern borders , has considerably strengthened controls along its borders with Italy , without even attempting to invoke the legal cover of the safeguard clause .
In any case , we have to recognize that the whole world is making a fool of the Schengen agreements .
As an MEP of a border region , I know that border controls in no way constitute a hindrance to freedom of circulation , just as showing our parliamentary or civil servants ' identity cards is not a hindrance to our entering these Parliament buildings .
As an MEP of a border region , I know the political and socio-economic damage caused by unfettered emigration .
Each country must remain free to decide who lives within its borders , to protect and respect those it accepts and to refuse this right to those who do not respect its laws .
It is precisely within this context that the Treaty of Amsterdam anticipates , within a five year period after its enforcement , the abolition of all controls on movement of people , including those from third countries , at the internal borders of the Union .
And they want France to amend its constitution to this end ?
I simply hope that the French , and in particular those from Alsace , will be able to give their opinion on the subject and reject the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Mr President , once again I am wondering what Europe wants and what role Europe is playing in the face of the daily events of extra-European immigrations of entire peoples .
On the one hand it welcomes the new arrivals and encourages this mass transfer , and on the other it tramples indecently on the rights of the peoples of the Member States : Padania is an example of that .
Turkey and Iraq share the territory of Kurdistan , while Italy and the Member States share the Kurdish people robbed of their homeland .
I wonder if the Union did not have the political strength to react or did not want to react against the Turkish government , which speaks of democracy and in reality bombs and kills Kurds and in its own country obliges citizens to write their religion on their identity cards .
What Europe do we want to build if we fail once again to demonstrate the capacity or the will to combat effectively the criminality which organizes mass exoduses speculating on the lives of desperate people ?
Of course the criminal organizations know how inefficient Europe , this Union is , better than the Union knows the criminal organizations .
In this way , dear Europe , we will again show our incapacity or , worse , our true objective : doing exactly the opposite of what we say .
Mr President , I think I too must highlight this fact that has shaken all of us : the Europe we have discovered on the occasion of the arrival of the Kurdish refugees in Italy has been the Europe of exposed nerves and ugly conscience .
Exposed nerves because slightly more than two thousand refugees were enough for someone to call for the immediate annulment of a pact , an agreement , a treaty which has cost so many years of work and which built the possibility of free movement .
Moreover , ugly conscience because it is that same Europe , those same forces , which did not want to reach the only possible conclusion which the citizens ask us for and which is a common policy on immigration and asylum ; now , not in five years time .

Fortunately facing this Europe there is another : a Europe which we have seen , with a delegation from the Party of European Socialists led by my colleague , Mr Schultz , to Puglia and Calabria ; the Europe , that population , those administrators , those governmental organizations , the Catholic church , in the first row , clamouring for common policies on immigration and asylum , calls for Schengen to be experienced for what it is , as a solidarity pact and not as an opportunity to unload the barrel on the other , above all on those mother nature has blessed with a beautiful sea : the sea , not the small internal borders of a state like Luxembourg .
And still they ask us , they have asked us , starting with the Archbishop of Lecce , whom we met , to formulate a policy on the right of asylum .
We are no longer in the presence of emigration , we are in presence of migrations which will increasingly tend to resemble what is happening in other parts of the world .
We also ask for something else , they ask for it , but we also ask for it : a fight against crime .
You know that at present , for example in Puglia , other arrivals are expected in the coming months , but not in the great ships immortalized in Amelio 's film ; high speed rubber dinghies are expected at night , which will land a few people at a time .
To control 120 kilometres of European coastline , is perhaps the case of contributing to the operation of our government in southern Albania to stop the criminals organizing this exodus .
We have talked with Kurdish , Tamil , Singhalese refugees : US $ 4 , 000 each to get to Hamburg and Amsterdam .
We explained to them that , correctly , the Italian government , for humanitarian reasons and also for practical reasons , had decided to apply the right of asylum .
I say practical reasons , because with the old law , even facing things that we did not want - expulsions - the way would have been open to reach the north .
From this angle - if you will permit - those who abused our government were twice mistaken , but above all made a grave error : that of demonstrating that this Europe of exposed nerves , of ugly conscience is alive in their person and in their behaviour .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we Europeans will , it is to be feared , more frequently have the opportunity to talk about refugees escaping to Europe .
Therefore , it must firstly be emphasized that what is happening in Italy at the moment does not represent an Italian problem , nor a German problem , nor even a German-Italian problem , but that the movement of Kurdish refugees is centred in Turkey .
Therefore , the first demand to be made to the Turkish Government is that the conflict with the Kurds be settled peacefully and by constitutional means and on the other hand that it be ensured that criminal organizations which also make capital out of human misery and use Turkey as an escape route be rigorously prosecuted .
That is the first demand .
Secondly , it has been said that the Schengen Agreement must be repealed .
Now , ladies and gentlemen , we must refrain from demanding the repeal of European provisions whenever there are difficulties .
Schengen contains all the possibilities of dealing with such situations .
This is precisely why we concluded the Agreement !
I accept that the Italian Government is playing its part in fulfilling these obligations and it must be acknowledged that it is more difficult in Italy than in other countries .
We must also develop an awareness ourselves that with the protection of the external borders , increasingly fewer decisions will be taken on illegal immigration .
Because - in an age of mobility - we neither can nor want to turn Europe into a fortress , decisions on illegal immigration must be taken in the individual countries .
We must decide whether refugees can stay in our country or not , and such decisions must be made quickly and constitutionally .
If we come to the conclusion that they cannot stay , they simply have to be returned to their own countries .
This also relates to the regulation of immigration , not only the protection of external borders which is being discussed at the moment .
A final point : everything we are now witnessing in connection with the situation in Italy cries out for a European ruling .
We cannot pretend that such problems can only always be solved by the countries which are currently affected .
This requires joint European efforts such as they are laid down in the Amsterdam Treaty .
They should therefore be implemented quickly , not only when the five-year term has ended ; we should make a start immediately .
This is what the case of Italy , the case of the Kurdish refugees , warns us about .
Mr President , it is very sad that the fate of the Kurds started to preoccupy the European Union more intensely mainly only after a small part of the problem began being exported to the West .
If we had not confined ourselves to pious words when the bombing of whole villages and the annihilation of a nation began at the Iraq-Turkey frontier and on Iraqi soil , Europe would perhaps not now be facing another flood of immigrants from the East .
The suspicions that Ankara itself may be involved in the recent waves of illegal immigration to the West in retaliation for the well-known Luxembourg decision do very little to change the general picture .
The Kurds are still being annihilated in their own homeland , which is divided between four countries .
And as has already been said , we are speaking of 20 million people .
Before the West of Europe began to worry about recent events , for years Greece had already been troubled by the latter-day slave traders who transport the illegal immigrants .
But at first , nobody cared .
At the beginning of the century Europe had and missed the opportunity to solve the Kurdish problem once and for all .
Now , of course , things have changed .
Yet , there are always ways and means for peaceful intervention , both to stop the genocide and to stem the flow of illegal immigrants .
The issue is not just a matter for Schengen .
Beyond Schengen , Europe has a very profound humanitarian and cultural tradition , this is a major political and humanitarian issue , and we cannot ignore the humanitarian dimension .
Mr President , I see positive developments in Europe 's policy towards the Kurdish problem , which because of this dramatic , biblical exodus , has been elevated to the status of a major issue , an issue which goes beyond the problems of immigration and asylum and takes on the character of a policy of ethnic cleansing .
Mr President , since I am about to ask the President-in-Office a question , I would like him to follow what I am saying .
Of course , I do not know whether he speaks Greek .
I would like the President-in-Office of the Council to follow my speech .
I do not know if you can speak Greek and understand my Greek .
You can understand my Greek ?
OK .
To continue , then .
There is the aspect of ethnic cleansing , reducing the Kurdish population and , as we did with the Moslems from former Yugoslavia , whom we took in but at the same time strove to intervene and made proposals for a solution to the Yugoslavian problems , so too we ought to make proposals for a solution to the Kurdish problem .
There are , however , no such proposals .
For the first time we are debating whether we can see through to the roots .
And my question to Mr Henderson - to which I would like an answer - is whether the General Affairs Council of 26 and 27 January will go to the roots of the problem and whether the proposal made by the Italian Government for an international conference on the Kurdish problem is to be discussed .
I await Mr Henderson 's answer .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , we Italians are very expert , historically , in the fact of migratory flows .
In fact , for centuries the people of central and northern Europe have crossed the Alps to find in Italy such a happy place they even make it their empire .
I add , also at the historical level , that the present Turkish tragedy is a consequence of the hypocrisy and egoism of many so-called civilized and advanced countries , which have contributed to - and have often connived in - the fact that this people is still denied one country , safe and peaceful .
I agree with those who have already maintained that the problem of the Kurds is not an exclusively Italian problem , even if we are experts in emigration and occupation , but it is a problem which is above all and uniquely European , if for no other reason than that the many arms manufacturers selling arms to those countries so that they can peacefully slaughter each other are European .
So the problem is European from that viewpoint as well .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I was not satisfied either by the explanation of the President-in-Office of the Council or your explanation , Mr van den Broek .
We are talking about the fate of people who are forced to escape because they are threatened life and limb , because their property is threatened , because they are driven out of their native country , because members of their family have been killed and because their basic living standards have been destroyed .
Although what the President-in-Office of the Council tells us , and what you tell us , is right , cannot be denied and holds true in all respects , it is not enough .
We cannot respond to these phenomena merely with a technocratic reaction .
You made it precisely clear what the spirit at the Commission and in the Council of Ministers is when you said ' We must protect people from persecution , but we must also protect the citizens of the European Union from floods of refugees ' .
No !
We do not have to !
The citizens of the European Union are not currently threatened by any flood of refugees .
This involves 800 people whom I myself was able to visit in camps and of whom the overwhelming majority come from the Iraqi part of Kurdistan .
Who are the 50 % currently in the camps in southern Italy escaping from then ?
They are escaping from Saddam Hussein for example , and not only from Turkey but from the Turks as well .
But when Saddam Hussein occupies Kuwait and when this man produces weapons which are internationally outlawed and forbidden , an international alliance comes together to overpower him , which is right .
We talk about the victims of this man here as if we had to ward them off .
This spirit is dangerous , it poisons the atmosphere in the European Union and with this kind of policy and this kind of discussion we help such powers to have the upper hand in the European Union , who want what Mr Nassauer does not want .
We do not want a fortress Europe , that we agree about , but we are not the majority .
There is a whole group of people in this Parliament as well who do not think like you , Mr Nassauer , and do not think like I do , who want a fortress Europe and who construe this kind of debate which we are conducting as a justification and legitimation of what they think is right .
Therefore I hold a different opinion .
We ought not to confine ourselves to saying that we need harmonized law in the European Union , we also need something else .
Do you know what ?
A ban on weapon exports in such areas , for example .
And we need an international outlawing of countries which pursue their policies in contempt of international law , as Turkey does in northern Iraq , and countries which unscrupulously repress minorities and deny them cultural and ethnic self-determination , because these are the real causes of their having to escape .
Please also allow us to discuss these substantively political reactions here as well , in addition to the mechanical reactions .
Mr President , I thought it was a bit pessimistic of Mr Schulz to say that we do not have a majority .
I think we almost unanimously agree , as we do also , to a large extent , with what the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner said .
I have to say that I was very taken with the fact that they both place the problem in a wider context , and do not give in to the tendency to panic reaction to an incident and shoot , but instead to look at the problems which take place in the second and third pillar , which are really the cause of what is happening .
The strange thing is that , with reference to the enlargement of the Union , the European Parliament stressed only recently that we are a league of constitutional states and democracies , and that only Member States which meet these conditions can join ; that the emphasis on the constitutional state is immediately and forcefully proved as being right by the arrival of boats with hundreds of refugees from Turkey and Iraq , countries where there is no constitutional state and democracy for these people .
It has already been said that there may have been a kind of revenge action as a result of the rejection of Turkey 's desire for membership of the European Union .
It might be a good thing if the President-in-Office of the Council was to refute this , because it would be a strange situation if this country was to try and join the European Union using this kind of blackmail .
But the story is going around , and I think it might be worth refuting .
Secondly , I would like emphasize the fact that there are of course also problems in the sphere of foreign policy .
My colleague Nassauer has explained the Schengen issue excellently .
Our foreign policy is I think often caused by massive migrations , massive refugee movements .
With Bosnia it was in a direct sense .
Now it may be in a roundabout sense because we do not have a preventative foreign policy .
The same may happen in the future as far as Algeria is concerned .
I think we have to make efforts to create a truly common foreign policy towards these countries .
Only too often the Member States not are always on the same wavelength with regard to problem areas .
I find this a grave danger , which will materialize in large numbers of refugees presenting themselves at our borders , amongst them people who can genuinely be described as refugees who rightly carry the name refugee , because that is far from always the case at present , of course .
I have received seven motions for resolutions , proposed pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
And so I give the floor to Mr Henderson who has also been given permission to say a few words about the situation in Algeria .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to make some remarks in response to the debate .
There has been some heat in the debate and I have enjoyed listening to the various views expressed by different Members .
Within the furnace of that heat , I think there has been a lot of common ground on which we can all build with a view to the future .
It has been recognized that there is a need for urgent action at European Union level .
This is not a problem that affects only one part of the Union ; it affects potentially the whole of the Union .
It is also welcome that there is an understanding that there needs to be cooperation among the Member States .
We all face this problem and maximum solidarity would obviously be helpful .
It has also been heartening that there has been a complete condemnation of the cynical trade in the human misery which has been perpetrated by those criminals who run the gangs and try to take money from innocent victims by telling them of a future that they might have in the European Union which is not possible .
It has also been important that it has been recognized in the debate that action is also to be taken in the countries where people are fleeing from .
Can I apologise to Mr Alavanos for not listening to the whole of his contribution .
In the old style of the House of Commons in Britain I was trying to do two things at once , being briefed on the next matter while the current one was still under discussion .
But I can say to him that the presidency will report the debate to the General Affairs Council on 26 January .
I do not exclude anything from the discussion .
I have not heard of great support for the proposed conference as being the centrepiece of tackling the problems that we face but we will look on 26 January at ways in which these matters can be addressed .
Mr Oostlander mentioned the question of Algeria and potentially of course there could be a similar problem emanating from the troubles and the difficulties there .
I have been asked to comment on reports that the Algerian authorities have rejected the proposed troika visit .
The presidency this afternoon is seeking clarification from the Algerians of their response .
We are surprised at the report since the Algerians had previously indicated to us that they would accept a troika visit .
We are in urgent contact with our European Union partners and will continue urgent efforts to find ways to end , or to try contribute to ending , those appalling atrocities .
We will also take forward a close dialogue with the Algerians authorities in the coming hours and days .
Thank you , Mr Henderson .
A brief comment from Mrs Aelvoet .
Mr President , I would just like to make the point to the presidency that it is surely not unjust of the Algerian authorities to respond to the fact that the troika which was sent comprised diplomats and not ministers , when it concerns such a delicate and politically sensitive matter .
That is the issue , and that is what they responded to .
Thank you .
Does the President-in-Office of the Council wish to respond to that remark ?
We will consider different ways of dealing with this difficulty .
We exclude nothing .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0001 / 98 ) .
Question No 1 by Freddy Blak ( H-0940 / 97 )
Subject : Belarus
The dictatorial regime in Belarus headed by President Lukashenko is responsible for ongoing and systematic abuse of human rights .
The opposition is being brutally annihilated .
The leader of the Belarus Human Rights League , Yevgeny Novikov , recently went underground after being subjected to severe harassment without the Belarus police intervening .
His office has been seized and taken over by a state organization and his colleagues have been beaten up .
Is the Council aware of Yevgeny Novikov 's fate ?
Is the Council prepared to intervene and investigate developments in this case ?
Finally , how will the abuse of human rights in Belarus affect the country 's relations with the EU ?
The Council is aware of the events surrounding the occupation of the office of the Belarus League for Human Rights in Minsk .
It is still not clear who was responsible for the occupation .
Mr Novikov was abroad during the seizure of his offices .
He subsequently returned to Minsk and had meetings with the British ambassador in November and December 1997 .
Although he had been questioned by the authorities , Mr Novikov had not been arrested .
The Belarussian authorities have now issued a ruling that Mr Novikov 's premises should be returned to him and a notice to quit has been served on those currently occupying the office .
The Council sees no need at present to intervene with the Belarussian authorities on behalf of Mr Novikov .
The Council reminds the honourable Member that the Union wishes to see Belarus join the community of democratic nations and that the Union is ready to support the process of democratization in Belarus .
Nevertheless , during 1997 , the Council noted with concern that Belarus had not made any substantial progress in this direction and it became evident that numerous violations of human rights and basic freedoms , notably concerning the freedom of the media , had been committed by the Belarussian authorities .
The General Affairs Council conclusions of 24 February , statement of 29 April and conclusions of 15 September reflected these concerns .
The Council , in cooperation with the OSCE and the Council of Europe has reacted to these events with speed and determination and will continue its efforts to urge the Belarussian authorities to respect human rights and democratic principles .
It is extremely happy news which has come from the Council .
The pressure which Parliament , among others , has been involved in putting on Belarus has thus helped Mr Novikov to perhaps get his rights and also his office back .
But the President-in-Office also mentioned the harassment of journalists , and I would like to ask whether he knows how many legal actions there are against journalists , because freedom of expression is being grossly suppressed in Belarus .
It is generally recognized that journalists have been restricted in Belarus in reporting on events in that country .
There are specific instances which I have been made aware of .
I cannot , at this moment , give particular details , but I would be happy to write to the honourable Member at a later stage and give him the information that I have in my possession back in my office .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I should like to make the following enquiry : this is indeed only an individual case which is described here .
There are certainly considerably more cases .
There are organisations whose activity is obstructed or which are simply excluded from Belarus , be it the IRI from the United States of America or also the Pan-Europa-Union from Europe , which have been unable to pursue their activities there .
However , we all know to what extent Russia is itself involved in Belarus and what opportunity it has to influence Belarus .
Do you not think it is time that we , who are pumping so much money into Russia from the European Union , should gradually start knocking at Russia 's door and tell them that as they have such an influence in Belarus , they should use their influence there so that these questions of human rights can somehow be tackled in order that we can also somehow exert our influence there
Mr President , I think that the questioner is right in saying that the situation is very complicated and it might be possible for the Russians to have some influence .
In the past the Russians have been able to exercise some influence on events in Belarus .
As I understand it at the moment , there is not a clear understanding between the Russians and the Belarussians .
A lot of the talks that they have had have not been fruitful .
This is something that we would want to raise with the Russians in the Cooperation Council and I would be interested to see what their response is .
I hope that they can help .
I do not have huge optimism in the very short term but perhaps in the medium term the situation will be better .
Actually , my question concerns precisely the same thing .
The fact is that last spring a union was created between Belarus and Russia .
Belarus is strategically important for Russia as a borderland to the West and as a symbol that although the Soviet Union may have been split apart , in some respects has also been geographically restored .
I am of course very keen for the Council and its members to use all conceivable opportunities in their contacts with President Yeltsin and other members of the Russian Duma and government in order thereby to be able to influence Belarus so that the country takes in at least some of our criticism of the undemocratic system which prevails there .
What initiatives is the Council prepared to take in this direction ?
Mr President , I am grateful for your help but probably not as grateful as the interpreters are .
I would like to say to the honourable Member that I think she has , in essence , raised a very similar point to the previous questioner .
I understand that there is sometimes a feeling that the Russians can always have their own way in places like Belarus .
At some time in the past that may have been true .
In the period after 1989 Russia was probably still able to have a considerable impact there .
Most recently this has not been the case but I did give an assurance to your colleague that I would raise that point at the future cooperation meeting with the Russians and I hope that they will be able to exercise some influence on the situation .
Question No 2 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0941 / 97 )
Subject : Exclusion of unemployed Spaniards from the benefits of the new employment policies
Will Mr Aznar 's solitary self-exclusion , at the 20-21 November 1997 Luxembourg European Council , from the main agreements designed to combat and prevent youth and long term unemployment not be detrimental to the unemployed themselves , who will not as a result be able to take advantage of the employment and training opportunities which will be available ?
How many unemployed people in Spain will be excluded from the measures adopted ?
Should a suitable timetable for the implementation of the agreements not be drawn up which would enable the unemployed in Spain to benefit from the measures agreed ?
How will it be possible to ensure that they are not disadvantaged by Mr Aznar 's negative decision ?
At the extraordinary meeting of the European Council on employment held in Luxembourg on 20 and 21 November 1997 , the Member States agreed unanimously on a new coordinated approach to tackling the Community-wide problem of unemployment , whilst respecting the principle of subsidiarity and accepting that different nations ' situations will result in differing emphasis .
The measures agreed in Luxembourg , which were formally adopted by the Social Affairs Council on 15 December 1997 , will be applied to all Member States across the European Union .
Member States will develop policies to ensure that every unemployed young person is eventually offered a new start in the form of a job , training , retraining practice or other employability measure before reaching six months of unemployment , and that all adults without work are offered a fresh start before they reach 12 months of unemployment .
The European Council agreed that these objectives should be implemented within a period not greater than five years .
It is true that this implementation period may be extended in Member States with particularly high unemployment , but the Luxembourg conclusions will eventually be applied in full across the whole of the European Union .
Thus , the honourable Member should recognize that no exclusion of any kind arises from the Luxembourg conclusions .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is a known fact that the self-exclusion of Spain , as decided by Mr Aznar , will result in unfair treatment for unemployed people in Spain .
In view of that , and since the European Council is not a Community institution , I would ask whether the Council of Ministers will be supporting Mr Aznar 's mistake , or whether , conversely , they will recommend that it is put right .
It is not true that the measures will be applied to everybody in the same way .
Being British , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , you understand our well-founded fears better than anybody else , since the model Mr Aznar is following in this area is precisely the same as Mrs Thatcher 's model , and as such , it means that the benefits of the new employment policies are being denied to the country most in need of them .
I think there is a bit of a misunderstanding .
Although Mr Aznar expressed some concerns about some of the directions of the discussion in the Luxembourg Council , the agreement reached exempts no Member State .
However , the Council recognized that , in particular circumstances , there may be a need for a longer timescale for implementation of some proposals .
At this stage there has been no exemption and , therefore , Spain and Spanish regions like Andalucia where there is high unemployment , will be expected to deal with the decision in Luxembourg in the same way as others throughout the European Union .
I see Mrs Izquierdo Rojo is asking permission to speak .
Unfortunately , the Rules of Procedure do not allow me to let her do so .
Mr Hernández Mollar has the floor .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo 's question - and the way it was put - can only be seen as an attempt , here in the European Parliament , at the irrational , demagogical opposition which her party practises in Spain .
It also shows that she has not taken the trouble to read the conclusions of the extraordinary meeting of the European Council on employment .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , has any country excluded itself from presenting a national employment action plan at the forthcoming European Council in Cardiff , or announced an exclusion clause with respect to the Council directives ?
Mr President , please give me some support . I am being interrupted .
Mrs Izquierdo , I would ask you please to remain silent .
You have had your minute , and have spoken .
I now have to ask you to respect the right of other Members of this House to speak , as is customary , and as you normally do .
I find any other behaviour surprising because your manners in this Parliament are normally very good .
Mr President , I also remember that Felipe González ' socialist government ( which bequeathed 3 million unemployed to the Aznar Government ) refused in 1996 to present the multi-annual employment plan decided on at the Essen Summit .
That was recorded in this Parliament 's proceedings . Mr Aznar 's Government , in contrast , is at this very moment holding discussions with the trades unions on the action plan to be presented at the European Council in Cardiff .
Thank you , Mr Hernández Mollar .
Mr Henderson , you can see we have lively debates here , just like in the House of Commons .
Mr President , I was about to say to you that I thought I was back in the House of Commons in London .
I can only say to Spanish Members that it is quite clear that there are no exemptions from the decision made in Luxembourg .
It has been recognized that there may be a need for extended timescales in some instances , as yet undefined , but that the principles of the conclusions at Luxembourg must apply across the European Union .
Every partner within the European Union is expected by the British Presidency to come forward with action plans , which will allow a discussion of those plans in the organs of both Parliament and the Council before the Cardiff Summit , hopefully so that there is an opportunity for the different partners to learn from some of the suggestions of some of the other partners and also from the reflecting comments of both Parliament , which are very much valued , and , indeed , of the committees of the Council itself .
Question No 3 by Birgitta Ahlqvist ( H-0944 / 97 )
Subject : Freedom of movement between Sweden and Finland
Freedom of movement is a fundamental principle within the European Union . It was established in both the Preamble and Article 3 ( c ) of the Treaty of Rome and has been confirmed on many occasions since .
However , despite its acceptance of the Community patrimony , the Finnish government now intends to charge Peter Enbuske , a Swedish citizen , customs duties and VAT on his vehicle , on the grounds that his frequent visits to Finland ( where his fiancée is resident ) make him a Finnish resident with an imported vehicle .
The rule referred to is paragraph 1.2 of the information leaflet on the temporary use of vehicles in Finland , which states that a citizen is deemed to be resident in the place where he or she spends 185 days per year .
Peter Enbuske is domiciled in Sweden , holds a Swedish passport and pays all his taxes in Sweden , which makes the Finnish government 's action a flagrant violation of the right to freedom of movement .
What measures does the Council plan to take to resolve this situation and prevent its recurrence ?
The issue raised by the honourable Member is undoubtedly of considerable importance , not only to the individual named in her question but also in so far as it is likely to have a direct impact on other citizens of the Union in a similar position .
However , what is at issue here - and the honourable Member has hinted as much in her question - is whether a particular Member State is correctly applying the relevant provisions of Community law .
I would point out that this is not a matter for the Council but rather for the Commission .
According to Article 155 , first indent of the EC Treaty : ' The Commission shall ensure that the provisions of this Treaty and the measures taken by the institutions pursuant thereto are applied . ' For such purposes Article 169 of the Treaty provides that the Commission may bring infringement proceedings before the European Court of Justice against a Member State which fails to observe any of its Treaty obligations .
Article 177 of the Treaty is also available to individual persons as a remedy , for example by raising a question in proceedings before a national court , which may then be referred to the Court of Justice for a preliminary ruling on the correct interpretation of relevant provisions of Community law .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers for his reply .
This is not just a matter for Sweden and Finland alone , but just as the President-in-Office says , it is a violation of the EU 's principle of free movement .
As I understand , the European Court of Justice has previously underlined this in a similar case between Denmark and Germany , the so-called Ryborg case .
I am also glad to hear that there are ways to proceed , i.e. that the Commission or the individual can take this to court .
I would like to ask a closing question : What are you , Mr President-in-Office , going to say to these EU citizens ?
I should like to say to Mrs Ahlqvist that I cannot give an opinion on the individual case raised by the honourable Member but I should like to point out the ruling , which she has referred to , already made by the Court of Justice in a 1991 case : ' The mere fact that a national of a Member State B who has moved to a Member State A where he has found employment and accommodation has after a certain date and for over a year spent almost every night and a weekend with a woman friend in Member State B , whilst retaining his employment and his accommodation in Member State A , is not sufficient to justify the conclusion that he has moved his normal residence to Member State B ' .
I would like to thank the Council for the answer I have received .
I also understand that it is the task of the Commission to ensure that these rules are followed .
At the same time it is a very serious problem .
There are now a lot of examples of almost ' persecution ' of Swedish citizens .
There is a couple who have a summer cottage in Finland and have had their car confiscated by Finnish customs because they travelled to their summer cottage too often .
The fact is that it is the Council which once adopted the directive which is the basis for the action of Finnish customs .
The Council must be able to have an idea as to what extent this was the intention of the directive , i.e. that you could prevent boyfriends from meeting their girlfriends and old couples from visiting their summer cottages in this way .
I wonder whether you think that is the spirit of the directive which the Council adopted ?
I have to return to the gist of my original reply , which is that this not really a matter for the Council to remedy .
There are avenues open to those who wish to challenge this situation if they believe that Community law is being infringed .
If there is some doubt as to the intention of Community law , it might be wise to raise this with the Commission .
It would be inappropriate for me to make specific comment on that .
This is not going to be an international match , but a combined attempt to work towards the same objective as friends from across the water .
I would like to report that I have personally submitted a complaint to the Commission regarding Finnish car taxation .
The question which I would like to ask the Council of Ministers is whether it would not lay the foundations if the Council of Ministers and the Member States could agree on common guidelines , firstly with regard to car taxation , and secondly with regard to what is a person 's domicile according to tax legislation , which is something which has often been raised in Parliament 's Committee on Petitions .
This should also be harmonized since we have seen many cases where people are ' persecuted ' in precisely the way in which Mrs Ahlqvist and Mr Sjöstedt have described .
Is the Council of Ministers prepared to take legislative action ?
I would say to Mrs Thors that free movement is not affected by the levels of taxation on vehicles .
The setting of the levels of taxation does not fall within the Community 's powers .
Therefore , I can only repeat that if the current situation is thought to be outside Community law , it is up to those concerned to challenge that in the appropriate avenues .
It is up to those who believe that the current position should be upheld to make their views known and make the necessary representations , which might be opposed to those made by others .
It would then be up to the courts to decide .
Question No 4 by Konstantinos Hatzidakis ( H-0948 / 97 )
Subject : Political representation of Greece in the Committee of the Regions
Article 198a of the Treaty on European Union is concerned with the establishment of a " Committee of the Regions ' consisting of representatives of local and regional bodies .
Members are appointed by the Council acting unanimously on proposals from the respective Member States .
The Greek Government has proposed to the Council six local government and six regional government representatives for the new four year term .
The members of the Committee of the Regions have formed political groups as in the European Parliament .
However , of the twelve members representing Greece , the Greek Government has proposed ten members from its own ranks and to the left of the wider political spectrum and only two ( a mayor and a prefect ) from the official opposition party which ( according to the most recent parliamentary elections ) represent 38 % of the Greek people .
No other Member State has acted in this way and the adoption of such arbitrary and self-serving partisan tactics at European level , merely serves to undermine the fundamental principles governing the political representation of our country within the Committee of the Regions .
What steps will the Council take before 22 January 1998 to prevent the distortion of the political representation of Greece in this European body consisting of local and regional government representatives ?
The members of the Committee of the Regions are appointed by the Council acting unanimously .
Nominations for the next four-year term of membership will be considered by the Council in the near future .
Nominations for membership are a matter for individual Member States .
The only Treaty criterion which nominees must meet is that they must be representatives of regional and local bodies .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I know what the Treaty provides and I mentioned it in my question , namely that there are no specific criteria .
However , the European Union is supposedly structured on the basis of the principles of democracy and representation .
It should also not escape our attention that the Committee of the Regions is organized in political groups , as we the European Parliament are too .
So what is happening in the specific instance ?
Greece has twelve delegates .
The government itself , the socialist government , appointed Greece 's delegates four years ago on the basis of the same results of the local elections , in accordance with which our party , the official opposition , had four delegates .
Now , in the new delegation , the socialist party with 41 % has seven delegates and we have only two .
You can see that this is clearly unfair .
I know your position is a delicate one , but I would like to hope that there will be some intervention , even behind the scenes , to correct the matter .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to ask the President-in-Office : does he not think that a precedent is created by this decision so that everyone can do what they like ?
And could he tell us where else he may be aware that anything similar has happened , anything like what I have reported .
Mr Hatzidakis , I really have to refer to my original reply to the question .
As you yourself have affirmed in the wording of the question , in Article 198a of the Treaty - the establishment of the Committee of the Regions composed of representatives of regional and local communities - membership of regional and local bodies is the only criterion which the Treaty on European Union established for the appointment of members to the Committee on the Regions .
The Council has no locus to question the political affiliation of nominees .
I do not consider that any precedent is being set and as for other examples , I do not have the knowledge of who has been appointed in the past .
I would think that the questioner would have as much access to that as I would .
If he wishes a reply to that he can , no doubt , raise that at a later date when I have had notice of the question .
Mr President , I listened to the answer given by the President-in-Office .
I am not one to encourage interference in my country 's internal affairs , especially by English representatives , because we have bitter and painful experience of their interference .
The problem , however , is a different one .
The European Union wants this body to be representative .
That is why it says the delegates must be elected .
So what is happening among those elected ? Are some considered ' dirty ' and are not , therefore , put forward by the government , while others are ' clean ' , in other words party members , and those are the ones put forward ?
In that case representativeness goes out of the window for this Community body and you have an obligation to do something about it , since you act over the most trivial matters and prosecute small producers for fraud .
Here we have a political fraud of the first order , and you must intervene .
Mr President , I really have nothing further to add to my previous two replies which I hope make the position clear .
The responsibility is that nominees be from regional and local bodies and it is not our responsibility to assess political affiliations .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I understand and sympathize with your dilemma in this debate .
Somewhere , Mr Henderson , you said at another stage of today 's debate that you felt as if you were in the Parliament of the Communities .
I too could say something similar , in other words it is as if I were in the Greek Parliament .
I believe this is an issue which , if it is as important as Mr Hatzidakis thinks , should have been debated there .
Besides , it is a somewhat strange view that the municipal , local and regional authorities are classified into political and party factions .
I believe that representation at local authority level is different .
At any rate , Mr Henderson , perhaps you can find some way to look into similar questions in the future , when as you said , you become more experienced in these matters .
In any case , I do not think there is a problem about this , as Mr Hatzidakis has tried to represent here , which he ought not to have done .
It is often said that it is unwise to become involved in family arguments but it is sometimes quite amusing to watch from the outside .
I can see that in some of the questions local political differences creep into the debate .
I really cannot add to what I have already said in relation to the original question .
Not so much a point of order , Mr President . I wondered if the President-in-Office would comment on the fact that this is a problem not just in Greece but in a number of Member States and whether he will commit his own government to review the political balance of the UK representation on the Committee of the Regions ?
Question No 5 by Gary Titley ( H-0950 / 97 )
Subject : Expiry of the SFOR mandate and the peace process in Bosnia
How does the Council envisage the development of the peace process in Bosnia in view of the expiry of SFOR 's mandate in June 1998 ?
The peace process has made good progress since Dayton was signed two years ago .
In particular many of the military provisions of Dayton have been carried out .
The focus for the coming year will increasingly be on civilian implementation but it is clear that this will continue to require maintenance of a secure and stable environment .
The Peace Implementation Council , in which the European Union and Member States actively participate , considered at the Bonn Conference on 9 / 10 December a continuing military presence indispensable for this task and welcomed NATO 's plans to consider options for a multinational follow-on force to SFOR beyond June 1998 .
The European Union has made clear its support for the High Representative in implementing the conclusions of the Bonn Peace Implementation Council .
I wish to begin by extending a warm welcome to Mr Henderson as the acting President-in-Office to the delights of European Parliament Question Time .
I should like to ask him three quick questions .
Firstly , is there any indication yet as to whether the Americans will retain forces in Bosnia and , if so , will they actually be in Bosnia or over the horizon in Hungary ?
Secondly , is it not the time for European rhetoric on a European defence identity to have some actuality and for us to start to take more responsibility ourselves for the Bosnian peace process in the long term ?
Thirdly , does he accept that unless we can get the civilian aspects of Dayton up and running , we will end up with another Cyprus where we have a permanent military presence in a divided country ?
I warmly thank the honourable Member for his kind remarks and for his question .
I have to tell him that no decision has yet been reached by the American Government though the matter is under consideration .
Representations have been made by a number of Member States on this question and there will be meetings in Washington between the presidency and the United States Government later this week .
I am sure this will be one of the items which will be given consideration .
I would agree that it is important that more responsibility is taken and this is something which the presidency would hope to develop over the coming six months as an important priority in foreign policy .
As to the long term , the honourable Member is absolutely right that it is very important that , in colloquial terms , we ' keep a grip ' of the situation in political , diplomatic and military terms .
It is vitally important that we continue to make progress , albeit sometimes slow progress , so that an end is in sight for those who are involved in the situation on the ground , in particular the civilian population , and that they continue to give support to the peace process .
Hopefully , that will produce results if not in the short term , then in the medium term , and not deteriorate into one of these international situations which goes on for many years , rather than being resolved , and where it is very difficult to see progress .
Mr President , it goes without saying that the duration of the SFOR Mandate is also closely linked with internal developments in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
I would like to make two points in this respect .
First the question of returning those who have been expelled .
There are problems everywhere , in all three subdivisions , but most of all in the Republic of Srpska , where there has until now not been any actual return and I would like to ask whether it would not at least be possible to reach a binding agreement with Mrs Plavsic , that opportunities are at last created in the Banja Luka area for the return of expelled persons .
The bishop of Banja Luka was here in Strasbourg a few weeks ago and expressed exactly this demand to us .
The second point refers to the question of war criminals , in particular Mr Karadzic , but also other .
Here too , advances must be made for until these two points are resolved , it will not be possible to terminate the SFOR Mandate either .
The questioner raises the very important point that a key element in the Dayton process is that there should be returns of refugees .
Any influence the presidency can exert will be directed at trying to encourage those involved to follow that route .

Following on from Mr Titley 's question to the President-in-Office , I welcome Mr Henderson 's confirmation that the issue of US involvement in Bosnia-Herzegovina will be on the agenda of the EU-US ministerial meeting in Washington .
There is another issue that I want to raise .
Will the President-in-Office also indicate the priority he attaches to improving the delivery of EU aid to Bosnia-Herzegovina ?
I thank the honourable Member for his question .
I should just like to make it clear that the matter I referred to was not a formal agenda item in the presidency visit .
It is , however , something which has been dealt with on a number of occasions by a number of the Member States and is constantly under review .
The question of aid is an important issue .
Again , I hope I can reassure the honourable Member that we will be doing what we can during the presidency to try to help release the aid which is potentially there for those involved .
It is a matter of getting clarification as quickly as possible from those on the ground of what would happen to that aid - that it was going to be used for the purposes for which it was intended and that there were structures in place which would make sure that would be the case .
Hopefully those reassurances can be given at an early stage and can be confirmed .
Then , I would hope , it would be possible to make the aid donation at an early stage .
Question No 6 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0951 / 97 )
Subject : Human Rights in Cuba
In the light of its critical opinion of December 1997 , how does the Council judge the political and in particular the human rights situation in Cuba , including the question of freedom of conscience and religion ?
In this connection , where does it stand on the possibility of Cuba 's joining the Lomé Convention ?
At the second evaluation of its common position on Cuba in December 1997 , the Council concluded that no substantive change in the political and economic situation in Cuba had occurred in the six months since the last evaluation .
The Council reiterated that the objective of the European Union towards Cuba remains the encouragement of a process of peaceful transition towards democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , sustainable economic recovery and improvement in the living standards of the Cuban people .
Freedom of conscience and religion are not expressly guaranteed to citizens under the Cuban constitution and , therefore , their application by the Cuban authorities is a question of practice on a case-by-case basis .
Cuba has not applied for membership of the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group .
The Council has not discussed the possibility of Cuba acceding to the Lomé Convention .
Membership of the ACP is primarily a matter for the ACP themselves .
However , it is clear that , if Cuba were to be considered for membership , it would have to abide by well-established provisions of the Lomé Convention which include respect for human rights and the rule of law and democracy .
Mr President , many thanks for your very precise information .
I would just like to address two supplementary aspects .
We had elections last Sunday in Cuba in which 601 out of 601 parliamentary candidates were elected and I wanted to ask the Council where the development towards democracy is to be found !
The second question that I want to ask is this : Next week , I believe , the Pope will be in Cuba and we learn that the international press is to be denied access to Cuba , in other words that the major newspapers will not receive accreditation in Cuba for this event , and I wanted to draw this to the Council 's attention .
I believe that honourable Members of Parliament can make judgements that they think are appropriate on Cuba , in the same way as I can , as an individual .
As President-in-Office , I do not see that I have access to any special information that would allow me to make a different assessment .
One thing that is worth mentioning is that in any definition of democracy , clearly elections play a very important part .
They are an important condition of a democracy , but they are not a sufficient condition .
There are other conditions that have to be met in a democracy : press freedom , human rights and other issues .
I was not aware of the particular circumstances that have been drawn to my attention in relation to press coverage of the proposed visit .
I can only say that I will examine what happens in reality as distinct from what is now being suggested might happen , and reflect on such reports as I receive on that matter .
Those reflections will assist the presidency in drawing conclusions on the current situation in Cuba and on how we should respond to the various events there .
I too would also like to welcome the new President-in-Office and ask if he does not agree with me that the trade boycott of Cuba by the United States actually strengthened the links between Cuba and the former USSR ?
By forcing economic dependency on that country it was actually counterproductive in terms of democracy .
There are countries benefiting from trading arrangements from the Lomé convention with governments which are actually quite a long way from the kind of parliamentary democracy that we understand in Europe .
Nevertheless , they are given trade preferences .
Surely Cuba is more likely to move towards a more democratic form of government through strengthened trade links with democratic countries and being readmitted to the mainstream rather than being regarded as a pariah state ?
Can I thank the honourable Member for the supplementary question .
It is true , of course , that there was an American boycott and Members will draw their own conclusions as to the effect of that over a long period .
I think that it is worthwhile drawing attention to the fact that the European Union never endorsed such a boycott , preferring discussion and persuasion as a means of trying to seek change within Europe .
Indeed I know that there were many visits to Cuba from the nations who make up the European Union to take part in discussions and to try to persuade the Cuban government to take a different view on a number of matters both political and economic .
Can I thank Mr Morris for allowing me this minute .
I wonder if the President-in-Office would agree with me that the human rights of Cuban children were affected by the very same economic embargo which Mrs Hardstaff referred to ?
Children have been denied food and medicine because of the United States embargo .
Would you not agree that a major contribution to raising the living standards of the Cuban people would be the immediate lifting of the American embargo ?
It is against all international treaties , all international laws and indeed has been condemned , as has the Helms-Burton Act , by the European Union .
For Mr Posselt 's information he will read all about the Pope 's visit to Cuba in the Morning Star .
I understand the plight of poor people in Cuba - particularly children who might be suffering in the current situation - and , clearly , there is evidence of that .
The responsibility for that has to lie primarily with the Cuban Government .
That is not to deny that there are other influences but the responsibility for a situation internally is something which must be accepted by the government .
As I said in my answer to Mrs Hardstaff , I believe that the boycott was not the right way forward , that it is better to persuade , and that if the Cuban Government was more receptive to some of the persuasion , then it may be that it would benefit from greater trade links , perhaps from further help , and that in itself could be a major contributory factor in helping the poorest people in that country , particularly the children .
Question No 7 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0953 / 97 )
Subject : South Africa-EU trade negotiations
Would the President-in-Office confirm that the conclusion of the EU trade negotiations with South Africa is a priority for the UK Presidency ?
Does he anticipate that the difficulties related to agricultural products , wines and spirits and fisheries can be overcome ?
The presidency would like to express its satisfaction with the breakthrough in the negotiations with South Africa that took place late in 1997 , when South Africa presented its detailed trade offer to the European Union .
The Community is now preparing an equally detailed trade offer to present to South Africa as soon as possible .
The President-in-Office can confirm that the conclusion of the trade negotiations with South Africa is a priority for the UK Presidency .
The presidency is aware of the sensitivity that some Member States attach to certain products .
These sensitivities and the interests of the Community in other areas will , of course , have to be taken into consideration when negotiating with South Africa .
The presidency will watch for a satisfactory outcome to all these issues .
Again , welcome to the British Labour President-in-Office .
I should like to follow up on what you said about the contentious products included in these negotiations and ask whether the presidency would consider separate protocols for these products in order to ensure some progress in the negotiations , particularly in relation to wines and spirits and , of course , the prospect of a fisheries agreement ?
Might it not be wise at this stage , anticipating the successful outcome as you do of the negotiations , to issue an immediate invitation to President Nelson Mandela to come to the Cardiff Summit to put his personal signature on the agreements which we hope will be reached and , of course , to give him his very first opportunity to come and sample the delights that Wales , in particular , has to offer ?
I thank the honourable Member for her kind remarks and for her question . I , too , believe it is very important that progress is made in trying to reach an agreement with South Africa during the British Presidency , and it is one of our top priorities in that area of involvement .
I wish to say that I do not exclude any way of dealing with the various issues before us in those talks .
I do not exclude the possibility of separate protocols but , clearly , it is something which the Commission would have to give consideration to , and we await with great anticipation Commission proposals , which will then be subject to discussion in the Council . I hope I can reassure her that we want to make progress as quickly as possible .
In relation to the honourable Member 's remarks on the Cardiff Summit in Wales , it would be a nice idea if President Mandela were able to come .
There are five months between now and then and I hope that an answer to that question may be given more authoritatively in due course .
I welcome the President-in-Office 's cautiously optimistic response there .
However , I have to say that in this House we have heard endless goodwill towards South Africa since the end of apartheid but there has been relatively little action , particularly on the trade and cooperation talks .
Time , in a sense , is running out because after the British Presidency other events - renegotiation of Lomé , enlargement and so on - will very quickly crowd in on the agenda .
So , if we are to get a settlement , it is absolutely crucial that we get one during the British Presidency .
The problem up to now has been in the Council , not with the Commission and certainly not with Parliament , and if the South African Government comes back to the Council and wants to renegotiate a mandate , the British Presidency will have to give this an extremely high priority indeed if it is going to bring the more reluctant Member States into line .
So I hope that there is awareness that there might be a renegotiated mandate and that the British Presidency will give this top priority if need be .
Thank you for the supplementary question .
I think it focuses on a very important point .
There is a window of opportunity over the next five months to try to conclude an agreement .
After that period there will be many other matters which will be appearing on our agendas .
I myself have been reassured by the statements of negotiators on both sides who have said that an agreement can be reached by mid-1998 .
That gives me cause for optimism and I can assure you that we will use all our endeavours during our presidency to bring the Union along with us in trying to seek an agreement at an early stage , so that everyone can benefit from it , particularly those who are in most need of the benefit in the poorer sections of the Community and South Africa .
I welcome the President-in-Office .
For the South African trade agreement this is obviously good news , but I have two possible problems to raise about one of the difficult or contentious subjects to which both he and Mrs Kinnock refer .
Firstly , South African fishing .
I have met the ambassador and the ministers of fisheries from South Africa on a number of occasions and I hope I can be assured that the Commission will not press the South Africans to open their waters to European Union fleets before they want to or before they decide to .
I hope that this will be respected .
Fishing is a terribly difficult subject .
Secondly , there is the problem of South Africa in the region .
It is clearly the dominant , political and economic force in southern Africa and I am concerned about the effect of an agreement - I hope that this is borne in mind - on surrounding states , in particular Namibia and its fishing industry .
I would like to say that I understand the point that was made but , first of all , there is a distinction between a policy for South Africa and a policy for southern Africa ; that is one aspect in relation to the matters he raises .
I hope Mr Crampton will understand that in a negotiation it is best not to exclude items at the earlier stages of that negotiation .
That is not to say that some of the points which he made will not be consistent with the final agreement .
But I think it would be wrong of me to try to pre-empt what the negotiators might agree , and that must cover all of the issues .
As I said in my reply to Mrs Kinnock and the original question , I would not exclude separate protocols on certain aspects of trade .
That is something which the negotiators will have to take on board when they address the issue .
Question No 8 by Nikolaos Papakyriazis ( H-0954 / 97 )
Subject : Sakharov Prize awarded by the European Parliament - incarceration of Leyla Zana in Turkey
On Wednesday 17 December , the European Parliament will award the 1997 Sakharov Prize to the Algerian journalist Salima Ghezali in recognition of her endeavours in the field of human rights and for the achievement of a peaceful solution to the Algerian crisis .
In 1995 the Sakharov Prize was awarded to Leyla Zana , a Kurdish Member of the Turkish Parliament , in recognition of her unyielding struggle , for which she was relentlessly persecuted and incarcerated by the Turkish Government .
Today , two years later , Leyla Zana is still incarcerated in Turkey , despite being internationally acclaimed as a women symbolizing the peaceful struggle for survival of a people which continues to suffer persecution and violent repression in Turkey .
Now that Turkey is endeavouring to move closer to the European Union and relations between the two are under discussion , Leyla Zana has become an even more meaningful and poignant symbol .
Respect for human rights , international law and democracy is , after all , one of the fundamental requirements and basic conditions of the European Union .
What measures will the European Council take to ensure that the Turkish Government meets its fundamental obligations and to secure the immediate release of Leyla Zana , Member of Parliament ?
The European Council meeting in Luxembourg on 12 and 13 December 1997 underlined the need for the Turkish Government to meet its fundamental obligations in the field of human rights and democracy .
It recalled , in line with the Council position expressed at the Association Council with Turkey on 29 April 1997 , that strengthening Turkey 's links with the European Union also depended on that country 's pursuit of political reforms , including the alignment of human rights standards and practices with those in the European Union as well as respect for and protection of minorities .
The Council regrets the position of the Turkish Government concerning the case of Mrs Leyla Zana and can assure you that the situation of human rights and democracy , including the rights of members of the Kurdish population in Turkey , will continue to figure prominently on its agenda .
Those issues are ever present in our dealings with Turkish authorities .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I take this opportunity to congratulate the British Labour Government , through you , on its assumption of the presidency and on its presentation today , by Mr Cook a few hours ago , of the British Presidency 's programme , a creative , dynamic and very ambitious one .
Thank you very much for your answer .
I think it is very satisfactory and complete , to the extent that it deals with general principles .
However , my question specifically concerned the release of Leyla Zana , our parliamentary colleague whom we here in the European Parliament honoured with a major prize , the Sakharov Prize , for her fight on behalf of democracy .
Mr President-in-Office , I know that just 14 days after the beginning of your term in office you cannot have a ' personal ' position and view about the matter .
However , I asked the question about the need for Leyla Zana 's immediate release in the hope that today , or at some foreseeable time , I will get a specific answer from the presidency .
I thank Mr Papakyriazis for his kind remarks on my answer .
I really have very little further to add , except to say that the presidency will pursue the course with vigour that I outlined in my original reply .
Whilst thanking the President-in-Office for his reply , which is a very good one , will he bear in mind the fact that when we were considering in this House the Customs Union with Turkey , it was conveyed to many of us that , if that were approved , then Leyla Zana and other prisoners would automatically , in due course , be released .
This just has not happened .
At this stage there is not only Leyla Zana , important as she is , but there are many other Kurdish prisoners who are in a like condition .
Will the President-in-Office make it quite clear to the Turkish authorities that , until some movement takes place on this and other issues , it will be quite impossible for us to achieve any real improvement in the relationship between Turkey and the European Union , which all of us would like to see greatly improved ?
I hope I can convey to the honourable Member a reassurance that the question of human rights is a very important part of our presidential foreign policy .
There are situations that have been discussed in the past , where commitments have been given .
We will continue to pursue with vigour the course that I identified in my answer to the original question .
I , like he and others , hope that we will manage to be successful .
An improvement in human rights in Turkey is a very important part of the continuing dialogue with the Turkish Government and the Turkish people .
Thank you for the answers we have so far received regarding this question .
I believe the UK Presidency should be able to do great things during these six months .
This includes the question of human rights and imprisoned Kurds , including Mrs Leyla Zana .
However , I thought the introductory address by the Council 's Foreign Minister this morning said very little about Turkey .
But it said a lot about Cyprus .
I have a supplementary question which it may not be possible to answer directly , which I understand .
Would you as the representative of the EU for six months be able to propose that a delegation from , for example , the EU , the OSCE or the UN be sent to Turkey to find out what is happening there and to create good relations with the country ?
That is a straight question to which I would very much like to have an answer .
As I have said to other honourable Members , this is an important priority of the presidency .
It is linked to a number of other important foreign policy matters which will be under discussion during our presidency .
It is a priority of our presidency to try to make progress .
I have no illusions about the difficulties involved in some of these issues , but I hope I can reassure the honourable Member by saying that we have a determination to try to make progress .

I have personally been very closely involved in that ; I have been to Turkey fairly recently ; I keep a close eye on what is happening and what the situation is ; and I have made , in a British capacity , many representations to the Turkish Government about changes that I and others would want to see taking place .
I would hope to continue during the presidency to make similar representations to the Turkish Government in the hope that they would recognize that there needs to be change and that , as change takes place , benefits will accrue not only to those who suffer because of a lack of human rights - and who , in some cases , are incarcerated - but also potentially to Turkey and the Turkish people in building better , stronger and more effective links with the European Union .
Question No 9 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0955 / 97 )
Subject : Eurodac Convention
The Council is to decide on the details of the EU 's common system for checking the finger prints of asylum-seekers , Eurodac .
How will registered asylum-seekers be able to correct erroneous information about themselves in the system ?
Will the current data in the register be deleted automatically once an asylum-seeker has been granted a residence permit in a Member State ?
Does the Member States ' obligation to report information to the register imply in the last resort that finger prints should be taken by force ?
Regarding the draft Eurodac Convention , I would first of all like to emphasize that the Council submitted this text for the opinion of the European Parliament on 6 October 1997 .
The discussions of the Council are currently under way and it is difficult at the present time to predict what direction they will take .
It is even more difficult to say when they may reach completion .
However , at this stage , two things are certain .
Firstly , any taking of fingerprints can only be done in full and complete compliance with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
Secondly , the Council awaits with interest the European Parliament 's opinion on this draft Convention which was forwarded to it a little over two months ago .
In fact , the Council has not yet reached agreement on the whole of the text in question and intends to continue its discussions in the light of the European Parliament 's opinion .
I would like to thank the Council of Minister 's for its reply .
I understand that it is not possible to give all the answers today .
However , I think it is important to debate this now because it will be too late to debate it when the decision has been taken .
The draft resolution which existed for the Council of Ministers ' meeting in December included a British and German reservation with regard to the possibility of removing personal information on refugees who have been granted residence permits .
I regard this as of central importance so that people who are quite legally resident in a country are not registered .
I wonder whether you reached any conclusion on this point at the Council of Ministers ' meeting in December .
The other thing I would like to take up is the experience from the Schengen Agreement which has a similar structure to the Eurodac system .
There you can see that refugees ' rights are looked after very badly . They are not informed when they seek asylum and they have great difficulty in practice in appealing against decisions .
How are we going to avoid the same lack of legal rights occurring in Eurodac as now exist in the Schengen Information System ?
In addition I would like to express my opinion that I think it is unreasonable to base this on systematically taking the fingerprints of everyone , even children of the age of 14 , and that as a last resort force may even be used to do so .
These are not criminals , but refugees , i.e. people who are seeking protection .
I have to refer you back to my original answer .
At the Council in December , agreement was reached to freeze the text of a number of articles .
Agreement has yet to be reached on the rest .
So I can say that these matters are essentially under review .
I can give you a firm commitment that the Council very much upholds the rights of refugees .
That has been made clear on many occasions .
I hope I made that clear in my own contribution earlier today in relation to the debate on the Kurdish issue .
While on the one hand the Union , together with the Member States , has to take measures to protect boundaries to make sure that there is a regulation of migration , it is equally important for the Union to uphold the principles which are incorporated into the Convention on Refugees and for the Member States also to uphold those principles .
I hope that will ensure that when someone comes to any state within the European Union and says that he is likely to suffer persecution and has a strong case for political asylum , that case is given every possibility of being heard and , where the case is established , political asylum is granted .
Where refugees feel the case has not been given proper consideration there should be measures in all the Member States which the refugee or his or her representative can take to try to reassert the rights of genuine refugees .
That is the case in all our Member States ' law but that is not to say that on every occasion everything is done in a proper fashion .
There are sometimes slip-ups .
Where slip-ups do arise , I hope it is possible for genuine refugees to seek redress .
I can assure you that the presidency will do everything it can to contribute to upholding those important principles .
I add my welcome to the British Presidency and say how nice it is to have a British Labour Minister answering questions , something I have been waiting for patiently - or impatiently - for fourteen years .
The issue of the Eurodac Convention highlights the way in which legitimate concerns and national security can sometimes conflict with human rights and civil liberties .
Parliament will be debating a report on the Eurodac Convention tomorrow and voting on it later .
I would like to refer to the point about how long the fingerprints will be kept .
I refer to a briefing I have received from the Home Office .
It says that on a domestic level the United Kingdom currently erases the fingerprints of those granted asylum only when they have obtained indefinite leave to remain .
Could I ask if the presidency would not agree to any further extension beyond the period which currently operates in Britain ?
This issue comes up in many Member States .
I can only say to him this afternoon that the presidency does not have the power to do what Mr Elliot is suggesting should be done .
That would be a matter for consensus among the Member States in the Council and in other forums .
I can only encourage Mr Elliot to make the important and valid case he makes on as many opportunities as he can to continually remind those who are making decisions in these matters of the importance of these considerations .
That would specifically relate to the question of how long any records are retained .
Question No 10 by Gérard Caudron ( H-0956 / 97 )
Subject : Late payment on commercial debt
Late payment on commercial debt is an enormous inhibition to SMEs participating in the Single Market .
What does the Council intend to do in this important area ?
As the honourable Member may be aware , the Commission issued a Recommendation on 12 May 1995 concerning late payment on commercial debt , Doc .
95 / 198 / CE and published a Communication on this question on 17 July 1997 .
The Commission has also announced that a proposal for a directive on late payments will be transmitted to the Council in the near future .
The Council will initiate the examination of such a proposal as soon as it is received .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office for his reply , but he was quite right to assume that I knew of the existence of this recommendation , which is two years old , and of the existence of the communication , which is six months old .
But it seems that in spite of these two texts , nothing has changed and late payments remain very much the same , since they vary from 19 to 75 days , with further delays of between 6 and 41 days .
I would therefore like to see from the presidency a timetable and firm commitment , for there are distortions in competitiveness , even sometimes national preferential treatment , which is completely in contradiction with the single market .
Can I say to the honourable Member that I understand his concerns .
They are expressed by many throughout the European Union .
There is often and always a debate within the Member States on action that can be taken on these matters especially in the small company sector .
In some instances clearly action may be appropriate at Member State level but where there are international contracts that is something which should be examined very carefully to see if we can agree the context and the specific regulations that would help those small companies across international borders within our Union .
I very much agree with the point which he has raised and I look forward , like he does , to the Commission proposal .
When that is received I hope that I can reassure him that it will be dealt with as a matter of urgency by our presidency .
I wonder whether the President-in-Office is aware that the British , but Cheshire-based , Forum of Private Business estimates that something like £ 20 , 000 million is deprived from small businesses because of the problem of late payment which might otherwise be used in order to develop businesses and thus produce jobs .
If that is true in the United Kingdom , imagine the situation throughout the European Union .
I wonder what other measures , in concert with his colleague Mrs Barbara Roche and Commissioner Papoutsis , he is proposing to help ensure that the single market is properly completed ?
I should like to say to the honourable Member that I was not quite aware of that statistic from the Forum for Small Business in Cheshire , though I was aware of the general trend in that important part of the European Union .
I can only say to him that there are people in my own constituency in Newcastle-upon-Tyne - that other important part of the European Community - who feel equally strongly about this .
I know that it is not a matter which is within one region or one country , it is something which affects companies over the whole of our Union .
That is why I look forward to the Commission submitting regulations which clearly identify that it is better to have a responsibility at European-Union level and perhaps , on some issues , it is better to leave the responsibility with the nation states .
It is important that we get that right so that we reach a formula which is recognized by small business people throughout the European Union as one which will be effective in making sure that their businesses are run more effectively .
Of course , that is crucially important for job creation throughout the whole of our Union .
Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
Since the time allocated to questions to the Council has now expired , Questions Nos 11 to 43 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )
Relocation and investment in third countries
The next item is the second report ( A4-0392 / 97 ) , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on relocation and direct foreign investment in third countries .
Mr President , as you know , the report on relocation and direct investment was referred back to the Committee on External Economic Relations last December , where its general philosophy was once again approved by a large majority .
This report attempts to take into account the environment in which we live and to fit in with modernity .
Whether you are in agreement or not , you cannot ignore , for example , the Uruguay Round agreements , globalization , the implementation of the euro and the technological revolution which we are experiencing , if you wish to tackle the problem of relocations .
Nor can you under-estimate the fluctuations in the dollar and its consequences .
The arrival of the euro will therefore be a factor of monetary stability and it will contribute to avoiding competitive devaluations , thus limiting certain relocations within the context of the Union .
But everyone also understands that an overvaluation of the euro would only strengthen the current trend for relocation to countries where the currency is undervalued .
Consequently , it seems to me that , within the framework of the euro Council , the European political authorities will have to consider the consequences on relocations and foreign direct investment of the fixing of parity with the Eurodollar .
Furthermore , questions arise concerning the countries which will not join the single currency on 1st January 1999 .
Mr President , in actual fact the report is in contrast with protectionist theories and it defends a strong idea : that of more loyalty within the context of globalization , as an answer to certain relocations .
The conquest of new markets is an imperative for businesses , and investment is necessary to accompany this strategy .
Consequently , the Commission must continue to pick up on all obstacles which prevent European businesses from adopting this policy .
The database set up to this effect has been a great success .
It is thus not a matter of rejecting what I would call offensive relocations .
On the contrary , it is a matter of seeing how some uncontrolled relocations , whose aim is not to conquer a market but to bring about subcontracting , which very often leads to greater exploitation of the workforce and a massive cut in jobs within Europe , can be avoided .
Loyalty should therefore be the rule for all , starting with the European Union .
This loyalty must be practised with regard to European employees , who have the right to be better informed , above all before any site closures or relocation decisions are taken , hence the requested revision of Directive 94 / 95 C. Loyalty must be practised with regard to the European Union by companies which , when they receive Community or national subsidies , must not then be allowed to relocate a few months later .
In this respect , our proposals aim to align us on the payment of structural funds with regard to fraud , to institute the compulsory reimbursement of subsidies if a company moves prematurely .
Finally , loyalty must be the rule between the large European distribution firms , the manufacturers and the sub-contractors , through a contract of confidence encouraging a better exchange of information and thus a greater securing of loyal customers .
We thus hope to limit the pressure exerted by some distributors in favour of relocation .
European multinationals which set up abroad must be true vehicles of social development .
We therefore propose to set up a code of good conduct based on respect for the ILO conventions on combating forced labour and the encouragement of trade union freedom .
This code would not be an assortment of sanctions , but a company committing itself to this way of working might see its name quoted in the Official Journal or on the Internet .
We all know that today the power of information is such that it enables pressure to be exerted on multinationals .
Furthermore , at a time when the United States Administration is making the effort to develop a code of good conduct for American companies , would it not be appropriate for the European Union , the cradle of human rights , to be offensive in this regard also ?
It is clear that , even if costs are reduced to a minimum , the salary of a European worker will never reach the same low levels as that of a Chinese worker .
Costs are clearly too high in our countries but , and I repeat this , it is not in the costs of labour that the Union 's advantage lies .
Europe 's advantage lies above all in technology and training .
By launching a great European policy in these two areas , the Union could not only avoid certain relocations but , what is more , could contribute to further relocations , that is , towards Europe .
I am counting on the decisions taken at the Luxembourg Summit on Employment to give a new impulse to this policy .
Furthermore , we are also requesting the establishment of a code of good conduct with regard to taxation .
It is certain that the abolition of tax loopholes would be one solution to uncontrolled relocations , but this is a long and difficult path .
With regard to social harmonization , the Social Charter is , along with the social protocol which is integrated into the treaty , a good basis for a new departure for a social Europe .
But a great distance remains to be covered to achieve harmonization of our pension and social security systems , which are the only effective way of avoiding some relocations .
Mr President , this is all I wanted to say this evening .
Mr President , the rapporteur has quite rightly presented the difficult relationships which can exist between foreign direct investments and industrial relocations .
He has also placed this theme in a much larger context and this is something which we in Parliament have often discussed when debating world trade in goods and services .
We cannot on the one hand move towards liberalization , globalization and the application of the full potential of modern transport and information technologies without , at the same time , advocating a regulatory system .
This applies just as readily to the European internal market , to trade and commerce , which is so important for us all , and indeed to the world market .
I think that given the current preoccupation for globalization , the connection between trade and direct investment is growing ever stronger , since business enterprises are now able to act globally , irrespective of whether they are multinationals , or whether they are large , small or medium in size .
It must be pointed out that direct investment is not the same thing as simply exporting goods or placing contracts , since it involves a long-term commitment on the part of the enterprise in question .
One is therefore entitled to ask more questions about the repercussions of direct investment projects than one would about the problems associated with trade and commerce .
This is also bound up with the issue of investment outflow , which can inhibit growth and negatively affect employment .
Fortunately one has to say that globalization has not yet taken such a hold on today 's world as to create any real lopsidedness in the balance of investments .
Here in the European Union we can still see that we are an attractive investment area and that this will be enhanced by the introduction of the euro and the completion of the internal market .
From a European point of view this is without doubt something which will initially only affect specific branches and sectors of industry , or even individual companies , as far as their employment situation or level of economic activity is concerned .
But just how much more has to be done on our part ?
As the rapporteur quite rightly pointed out , there is a need for additional controls , the introduction of social and environmental clauses and greater fairness in competition , but we can also complete the global integration of the economy , commerce and investment , and create jobs - including those making explosives - , by regulating the relationship which exists with private enterprise .
We not only need an international system to regulate competition but we must also have a code of conduct to control the increase in foreign production and the internationalization and globalization of the marketplace .
Finally , transnational groups have created world monopolies in some products ; these transnationals not only control one third of all goods and services , but what is more , the one hundred largest of them are responsible for 16 % of total world employment .
I therefore consider it to be extremely important that we seek to prevent any restraint of competition and the setting up of monopolies , and that instead we introduce a code of conduct , together with regulations at both OECD and WTO level , to ensure that the net product of industry , as generated worldwide , and the increase in prosperity are not distributed in a one-sided way .
I believe that this important Sainjon report is a perspective and forward-looking document because the problems of employment and adaptation which face the industrial nations are quite clearly taking on a certain structure , and indeed these are addressed in the report , and also because it does not defend a new form of protectionism - but instead advocates a comprehensive opening-up of the market and the introduction of international controls .
We therefore simply have to support this report and make it a blueprint for the Commission and Council action which is needed at both European and international level .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . Industrial relocations are instruments which business uses to take account of certain local conditions within the social market economy .
They are not in themselves reprehensible .
However , problems do arise when the conditions which apply at the new location contravene legal requirements , such as in the extreme case of child labour and forced labour , when women are subject to job discrimination in the relocated companies and when , for example , money laundering is involved .
But industrial relocations can in some circumstances be necessary in order to open up markets , or produce goods , in new continents which are closer to the point of consumption .
Europe 's overall position , as well as that of most of its Member States - including my own country - , continues to improve and the introduction of the euro and other reforms will soon make the EU an even more attractive proposition .
In the medium and long term , companies should in their own interest consider whether relocation outside Europe is an appropriate way of being able to supply the European market from a certain geographical distance .
There are many reasons , including logistical ones , for resisting such a move .
Some companies have already begun to realize the consequences of this and are now starting to relocate some of their business operations from Asia back to Europe .
We support a discriminating free-market analysis of the wide-ranging factors which are responsible for the relocation of industrial production , and we oppose interventionist regulations which would impose a burden on companies .
All measures which seek to restrict industrial relocations should therefore be carefully looked at to ensure that we avoid interventions whose impact would be disadvantageous for the economy .
Specific framework conditions and a certain commitment on the part of the economy for company relocations can , however , be desirable for the rational deployment of public subsidies awarded in accordance with EU rules , or indeed for the prevention of fraud .
We therefore emphatically support the recommendation that the Commission should propose a code of conduct based on these free-market principles .
After the referral of the original report to the REX Committee on 6th November 1997 , substantial amendments were introduced on our behalf in the course of subsequent constructive deliberations with the rapporteur .
I would like to express my thanks to Mr Sainjon for the receptive manner in which he has dealt with our proposals and for the fact that he has accepted most of them .
However , I must also refer to the amendment which he has submitted on the subject of the euro , namely Item 22a ( new ) , which suggests that the European political authorities - whoever they are - should , by way of the European Council , reflect on the impact of establishing Euro-Dollar parity on foreign direct investments .
I believe that this recommendation is misdirected and indeed it was rejected yesterday by Commissioner de Silguy during the debate on the Ruffolo report .
The current Article 111 , which was previously Article 109 ( 1 and 2 ) of the EEC Treaty , cannot be interpreted in any way whatsoever to give the European Council currency-policy control in respect of the exchange rate .
The formal agreement on exchange rate systems , which is the issue raised here , is quite a different matter and , if it came to it , would concern a new Bretton Woods institution - but not the price regulation of the Euro-Dollar exchange rate .
In this area the European Central Bank alone has full and sole responsibility and its independence should not be prejudiced in any way .
Article 109 emphatically states that the European Central Bank is not to receive instructions or recommendations from decision-making bodies , from Community bodies or institutions , from national governments of Member States or from any other quarter .
This also applies to exchange-rate movements between the euro and the Dollar , whose regulation , if such is required , is incumbent only on the European Central Bank .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , on the 6th of November last year , the report by Mr Sainjon was referred back to the Committee on External Economic Relations at the request of the Liberal Group , and for three reasons .
Firstly , the heading did not cover the contents .
The report was supposed to have dealt with relocation and direct investments in third countries . Well , a major part of the resolution concerns socio-economic policy within the Union , or recommendations for the introduction of the euro .
I am glad that Mr Swaiger endorses the criticism of in particular the euro .
These issues fall outside the scope of this report and outside the competence of the Committee on External Economic Relations .
The second reason the group had difficulties with this report concerns substantive basic assumptions .
Whilst we are all striking out into the digital era with all its consequences , Mr Sainjon bases his resolution on an industrial society which no longer exists .
Thirdly , the greater part of the amendments submitted by me , amendments which were vital to my group , were not accepted .
Much to my regret I have to note that Mr Sainjon has ignored the Liberal Group 's criticism , which obviously was shared by the majority of this Parliament on the 6th of November .
He did not even bother to consult me , and did not accept the amendments which I submitted again .
My group believes that the report as it is before us is still not acceptable .
We will abstain , even though a few members will vote in favour .
Mr President , on the committee I supported the rejection of the report for the following reasons :
Mr Sainjon speaks of the information society .
In so doing he obscures from view the issue of global capitalism .
The report mentions a regulated economy without offering any further explanation .
We forget that a regulated economy is founded on the logic of capital .
There must always be the highest possible return on capital .
Capitalism is both a process to increase the value of capital and a social order structured round it .
The European Union is the modern version of capitalism in Europe .
Mass unemployment is an element in this system , in which European policies create a free working environment to exploit and manipulate people in the name of capital .
We export this culture to other countries in the shape of company relocations and massive investment programmes .
The report obfuscates the issue of capital , the profit-driven process , and sanctifies the market forces .
The rapporteur has forgotten that the free market is often at odds with human dignity , and even requires us to ignore it all together .
This explains why companies relocate to where the return on capital is greatest .
That capitalism standardizes all , making everything uniform , is something Asia , for which it was once an alien culture , has recently learnt .
Capitalism is not civilization or humanism , but the crude and ruthless pursuit of profit .
Consider this : there is sixty times more loose cash circulating around the world that what would be required to pay off all world trade debts .
Company relocations account for some of the latest expenses of capitalism . It is the world 's casino , where the stake is often the dignity of the poor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a trades unionist recently said that come the year 2000 , the employers ' notion of the ideal textile factory will be one located on a ship which always ties up wherever salaries are lowest and furthermore - and there is plenty of evidence to support this - where work safety and trades union rights are limited , where social costs and social insurance are minimal , where profits at highest and where the market is the most promising .
No-one can do anything about the last of these , namely the market situation .
Businesses will naturally seek the shortest route to the consumer , but surely we do not want to see the European ship operating as a global pirate .
A mechanic working for a European car manufacturer has a right to an uncontaminated , clean and socially-just workplace , no matter whether the factory is in Stuttgart or in Campinas down in Brazil .
Neither can we see why the European board of a multinational company should justify its relocation to one of its branch establishments , where production costs will be cheaper , solely on the grounds that labour costs have forced such a move .
For this reason we need controls and this is why we in the REX Committee organized a hearing and have submitted the report which is to be adopted today at the second attempt .
It is certainly regrettable that at the last vote a number of members of this Parliament allowed themselves to be taken in by the monstrous argument that the report was full of social stuff and that this would have to be amended in committee .
Well , this has now been done .
The reported has been amended and , interestingly enough , the changes which have been made seem to take even more account of the social aspects .
This is now common knowledge .
After all , cars do not buy cars .
But let me just make two points .
Multinational companies need a code of conduct which enshrines the fundamental principles of the ILO conventions and environmental guidelines .
All companies abiding by this code should be listed by name in the EU 's Official Journal .
We also call for companies which do not play by these rules to be excluded from EU subsidies and for this reason I would ask you to agree to our amendment .
The same should indeed apply to export credit insurance , for surely those who really take account of human rights should find some reward for their particular entrepreneurial spirit .
Let me just say something to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel .
It is dreadful in my opinion that someone submitting amendments should a ) not be present at the hearing and b ) again fail to attend the final vote on the report , when really one should be there in order to present the amendments in question .
You cannot treat our Committee this way .
Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel can read this part in the Minutes , for I know that she understands German perfectly well .
The Sainjon report is an excellent piece of work .
I can endorse much of what Mr Schwaiger has said .
We in the Committee on External Economic Relations support the report .
Mr President , the return of the Sainjon report to the House from the Committee on External Economic Relations , with no significant amendments , confronts us once again with the minimalist approach to the phenomenon of relocation , which has been upheld by the rapporteur and which we deplore .
Furthermore , this report is presented in a paradoxical way since in its explanatory statement , it tends to minimize the social and territorial impact of the practice of relocation and , in the motion for a resolution , to multiply the different palliatives , in an attempt to lessen the worst consequences .
This range of measures , which are certainly interesting - code of good conduct , international global labels , contracts of confidence between manufacturer and distributor , measures to combat forced labour - are , first and foremost , many admissions of the pernicious effects of the process of relocation .
Undoubtedly the reality of the phenomenon is difficult to comprehend statistically , but the approach retained by André Sainjon seems particularly restrictive .
When you count the number of jobs wiped out in our countries by relocations , you have to take into account not only the products reimported from low salary countries but also products coming from highly developed countries with an average of 30 % of their components produced in low salary countries .
In addition , the phenomenon of relocation cannot be considered in isolation from the pressure to reduce salaries which the choice of systematic free trade creates for employers , with businesses being forced to compensate , through automated production , for the exposure of the market to production from low salary countries .
It is thus the whole package of costs that must be incorporated into the analysis of the social effects of relocation : only then will we have an idea of the scope of this phenomenon .
The corrective measures that Mr Sainjon proposes do not measure up to this scope .
It is particularly unfortunate that he has not wanted to explore the area of measures likely to reduce the attraction of reimportation .
This is , however , one of the clear future ways for the most fruitful reduction of the scope of the pernicious phenomenon of relocation , if we truly want it .
Mr President , could I begin by paying tribute to the work done by Mr Sainjon on this report .
First of all , it very comprehensively embraces the subject matter and issues raised at the public hearing organized by the REX Committee last year .
Also it is a pretty fair reflection of the spread of opinion in the REX Committee .
For my part I would just like to highlight and expand upon some of the significant points made by the rapporteur .
I welcome the call for a code of conduct applicable to European multinational companies to be drawn up by the Commission .
We must ensure that it applies to subsidiaries and to subcontractors as well .
To be truly effective there must be a role for the trade unions in monitoring its effectiveness .
I have to confess that I am not entirely a fan of voluntary codes .
I doubt very much if voluntary codes can be effective and I hope that the companies who are involved take note of that .
Additionally , I would reinforce the rapporteur 's demand for an inclusion of social and environmental clauses , international agreements and WTO rules .
We have long supported that in the REX Committee .
Given that we are in a period of slow growth and rising unemployment in Europe , it is essential that we address all the aspects of foreign direct investment and relocation .
Mr Sainjon raises some interesting questions on the potential consequences resulting from the introduction of a single currency , I look forward to hearing the Commission 's response to that .
There is one other vital issue however which I believe should be addressed concerning relocation and that is the issue of transparency .
I would submit that the big companies who lobby the Commission , who seek benign legislation or even deregulation or benefit from training programmes , have a duty and an obligation to be open and frank about their long term investment relocation plans .
I believe that it is not too much to ask that they inform us well in advance not only where their planned foreign investment is to be but what market it is intended to serve and what impact it is likely to have on employment and unemployment in the European Union .
I hope that when the Commission has discussions with multinational companies , as we know it does , it will raise these points with them because in the absence of such information any plans to systematically tackle unemployment are reduced to mere fire-fighting exercises .
As soon as we deal with one incident another one springs up behind us .
Finally , a word about the proposed multilateral agreement on investment .
If this proposed agreement is seen to restrict social or environmental legislation or to hinder the socio-economic progress of developing countries then it will be fiercely and rigorously opposed and I would advise the Commission to take careful note of the growing concern surrounding the MAI .
Mr President , the relocation of investments has to be seen with realism and constructively , seeking to reduce the risks and possible exploitation of the opportunities created , as is duly emphasized by the rapporteur , Mr André Sainjon , whom I wish to congratulate for that , without prejudice to the reservation made by Mr Schwaiger .

We should begin by remembering that , in a worldwide context , the European Union is the most sought-after destination for direct foreign investments ( 45 % of the total ) , with an economic impact that is reflected in the broadly positive balance .
For that reason , we have to accept the fact that European investment abroad is also substantial , although we should be particularly sensitive to investments in countries where labour is cheaper with production leading to unemployment in our countries .
However , apart from concerning ourselves with the development of these countries , no doubt with the countries and the multinationals undertaking to comply with minimum rules in the social and environmental fields , the investments made may be converted into opportunities for us , particularly with the opening of markets to semifinished products in whose production we can continue as leaders thanks to the progress made in technology that can give us a unique position in the world .
With the requirement resulting from a broader scope , the rapporteur 's reference to the fact that the structural funds should be concentrated , more than in the past , on the promotion of research and technological innovation for companies established in the less favoured regions of the Union is particularly appropriate , in order to increase their competitiveness and ability to face the competition of the developing countries with emerging economies .
In fact , only a balanced Europe , without the costs of great mergers and making use of all national and regional potential , can face the competition of a world we have to be more and more open to , in our own interests .
This is a requirement for the whole Union and for each of the countries , particularly for Portugal , where there is so much to be done in the field of regional development .
Mr President , I begin - like my friend Esko Seppänen - by accepting that we are part of a capitalist system . I should , however , like to draw attention to one aspect of the report to which other colleagues have referred , and which seems to me to be fundamental : that in which the rapporteur , Mr Sainjon , suggests that social justice and sustainable development should be on a level with efficiency and economic stability .
I should also like to stress what other colleagues have said : that the code of conduct should also apply to multinational companies .
In the last analysis , that code of conduct embodies all a community 's traditions : the struggle against forced labour , child labour , discrimination between men and women at work , and the encouragement of sustainable development .
All of this , which is theoretically the basis of European policies , must also be a code of conduct for the multi-national companies .
Not long ago , we were informed that nearly 200 million children work from the age of five .
The European Union cannot allow this to happen in the multi-national companies with which it is connected .
It is also necessary to revise EC Directive 94 / 45 , because it seems to us , as the rapporteur put it very well , that it does not stipulate sufficiently clearly that workers should be consulted when a multi-national company moves work somewhere else .
Right now , we in Spain have examples of sectors of the economy with good future prospects , such as telecommunications .
But there is a Swedish company , Ericsson - and others following suit - which sell part of their production to small firms without guaranteeing the workers ' rights and without guaranteeing the workers ' future in that small firm .
We believe that we should aim to prevent the multi-nationals from doing what they like with workers ' rights , and the European Union has sufficient weapons to hand to prevent this .
Mr President , when discussing the first report by Mr Sainjon on this topic , we already expressed our appreciation and our criticism .
Most of the comments still apply , but the resolution has improved on certain points .
The pronouncements on harmonization of tax conditions and a fiscal code of conduct have rightly been deleted during the follow-up discussion in the REX Committee .
It is also a good thing that the idea that multinationals are obliged to advance social development , has been toned down .
Yet the resolution remains characterized by dirigisme .
The European Commission must draw up a code of conduct for European multinationals .
There should be a European social label , and a confidentiality contract between distributers , manufacturers and subcontractors .
Besides , we draw the line between the public and private domain in a very different way from colleague Sainjon .
He obviously sees governments as a kind of solver of all problems .
By mixing the public and private spheres , he ignores the nature and responsibilities of public administration on the one hand , and business on the other .
A business is primarily an economic organisation , even if it has responsibilities in many areas such as environment and social policy .
Yet businesses should not be awarded powers pertaining to public law , and they cannot , nor are they allowed to behave like government authorities .
Because of the nature of public institutions , their opportunities to manage are limited .
Authorities must set up conditions for the functioning of social relationships .
As if it is self-evident , the rapporteur asks the European Commission to take all sort of measures , without considering whether the European Union is responsible for them .
Looked at from within the subsidiarity principle , we are dealing primarily with responsibilities of the Member States .
The European institutions are not state organisations but supernational authorities to whom a limited number of powers are delegated .
The rapporteur loses sight of this , unfortunately .
That is why we cannot support this report .
Madam President . I agree with the rapporteur when he says in Item C of the Preamble that industrial relocation is a phenomenon which follows economic logic and is something which should not be ideologized .
However , limits have to be imposed on economic logic for humanitarian , socio-political and labour-market reasons .
A code of conduct for multinational companies would be welcome .
But when it comes to combating child labour or forced labour , in other words modern slavery , then a code of conduct is not enough .
No European firm should gain competitive advantage at the expense of maltreated children .
As well as combating violations of human rights , which is a top priority matter , Europe should be doing everything in its power to make its economic situation more attractive by a massive increase in research expenditure .
Europe cannot solve the problem of unemployment by way of protectionism and progressive isolationism .
The structural funds should in future be used much more for technological research and innovation .
Our objective in Europe must be to achieve competitive production costs in spite of higher labour charges .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the question of relocation is a particularly burning issue in European public opinion .
We have already discussed it at length here one November evening during a week 's part-session . At that time we had to give our position , at the time of the vote , and it was only a small last minute procedure , quite a poor one at that , which referred it back to the Committee .
Having already spoken on that occasion , I would this evening simply like , firstly , to applaud the rapporteur 's proposals in the areas of research and technological innovation in particular for , as he said , these are factors in the relocation of industry in Europe . I say this as rapporteur currently working on a report on European industrial competitiveness .
I would also like to repeat my agreement with the demand for a social clause in the international trading system in order to fight against all forms of exploitation , if not slavery , in the third world .
Thirdly , I want to dispute the validity of the widely accepted belief that it is European labour costs which are primarily responsible for relocation .
Finally , I want to remind you of what I had already said last November , regarding relocation within the Union .
Indeed , this cannot be prohibited , but we must do all we can to speed up fiscal and social harmonization from the top .
It is impossible to accept a single market where the rules of the game , and thus the costs , remain fundamentally different .
Finally , and I will say this again and again , it is not possible to accept that companies which benefit from European subsidies can then relocate , and even less possible to accept that relocations are caused by the subsidies themselves , within Europe .
There are frequent cases of this .
I believe it is time , in this area too , that there should be a true European political will with regard to this .
We could thus very concretely show public opinion that we are fighting uncontrolled relocations , which are economically and socially unacceptable .
Mr President , this report raises an interesting phenomenon which illustrates Europe 's difficulties in creating an expansive economy and full employment .
The report should , however , have been able to remind people to a greater extent how total investments in the EU could increase .
That is what is important .
Relocations are only a small part of the whole .
The report 's attitude is defensive , trying to preserve something instead of creating much that is new .
That does not contribute to the picture of a dynamic Europe . Rather it reinforces a stagnating perspective .
This impression is reinforced by the proposals which are presented to prevent relocations .
These are based not so much on how we should make Europe more attractive , but how we can make other countries less competitive .
A number of regulations and codes are to be extended to apply to other countries .
It is doubtful how effective this approach is .
With all due respect for negotiations in the ILO , codes in the OECD , rules on aid , rules on unfair competition , structural funds , research subsidies and social clauses , in the end this long line is a list of all the kinds of efforts which many politicians cite in order to appear decisive and involved , but which still do not achieve the desired result .
It is hardly going to reduce relocations and will not in any case increase overall investment in Europe .
It is not possible to order companies and employment into existence , and that should be recognized by the European Parliament .
In order for people to achieve the goal , general measures are required which make things easier for enterprise and new businesses , increase profitability of new investments , improve training and research programmes and make Europe competitive .
Let me take paragraph 15 of the report as an example .
There it says that the structural funds should to a large degree be aimed at creating an innovation and research-friendly environment for large and small companies in the area of information technology and that the Adapt programme should accelerate the training of workers to make them more able to react to technical change .
That is quite excellent and very well intentioned , but it is still a risky thing to confuse such politically-controlled subsidy programmes with real measures to create the foundations for investment-friendly and investment-oriented business .
Paragraph for paragraph , this report contains a lot which is interesting , but together it presents an incomplete perspective .
The 25 paragraphs may in their number give the impression of something large , but there is a lack of basic paragraphs about how European competitiveness can be developed and thus the basis which is needed to counteract relocations and , even more importantly , to promote new investments .
Mr President , I would like to concentrate on the impact of European relocation decisions as they impact upon developing countries .
As the report rightly states , European investment has had a major impact on the fast developing countries of Latin America and Asia .
But the flight of international capital in both of these continents has been a great source of instability , whilst ideas of a tax on such capital movements remain on the drawing board .
Meanwhile , for the poorest African countries investment just is not happening , with multinationals taking £ 380 m more out of Africa over the last 20 years than they put in .
Overall , we all know that foreign direct investment , in both its level and its potential , could have a far greater impact for good in the world compared to development aid .
Yet today the processes of globalization too often exacerbate social inequality .
That is why , as the rapporteur rightly states , we should support the ethical business movement .
But in holding to these principles we must not be frightened to name those who failed to uphold just standards .
Like the indigenous people who forced British gas to stop oil exploration in the Ecuadorean rain forest , or the Costa Rican banana workers who sued Shell for sterility caused by use of unsafe pesticides .
Or perhaps the most notorious example of the world-wide consumer boycott was that against Nestlé for their irresponsible marketing of breast milk substitutes .
The rapporteur rightly calls for a European code of conduct for multinationals and one that is developed in conjunction with international institutions .
I am proud that the new government 's international development White Paper in my own Member State , the UK , echoed these demands .
But tonight we should call for Parliament to consider this question in much more detail and in particular to do so with far greater emphasis on the impact on and the partnership with the peoples of the developing world .
At the November plenary session in Brussels , Sir Leon Brittan commented in detail on the first report .
That allows me to be very brief since the core elements of the report have not changed very much .
I should like to refer to two points that the Commission welcomes .
Firstly , the report identifies the benefits that outward investments bring , both for the European Union and the countries which receive FDI .
It highlights the benefits , as I said , and also underlines the more limited costs .
However - and this is important - it does not simply dismiss these costs , but takes on board the concerns that a large part of public opinion and the industrial sector are expressing about relocation .
It seems to the Commission that the report recommends a useful solution , which will further enhance the benefits of relocation while combating the potential negative effects .
I would refer to two points .
First , the code of conduct .
The Commission welcomes the pragmatic idea of a code of conduct , particularly in third countries , in relation to social standards .
However , the Commission does not consider that its role should be to devise or impose such a code of conduct on business .
This is a job for businesses themselves .
It is a pragmatic and voluntary code of conduct in which information is the major tool , rather than sanctions , which normally do not work .
So the idea of publishing a list in the Official Journal or , even better , on the Internet , seems a good idea to the Commission .
Secondly , I would like to remind you that the Commission has been seeking to improve international labour and environmental standards .
As you know , the Commission proposed the specific initiative on trade and labour standards prior to the Singapore WTO ministerial conference .
This initiative was , unfortunately , not adopted , but the Commission will continue to support the work of the ILO and to look at other means , for example , measures associated with the GSP , to further improve these standards .
I have two further points to make .
One concerns the exchange rate .
I understand there was a major debate in committee .
The Commission notes that Parliament adopted the Ruffolo report yesterday .
We think that is the kind of text in which this issue should be dealt with and possibly solved .
Following a remark by Mr Smith , the Commission can reassure him that we advocate the MAI provision , explicitly saying that countries should not lower their environmental or social standards in order to attract investments .
The chances for the inclusion of such a clause are good .
Having said that , the Commission welcomes this report .
We are looking forward to continuing working with the European Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Fishery products from Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands and Guiana
The next item is the report ( A4-0385 / 97 ) by Mr Medina Ortega , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) establishing a system of compensation for supplementary costs with incidence on the sale of certain fisheries products originating from the Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands and the French Department of Guiana , due to the ultra-peripheral character of these regions ( COM ( 97 ) 0389 - C4-0451 / 97-97 / 0200 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , it seems that we are already getting used to discussing fishing reports into the small hours .
As you know , many fishermen prefer that time of night precisely because of the good catches they can make then , although I do not know whether they conform with the strictest regulations for protecting the species .
In short , I think it is not very good for the protection of the ' Parliamentarian ' species and the species of Commissioner .
In any case , Mr President , this is a report which I do not think will cause Parliament any serious difficulties .
It is a regulation proposed by the Commission which aims to make permanent some support - which already existed on a temporary basis - for the outlying regions of the Community .
I think that MPs are already fully aware of this .
At the Maastricht Conference in 1992 , a Declaration was added regarding the areas on the periphery of the Community and , in Article 299.2 of the new Amsterdam Treaty , it is pointed out that these regions have special characteristics relating to their remoteness , insularity , lack of energy resources etc. which justify a series of supportive measures .
Within this context of support there are special programmes for these regions , specifically the Canary Islands , the Portuguese islands of the Azores and Madeira , the French islands of Guadeloupe , Martinique and Réunion , and the French department of Guiana .
Support for these areas includes help for the fishing industry , laid down initially in a regulation of 1992 , postponed in 1994 and 1995 and which should have been completed by 31st December 1997 .
I think that Parliament has been industrious in studying this matter .
On the committee in November we approved the proposed regulation with its suggested amendments , and I think that tomorrow we shall be able to approve them at this Plenary session without any difficulty .
On the Fisheries Committee , the European Commission 's proposals were adopted without any problems whatsoever .
The rapporteur and members of the Fisheries Committee were concerned about flexibility .
That is , when making a temporary regulation into a permanent one , it would not make much sense to keep to the figures established initially , on the basis of a given situation which might have been valid in 1992 .
The development , both of production and fishing activity , together with marketing , changes in consumption etcetera , would justify certain adjustments .
This is the meaning of the amendments adopted by the Fisheries Committee , Amendments Nos 1 to 9 , which can be divided into three groups :

The first group of amendments - numbers 1 , 2 , 4 and 9 - refers to the inclusion of certain products from the island of Réunion .
The island of Réunion is also on the extreme periphery of the Union and there would be no reason to exclude it .
Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 are an attempt to adapt the assistance to the Canary Islands to those products which are in effect being marketed at the moment .
Finally , Amendment No 3 is a modest amendment considering that it merely reiterates something which already exists , this being the obligation to enforce the minimum limit of 30 metres depth for fishing on the continental shelf .
As members of this Parliament will observe , the Fisheries Committee acted with the greatest concern for the strict budgetary requirements imposed , in order not to exceed the financial limits .
Our committee may have been too punctilious and respectful towards the authorities at the Budget Committee and with regard to the Community 's own budgetary forecasts .
It could be said , perhaps , that since the amendments approved for the Canary Islands , numbers 5 to 8 , are so strictly drawn up , they might allow little margin for subsequent development .
Amendment 9 , which assumes that in order to be able to give additional aid to the island of Réunion it would have to be deducted from assistance to another outlying French region , would cause difficulties for that other outlying French region .
Probably the most interesting observation - and it was a pity that it came so late - was that made by the representative of the European Commission at our parliamentary committee on 25th November 1997 .
He pointed out that perhaps the regulation could have adopted a much more flexible formula , with certain financial controls , but without specifying for each species and at each moment what quantity was subject to regulation .




This concern to combine flexibility with strict budgetary guidelines appears to govern Amendment No 12 from Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations ; Amendment No 13 from Mr Baldarelli on behalf of Group of the Party of European Socialists ; and my own Amendment No 14 , also on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , which aim to replace or modify Amendment No 9 , which had caused irritation in the French department of Guiana .

The rapporteur thought that these amendments were correct .
In particular , he prefers his own amendment , number 14 , but any of these appears to improve the situation so as not to cause a confrontation between the island of Réunion and the French department of Guiana .

Amendments Nos 15 and 16 , submitted by Mr Baldarelli , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , attempt to combine this flexibility with the strict budgetary guidelines , and I also think that they are acceptable .
I think that they help to allow for this flexibility in a regulation which is going to become permanent .
On the other hand , the rapporteur considers that neither Amendment No 10 , from Messrs. d 'Aboville and Aldo , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , nor Amendment No 11 , from Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , on species and sizes of fish and prawns etcetera , belong in a regulation about help with marketing .

Their place would be in a regulation on assistance with the protection of fishing species and the rapporteur considers , therefore , that they should not be approved .
Finally , Mr President , I do not know where this regulation will lead once it is adopted but , bearing in mind the remark by the representative of the European Commission and that , subsequently , the Council will have to adopt the final regulation , I hope that neither the Commission nor the Council consider the amendments submitted by the Fisheries Committee - which could easily be accepted tomorrow - as a very tight straitjacket .
On the contrary , when drawing up the final text of the regulation , a clause should be introduced allowing for real flexibility .
That is to say , every time we want to transfer assistance from one party to another , or from one item to another , we should not have to modify the regulations .
Obviously this was not the Commission 's original idea .
I do not know what formula could be chosen .
It is possible that the Commissariat could explain whether it has any ideas about this or , simply , if it is going to restrict itself to approving the amendments as they may be approved tomorrow by the Plenary session of Parliament .
I think that the amendments are positive and constructive and , of course , I wish to thank the Commission for proposing this type of regulation , which will doubtless be favourable for the outlying areas of the Community .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to say a word of thanks and appreciation for Mr Medina 's commitment to defending the interests of the ultra-peripheral regions , exemplified by the report being discussed .
The EU 's recognition of the need to establish fair conditions for the marketing of certain fishery products , in order to compensate for the disadvantages deriving from remoteness , has been co-substantiated since 1992 by means of an aid scheme systematically extended to 1997 .
The ultra-peripheral regions of the EU have common structural characteristics , placing them in the group of regions covered by Objective 1 , characterized , as you know , by presenting a per capita GDP below 75 % of the Community average .
The great remoteness of the fishery products marketing regions , the small size of the markets for marketing these products and the increase in production costs related to the high cost of transportation , associated with unfair competition resulting from commercial agreements which the EU has arranged with third countries , obtaining commercial advantages in relation to those regions , make the survival of the processing industries and a whole chain of workers directly or indirectly connected with them dependent on the compensatory aid scheme .
With regard to Madeira and the Azores , owing to the incentive policies , it has been possible not only to consolidate but in some cases to increase the industrial fabric harmoniously , enabling surplus local production , mainly tuna , mackerel and black swordfish , to be marketed , giving prospects of sustainable development to the processing companies .
And so we welcome the Commission 's motion and the amendments introduced by the rapporteur and we keenly ask for its approval by Parliament and Council , so as to maintain stability in the fishery sector and in this way also stimulate the creation of new jobs .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we , the Group of the European People 's Party , find these measures correct and justified .
Essentially , they aim to continue measures existing in previous regulations whose validity ended in December last year .
Their object , as we know , is to compensate the ultra-peripheral regions for the additional production costs and for the processing costs and , mainly , for the costs of marketing species of fish whose market lies outside those regions , which are normally very small and very restricted markets and so they normally have to export to the European continent and to the Common Market .
As we all know , we are talking about fairly poor , ultra-peripheral regions with very low levels of income , all classified in the Objective 1 regions , as stated by Mr Correia , and we are also talking about permanent structural situations , levels of disfavour unfortunately not wiped out , not eliminated in the short term .
On that account , in our opinion , this aid should be regarded as permanent and not just as temporary aid .
The aid should be subject to periodic assessment , which should always take into consideration the development of catches , of existing stocks and , naturally , also , the development of the markets and allow these permitted levels of aid to be increased at any time , if there is a favourable trend in production and catches and a favourable market trend .
Several proposals have been put forward to extend some of this aid to fish from Reunion Island ; we can understand this and approve of these intentions , but we understand that financing would have to be found for that island and for that situation , adequate financing , without prejudicing the current beneficiaries of this aid situated , as we know , in Guinea , the Azores , Madeira and the Canary Islands .
The Group of the European People 's Party would like to thank M Medina Ortega for the fantastic , highly positive , greatly discussed and highly effective work he has carried out .
It agrees with the amendments approved by the Committee on Fisheries , but is voting against some amendments presented after the part-session , mainly Amendment Nos 10 and 12 .
I hope that in the future the Commissioner present today will follow the situation of these peripheral regions attentively , as she always does , and propose special measures aimed at them , as fish is the strategic and endogenous resource for the development of these ultra-peripheral and insular regions .
Mr President , the ultra-peripheral regions suffer from the handicap of remoteness .
Since transportation of their produce destined for the European market causes additional costs , to make this produce competitive with rival products from third countries , it is necessary to grant them certain compensatory measures , as Mr Medina Ortega has noted .
It is precisely because the problems encountered by producers in Reunion are of this nature that we proposed the inclusion of this region within the parameters of the compensation system .
Reunion is the furthest ultra-peripheral region of Europe .
Situated in the middle of the Indian Ocean , in an area where stocks are not over-exploited , an abundant source of tuna and swordfish is to be found , accessible by the local long line fishing method , tradable on the international market , and important , if not vital , in terms of jobs in an area which has been seriously hit by unemployment .
But the marketing , in Europe in particular , of fresh produce is handicapped by the freight costs and packaging costs .
This situation causes the long line fishermen of Reunion to settle for the local market , which brings about direct competition between long line fishing and traditional fishing .
In order to ensure that these two fields of fishing can continue side by side , it is necessary to promote the export of long line fishing produce .
That is the reason why I would like to thank Mr Medina Ortega for his Amendment No 14 which takes account of this situation .
Furthermore , within the context of the discussions on this report in the Committee on Fisheries , we met a delegation of traditional fishermen from Guiana , who came especially to draw our attention to the problems of this region .
There , some industrial outfits do not hesitate to fish for shrimps near the coast , in waters less than 30 metres deep .
By so doing , they put resources at risk by devastating young shrimp stocks , which are found precisely in this coastal area .
Another disastrous consequence is that this practice causes an additional catch whose sale destabilizes the local market .
These are the reasons which have brought my colleague , Blaise Aldo , and myself to propose that the granting of subsidies for Guianese shrimp fishing be made conditional on the product being of a reasonable size , that is , adult , and whose fishing does not put in jeopardy stocks as a whole .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's motion to reintroduce the scheme to provide compensation for fishery products in ultra-peripheral regions deserves our natural support , as does the report and amendments proposed by the Committee on Fisheries .
The Commission 's proposal , however , goes to prove today , in 1998 , that we were right three years ago when we discussed the same proposed reintroduction for the period ended 31 December 1997 .
It now shows that it was possible for an elementary act of justice to be drawn up in 1995 providing compensation for those involved in fishing deep-sea species in the Azores and swordfish and mackerel in Madeira , in addition to the natural proposed reintroduction of compensation for the tuna sector .
The sectors now supported on these peripheral Portuguese islands were already claiming compensation three years ago , and we repeated them , having amendments approved that reflected those concerns .
On that account , we should not forget today that we all agree in 1998 on the responsibility held by the regional authorities that forgot the deep-sea fishermen in the Azores and the swordfish and mackerel fishermen in Madeira three years ago , not giving continuity to the needs of these local economic sectors along with the Commission .
Nor should we forget a certain insensitivity on the part of the Commission which then failed to agree to amend its proposal , although , in my opinion , it could and should have done so .
And , finally , we should not forget certain omissions and obstructions or diversion tactics that appeared or were introduced here during the discussion that then began in this Parliament .
Now is the time for justice to be restored , even if it is three years late .
We cannot fail to congratulate ourselves for this .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this Regulation is in fact based on an extremely strong legitimacy .
This legitimacy has been present in the text since the Treaty of Rome , repeated in the accession treaty for Spain and Portugal , renewed once more in the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Conference of Maastricht and finally taken up in the Treaty of Amsterdam , even if this has yet to be ratified .
In other words , there is continuity in the very spirit of this text and in this system of compensation .
Furthermore , the European Union , and the European Parliament in particular , recognized the need to take the specificities of these remote regions into account and adopted the POSEI programmes in 1989 and 1991 .
Finally , it can be noted that there is no particular suspicion regarding these measures , which confers further legitimacy on them .
The European Union , and the European Parliament in particular , can thus take pride in the significant aid it has brought to these territories and to activities which are sometimes the primary source of export receipts .
When you consider this approach , marked both by generosity but also by economic reason and a concern for justice aimed at correcting the realities imposed upon us - particularly geographic realities - it is difficult to understand that from the moment when you include a territory , perfectly legitimately , it implies taking away from others some of the aid you were going to provide .
The previous speeches have clearly demonstrated that it cannot be defensible to consider withdrawing the required finances from the overseas French departments as a whole , even from the ultraperipheral regions as a whole , in order to help the Reunion fishermen compensate for their handicap .
Furthermore , with regard to Guiana in particular , I would like to draw your attention - and I know that the Committee on Fisheries will understand me entirely , because it is an open and dynamic Committee - to the need to consider different approaches .
If we have to perpetuate this system , it is also important to encourage the different economic operators to work together , to understand each other and to organize together in order to manage , in the common interest , resources which are certainly not inexhaustible but which also have their own ethological laws .
We must question ourselves on the results of research , on our knowledge of stocks , on the perception of interests , not only of one single resource - in this case shrimps - but also for other resources , and see under what circumstances contradictions , even antagonisms , can arise when there are superimposed fishing zones for shrimp and fish .
It is thus a long term job that the Committee will take on board but it will carry it out admirably .
Mr Medina Ortega 's sober , precise and convincing report can only persuade us that this work will be undertaken in the interests of all .
In the short term , it is clear that this system must be maintained , that justice must be established - that you can certainly not impoverish some in order to establish justice for others - and that we must ensure , in the future , common management of resources , by the fishing professionals to begin with .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with this proposal made by the Commission and this report drawn up with the knowledge and reflection shown by Mr Medina Ortega , the door is opened to a framework of financial aid for the marketing of deep-sea fishery products from the Azores , maintaining support for the tuna industry .
The allocation of aid to deep-sea fisheries was supported by us in February and March 1995 , against the opinion of the then rapporteur and the then regional government of the Azores .
On that occasion , the regional government of the Azores placed the responsibility for not including deep-sea fishing on the Commission , stating publicly that the Commission had not agreed to provide aid for deep-sea fishing .
Now , with new governments in the region and in Portugal , what we supported in 1995 is being implemented .
Congratulations to the current regional government for the strategy of dialogue and responsible demand followed up with the Commission , whose proposal now being discussed , maintaining aid for 10 000 tonnes of tuna , for the first time extends the aid to 3 500 tonnes of deep-sea species .
It is always possible to ask for more , but this is already one step forward .
The economic and social impact of fishing , particularly on employment , and the special conditions of the remoteness of the Azores region justify it .
This is also understood by the Council of Ministers , which is now competent to give final approval for this aid , aid reinforced with the inclusion of the concept of remoteness in the Treaty of the European Union as defined in Amsterdam .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the detailed and explanatory analysis of the economic conditions endured by the outlying regions , which Mr Medina Ortega has included in his report , avoids our having to speak at length about the appropriateness of this proposal which was submitted by the Commission .
Anybody who reads the reasons set out in that report will be able to confirm that this aid is justified and needs to remain in place .
Being an island in itself , and more so when accompanied by particular remoteness with regard to the main centres of economic activity , contributes towards creating , in a more or less extreme form , certain peculiarities in the production of islands and their commercial interchange with the rest of the world .
This has doubtless produced a certain specialisation in the products which are fundamental to these islands ' economies , amongst which fishing products obviously play a very important part .
Tuna from the Azores , squid from the Canaries or crustaceans from Guiana are some examples of the industries to which the inhabitants of their respective islands have turned in order to ensure their future livelihoods .
As the traditional basis of these peoples ' economies , such specialisation should be respected and consolidated .
This cannot be done without special financial provisions which allow the islands to operate within the markets on an equal footing , by compensating for the differences in costs produced , for example , by transporting such products to the centres of distribution and consumption .
On the other hand , the support contained in the POSEICAN , POSEIMA and POSEIDOM programmes has enabled the industries to develop from merely extracting the fish to exporting it in the form of semi- or fully processed products , creating new prospects of development and wealth .
It would , however , be desirable for the Commission to pay more attention to the individual peculiarities of some of these regions whose extreme remoteness in many cases may make their voice more difficult to hear .
This has happened in this case with aid to Guiana which did not take into account , as it should have done , the actual protection of the interests of its local fishing industry .
The presence of representatives from Guiana on the Fisheries Committee demonstrated this region 's concern to obtain a system of support which ensures respect for the continuing biological viability of its fishing resources , something which the Commission should defend in principle .
We hope that the amendments submitted by various groups with the aim of resolving this question , amendments which we support , may contribute towards alleviating this situation , which should not arise in future .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the measures proposed for this regulation are simply the updating and continuation of those adopted in 1994 and 1995 within the framework of the POSEIMA , POSEIDOM and POSEICAN programmes .
These measures only set out to remedy the damage caused in the fishing industry by the extra costs incurred by the particularly restricting circumstances of the outlying regions .
And they are measures which , in the course of time , have proved effective to a certain extent .
They seem to be common-sense measures .
There are third countries which enjoy advantageous agreements with the European Union and it would be difficult not to give permanent support to the community 's fishing industry when this is provided to third countries which are not members of the Community .
In short , without such measures , the Canary Islands ' fishing industry , which is increasingly a minority interest as it is , would end up by disappearing altogether .
The best thing I can say in defence of these measures is that without them a large part of the fishing industry in the outlying regions would be lost and that in such fragile economies no sector is negligible .
Mr President , This regulation , as we have heard , affects regions on the extreme fringe of the EU , such as the Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands , French Guiana and others .
Because of their remoteness these regions incur additional costs in the marketing of certain fishery products .
We now need to update and maintain the current system of subsidy controls which are designed , quite simply , to balance the additional costs actually incurred in the marketing of fishery products against those of other EU regions .
This proposal has been accepted by the Committee on Fisheries .
An interesting proposal in some amendments is for subsidies to be redistributed along more flexible lines , whereby the total amount of aid remains the same .
The report is very up-to-date inasmuch as it addresses structural policy aspects of the fisheries sector .
We have on several occasions complained of the fact that the fisheries industry is scarcely mentioned in Agenda 2000 , while the Commission Work Programme for 1998 only refers to it in passing .
As a result of this we were motivated to focus now on the structural problems affecting the fisheries sector .
The long-running alignment programme and the technical measures agreed in 1997 can only have a positive effect on the lives and jobs of those working in the fisheries sector once the structural problems affecting this industry are tackled and ultimately solved .
But to do this we obviously need money .
Parliament has already played its part in 1997 by drawing up a forward-looking report on European fisheries policy after 2002 .
Two further initiative reports are to follow in 1998 .
That which deals with industrial fisheries will again produce a passionate debate , but the outcome will show that we are well able to tackle the technical problems affecting the fisheries industry and that we are all set to solve the conflict which exists in this sector , and that this House has the will to achieve its objectives .
Controversial funds have now been set aside under international agreement .
Let us then take a cool and calculated look at the situation and let us employ the full force of the Budget Committee and of all other members of this House so that we can ultimately achieve the longed-for and legislatively necessary decision on strengthening the position of Parliament .
A report on the islands is currently being debated .
A report on coastal areas is to follow .
The aim here is to highlight and resolve the local infrastructure problems so that jobs and production centres in these unstable regions can be maintained and built up to the advantage of the fisheries industry .
To this end we shall continue to work as before , and perhaps in an even more focused way , which I believe was the intended message of Mr Ortega 's report .
You can already see , Madam President , that all the political groups and countries support your proposal .
I therefore wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , and yourself Mrs Bonino , for the success and appropriateness of your proposal .
I particularly agree with the proposals made regarding fish-farming and squid , and I understand the concern you express , Mrs Bonino , to the Government of the Canary Islands in your letter of 27th December last , about responsibility for the biological " desert ' in the territorial waters of Morocco .
The very heading of the proposed regulation is in itself fortunate .
It speaks of compensation for additional costs .
For years we have been advocating the need for the outlying regions to have their shortages and natural disadvantages recognized so that they can become part of the internal market and benefit from their participation in it .
We have come a long way , not without set-backs , but in the end we have achieved success .
I should like to draw attention to the fact that these extra costs which the Commission wishes to compensate are not only relevant to the present moment but are structural in nature .
That is why I consider it necessary - as the Commission recognises - to maintain this kind of aid in the future as well .
For some outlying territories - for instance the islands of Pico in the Azores or Lanzarote in the Canary Islands - fishing is not just another of its economic resources , but forms part of its very life , culture and traditions .
Because of its economic significance , and the number of jobs it creates , this is not just another figure but part of the strategic resources which are vital for such support to enable the industry to survive in the outlying regions , which suffer from the highest rates of unemployment in the Union and are all areas under Objective 1 on account of their low level of income .
That is why it is necessary to maintain current policies , and this is what the regulation we are discussing today finally proposes .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the excellent report now being discussed relates to the aid to be given to one of the sectors of economic activity of the ultra-peripheral regions of the EU which might not be that of greatest expression in some of those regions .
However , it is not the most lacking in aid , in view of the environmental and social strategic importance of the fishery sector and its production , processing and marketing .
It is a special system for providing financial compensation for the additional costs incurred owing to remoteness , provided within the framework of the POSEIMA .
The achievement made in the last revision of the Treaty of the European Union should be pointed out , as it led to the inclusion in this Treaty of the wording for the ultra-peripheral regions , the recognition of the specific characteristics of insular regions separated from the continent , separated from the European market to which they export most of their products , providing for measures to be taken regarding the fishery policy in Article 229 paragraph 2 of that same Treaty .
Some of the reasons given and others that could be given fully justify the belief that the measures now taken should not be considered transitional or temporary but , on the contrary , should be understood in a logic of constant geographical conditions and not just that but highly penalizing , thus deserving permanent and definitive measures .
It is right for aid to be extended to other ultra-peripheral regions not yet contemplated , but it is essential and advisable to point out that this aid should never be provided at the expense of the ultra-peripheral regions already benefiting in some way .
In the autonomous region of Madeira , tuna , black swordfish and mackerel are the species that deserve the aid granted , which at the moment is no more than ECU 1.6 million .
This incentive policy permitted the consolidation and implementation of an harmonious industrial fabric , enabling the surplus local production to be marketed .
An appropriate revision should be made of the species and the amounts to be provided , based on the development of production and the production , processing and marketing costs .
The report and most of the amendments being discussed deserve our consideration and agreement .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mr Medina Ortega and the Commissioner for their excellent work .
With regard to Amsterdam , you will understand that one of the most significant changes for me is the inclusion in the Treaty of the European Union of the article relating to the ultra-peripheral regions , recognizing that their specific characteristics require specific measures .
This is the right decision which the European Parliament has been involved in from the outset .
When some people wonder how to convey the new possibilities opened up by the Treaty , the answer is easy .
Successful experiments constitute a good starting point .
Examples of this are the Community initiative REGIS and the POSEIMA , which is precisely the instrument enabling the measure being examined to be adopted .
The POSEIMA has positively but insufficiently contributed towards the Azores feeling more a part of the European Union .
It is in this framework that the measure being discussed is incorporated ; it cannot be temporary , as the structural conditions that fail to favour these regions result from the their separation from the European market to which they export their products .
They have to become final on that account , because the geography will not change .
With regard to Mr José Apolinário 's speech , I would like to say that he has a short memory , because at the time the European Parliament approved his amendment proposals , which I did not agree with , and the Commission failed to include them in its report .
However , his proposal is not what we are discussing here .
What we are discussing here is far more along the lines of what I supported in his proposal , because I supported that tuna should remain untouchable and that deep-sea fish should increase , but the MEP insisted that tuna should be withdrawn to make room for the deep-sea fish .
So what he said is only half the truth .
One final point : with regard to the ultra-peripheral regions mentioned in the Treaty of the European Union , it is clear that solutions such as this and others , including those relating to the agricultural sector , have to be developed , as they have achieved excellent results .
This is the right path .
And so I fail to understand the lack of references to the REGIS and the POSEIMA in the Agenda 2000 , a situation that needs to be changed and which Mr José Apolinário can help to do .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , effectively , as the rapporteur has pointed out , the frequent appearance on the agenda of items relating to fisheries threatens to turn us all into a kind of club of friends of fisheries , a club which is perhaps a little exclusive , with the same people always there , but which also has its positive aspects , in the sense that one is talking with parliamentary colleagues who know this dossier inside out .
This relieves me , for example , of returning to the motivations and the content of this regulation , which , moreover , you have illustrated in detail . However , I think it is appropriate to dwell on some of the amendments .
The general philosophy of this regulation has been underlined by each of you , both from the fair treatment angle and as a kind of solution .
Other than this , the proposal also mirrors developments over the last few years , hence including new species ; it is a proposal then , from a certain evolutional point of view , which is not limited to a pure and simple repetition .
More specifically , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , while Nos 3 , 5 , 5 , 7 and 8 perhaps require a touch of redrafting .
As regards the island of Reunion , the Commission accepts the amendments in principle , but we are not yet in a position to give a technical definition of the methods and quantities because the French request arrived very late ; the Commission has however sent a mission to the island of Reunion , but we are still waiting for further information which we have asked the French authorities for .
Your amendments will then be taken up in the modified proposal that the Commission will have to present .
But I must also emphasize that in principle the Commission accepts this inclusion .
So when the Commission presents a modified proposal , on the basis of both the amendments and the new information , we feel that Amendments Nos 13 and 15 will then be superfluous .
As regards the purpose of Amendments Nos 10 and 11 , the Commission cannot but share this objective , because they refer to the conservation of resources , but frankly it seems to me that it would be better to deal with this under the implementing regulation .
This does not seem to us the appropriate context in which to insert this type of consideration , above all if it must deal with the technical methods intended to achieve the conservation of resources .
Article 6 seems sufficiently precise about the nature of the report to be presented by the Commission , while Amendment No 16 , which concentrates only on the financial aspects , could bring a partial evaluation of the measures in question .
On the final point I am addressing Mr Langenhagen , in particular : I am perfectly aware - we say this every time - of the European Parliament 's request to reach a codecision on the agreements in due form .
For the moment we must make a virtue of necessity and live with the existing rules .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , the Commission hopes that , in a situation of temporary regulation which is becoming permanent , this regulation , which you have given a positive welcome , can also give the sector that stability of prospects which is one of the cardinal elements of a vision , also economic , of the entire fisheries sector .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
VAT on telecommunications
The next item is the report ( A4-0376 / 97 ) by Mr Cox , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 77 / 388 / EEC concerning the value added tax system applicable to telecommunications services ( COM ( 97 ) 0004 - c4-0100 / 97-97 / 0030 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , this is a short proposal from the European Commission - in terms of reports for which I have been rapporteur during several years , it is perhaps the shortest .
It is also one of the most complex .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy believes that the Commission proposal is a timely one and in that regard welcomes it .
It is a useful response to a global telecommunications revolution which in substance has bypassed some of the relevance and nature of the existing VAT system as it applies to that sector .
Certainly the technology has outpaced the VAT design .
The proposal sets out to address a very fundamental problem , namely that European Union telecom suppliers pay value added tax in respect of their EU clients but third country suppliers pay no such tax in respect of their EU clients .
At least that was the case at the point of introduction of the proposal .
It meant that there was an unfair market distortion which was damaging to EU telecom suppliers and that there was a loss of Member State revenue .
It was a dynamic loss because this is a growing sector and , over time , the problems would deepen , especially in the context of the liberalized market we face from now on .
However , the immediate urgency lying behind the Commission 's proposal has in part been addressed by 15 parallel , identical derogations agreed by the Council on 17 March last year .
Consequently , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy was of the opinion that this affords a pause for thought , a chance to clarify questions and issues , and then to see how to deepen and perhaps add value to the basic Commission proposal which we have been considering .
The advantage of the Commission proposal was that there would be a single VAT registration for suppliers .
But this is counterbalanced in practice - and the report deals with examples at some length - by the cumbersome and costly value added tax recovery procedures under the Eighth VAT Directive .
The Commission has recommended against a reverse charge mechanism and the consequence therefore is , if you look at the dossier in detail , that clients would need , if they purchase from EU suppliers from another Member State , to pre-fund value added tax bills and to wait for a number of months to get those refunds back .
Since the Council has partly addressed the matter - although I know the Commission has argued before our committee that it has not done so in a way that would be satisfactory in the long haul - we believe that time is now available to the Commission to reflect and perhaps to make one or two additions to this proposal .
Firstly we would call on the Commission to revise the Eighth VAT Directive with regard to the cumbersome and costly refund procedure .
It is a timely moment to pick up on that particular concern , which certainly was a major concern of telecom suppliers who spoke to me as rapporteur and who had contact with colleagues in the committee .
Secondly , because we now have liberalization of the market , because the Commission is of the view that the Council 's derogations cannot be sustained over the long haul and could , indeed , even create some problems in terms of WTO conditions .
I believe it is worth trying to identify precisely where the weaknesses are and where they need to be filled .
Finally , we explored whether it might not be appropriate to consider for telecoms a pioneering notion of a single VAT rate .
We have asked the Commission to reflect on those elements and then to bring forward a revised proposal which would enhance the current basic proposal .
In essence , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy regards what has been proposed by the Commission as positive , believes what the Council has done affords pause for thought and would like that time to be used to enhance the value of the proposal and to make it more comprehensive and more acceptable .
I would commend the amendments to the Commission .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Cox both on his report and his explanation of it here , in this Chamber .
I think it is a most complex subject and difficult to explain .
I would be most interested , Commissioner , to hear your reaction to the suggestions that Mr Cox has made .
It seems to me that both the Commission proposal and the Council proposal have certain short- and medium-term disadvantages .
Mr Cox has explained very clearly that the technology has outpaced the VAT systems .
There have been most serious handicaps for European Union telecommunications operators and a most serious and disadvantageous distortion of competition .
We can quite understand why the Council has put into place the derogations that Mr Cox has outlined .
Under the Commission proposal - the change to the Sixth VAT Directive - there will be a shift in the place of taxation to the place of establishment of the recipient of the services , the customers ' base , and away from that of the supplier , the telecommunications company 's base .
The problems that Mr Cox has identified about the cumbersome and costly VAT recovery procedures , on which I and many Members get many letters , clearly is a major obstacle .
I think that Mr Cox 's approach is correct , but I would be interested to hear the Commissioner 's reaction to the question of how to make progress towards a definitive VAT system and how to recover VAT without undue cost and bureaucracy , to the question of the impact of telecoms liberalization on fiscal receipts - because this is a hugely growing market and the fiscal implications for chancellors really are very considerable .
I would also like the Commissioner to comment on the effects of the Council 's derogations .
Mr Cox has mentioned possible conflicts , which I think are more than probable , with the GATT clauses and the specific World Trade Organization agreement .
Although , clearly , the Council proposal can hold in the short-term - which , in a sense , removes some of the pressure both on this Parliament and the Commission - nevertheless the problem will exacerbate rather than diminish .
Clear proposals from the Commission would be received with great interest by members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
Mr President , my group supports Mr Cox 's report and also the amendments proposed .
We had cause for concern : Europe 's disadvantage in relation to competitors from abroad .
And so we understand the exceptions established by Council .
Curiously enough , we have gone for a solution along the lines of the " principle of fate ' , only in that way avoiding market distortions , besides avoiding the problems resulting from the lack of harmonization of taxes and the lack of an income compensation mechanism , which is essential in taxation on consumption .
Finally , you may wonder whether it is not a question of virtualities that we need to continue using VAT in general , postponing the adoption of the final system according to the " principle of origin ' until the complete harmonization of taxes is established and a safe system of compensation is assured .
In this specific case , we are justified in accepting the Commission 's proposal with the addition of the new line s ) to Article 9 paragraph 2 of Directive 7788 / EEC ; but as we agreed , its application should depend on a report to be submitted to Council and the European Parliament in which the Commission will have to explain in detail all the progress made in the direction of the final system , the impact of the liberalization of telecommunications on tax receipts and the effects of the exceptions introduced in the meantime .
Mr President , until recently we were working with a VAT regime which was bad for European competition and for the telecom suppliers within the Union .
On numerous occasions attention has been drawn to the future taxation problems in this sector , and I think we will frequently have to exchange views on this issue .
The Cox report contains a lucid analysis of the pros and cons of the Commission 's proposal , and of the temporary arrangement made by the Council .
At the moment 15 identical derogations are used for all Member States , which is acceptable in the short term .
The present Commission proposal also contains some traps , such as the costly procedure to reclaim VAT .
That is why it would be sensible to implement in particular Mr Cox 's Amendment No 5 , in which the Commission is asked to have another thorough look at the problems concerning claims in connection with a definite VAT arrangement without unnecessary bureaucracy ; at the effect of liberalization and the effect of the 15 derogations ; and to submit a new directive to the Parliament and to the Council on the basis of the analysis .
Mr President , I think we can allow ourselves this amount of time to come to a sound arrangement which will also be able to stand the test of criticism at the next WTO negotiations .
My group is wholly sympathetic to the difficulty in which the Commission finds itself , because no one has yet quite invented the wheel to solve this problem .
The Cox report has given an indication , however , of how we might reach a better solution than we have here before is , and I think it is important to follow the Cox report in that respect .
Mr President , the Commission is basically faced with two different problems . The first of these concerns the fact that we have still not succeeded in developing a definitive VAT system in the EU which really works .
Such a thing would be extremely beneficial for the development of the internal market and for the EU as a whole .
Mr Cox has pointed out some of the disadvantages resulting from this oversight .
Such a situation can lead to paradoxes , for example a third-country supplier is suddenly no longer liable to VAT , while an EU supplier is liable to this particular tax . That is naturally quite unsatisfactory and paradoxical .
The second problem concerns the technical revolution which has meant that telecommunications services can now be supplied practically irrespective of geographical situation .
It is therefore now basically possible to offer such services on a planet-wide basis .
In such circumstances I think that Mr Cox 's proposal is intended to gain time .
This may well be a logical move , but I believe that we should try really hard to find a solution which is based on a definitive VAT policy and on the use of telecommunications services from the point of view of greater local inclusion , since local inclusion is still possible in this area .
This would be somewhat along the same lines as the Commission 's draft directive .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the interest of Mr Cox 's report on the system of VAT applicable to telecommunications services lies in the fact that it raises a much wider question which underlies all world doctrine on fiscal law , as the OECD studies prove .
I myself am supervising the thesis of a young French researcher , Mr Huet , on the issue of international trade and its system of taxation , that is , the whole problem of the risk of cyberevasion , of a taxation of cyberspace yet to be invented , the Internet services , call back , down loading of software , intangible services , and the whole difficulty of the digital influx which cannot be regulated or controlled , and a business which it is said could reach 70 billion dollars by the year 2000 .
We know the questions . Who should enforce this ?
How should it be enforced ?
Where should it be enforced ?
Should we completely exempt it from taxation ?
Should there be a specific tax ?
Should there be a world conference , about the whole range of taxes : customs duties , excise duties , corporation tax and VAT ?
With all the different methods of administering corporation tax that exist ?
There is the method by which the server should be a stable establishment ; for VAT , the distance sales method , or Article 9 , first paragraph of the Sixth Directive ; or Article 9 , paragraph 2 , still of the Sixth Directive , which relates to provision of cultural services .
We know the problem : to avoid distortions in competition .
In the first system , it is the service provider who defines the place of taxation , to which has to be added the distortion of competition outside or inside of the Community .
The wish was to combine this with the Commission 's system , a relatively coherent one , in which the client defines the place of taxation , before this proposal came about , the March 1997 solution , which has been generalized in all countries - Germany applied it from January 1997 , in France we will have a directive on this in May 1997 . However a difficulty arises since it confuses the location of the provider with the location of the beneficiary of the provision , depending on whether the person is liable for VAT or not .
I will therefore , content myself with taking a sample group .
I am not against the temporary solutions which have been sketched out .
I wonder - it does no harm just this once - if there should not be a world doctrinal reflection and if , perhaps , the method of complete tax exemption , with all the risks this means for traditional commerce and virtual commerce , or the method of specific taxation are not worth studying .
I believe that perhaps the solution of a wide conference reflecting on this extremely novel issue may be the right way forward but , in the interim , I recognize that the solutions of a temporary nature drawn up by Mr Cox are acceptable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the VAT system on telecommunication services , which distorts and weakens competition , is driving European telecommunications companies into a worse position than that in the developing world .
Under present legislation telecommunication services are taxed where the provider is based .
This means that telecoms working within the Union pay VAT , and those outside do not .
The Union VAT jungle is also unequal in its treatment , which also distorts competition .
Viable internal markets demand viable structures .
The harmonization of taxation systems is obviously a step in the right direction .
It is necessary to focus on a taxation and VAT system at the European level , and not just at the national one .
With the third stage of EMU and the common currency the public finances of all Member States are in any case closely controlled by the Community .
Why not have the same control for taxation ?
On the global level , the biggest problem for current European taxation systems is the imposition of taxes on ' fixed ' factors , i.e. the workforce .
For some reason companies that offer employment are pictured as being better off ; why otherwise would their tax burden be so unfair compared , for example , to that of automated companies .
Offering employment is penalized , when it should be rewarded .
We have to start straightening out the wrinkles in the tax system .
The minimum requirement is obviously that companies offering employment should at least enjoy equal a status equal to that of automated companies .
The Council now accepts a system whereby all telecoms in every Member State pay VAT directly to the inland revenue office in their customer 's country .
If the customer happens to be outside the EU , no tax is due at all .
This defect in the system is a direct invitation for the large telecoms to move to third-world tax havens .
This we all have a duty to put right .
Mr President , on 1st January 1998 , the liberalization of telecommunications services became a reality in the European Union .
It is time to complete the regulatory framework which accompanies this liberalization with the VAT discipline .
In effect , both our telecommunications companies , and the firms of other countries , need to know the fiscal obligations confronting them over the next few years .
This is the general objective of the proposal .
Then there are two more specific aims of this directive .
The first relates to the modification of the territorial of Community VAT and specifies that VAT must always be applicable if a telecommunications service is delivered to a Community client : the consumption in fact takes place in the Community .
The second specific purpose aims at confirming the existing law of the sixth directive , by which a Community telecommunications operator has fiscal obligations only in the Member State in which it is established .
To impose registration on it in each Member State in which it has a client , would end up cancelling the greater part of the benefits attaching to liberalization , because the operator would have to keep specific accounts or even have recourse to a fiscal representative in each of these Member States .
It follows logically from this that we cannot discriminate against operators of third countries by demanding that they register in all the Member States ; they too should be able to benefit from the advantage of a single registration in the Community .

Your rapporteur , Mr Cox , has carefully examined the consequences of this approach and proposes various amendments in his report , adopted by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . I can tell you that the Commission has no difficulty in accepting Amendments Nos 1 , 3 and 4 .
By contrast , Amendments Nos 5 , 6 and 7 are not acceptable , in the opinion of the Commission , because they would postpone the entry into force of the proposed directive until a report has been drawn up on elements which are in reality linked to the present proposal .
In fact , the progress towards the introduction of a new common VAT system is independent of the creation of a fiscal system for telecommunications services .
The liberalization of these services will certainly have less impact on the VAT yield than the absence of a VAT system will have on the success of liberalization .
The effects of the derogations currently applied by the Member States will certainly be taken into account when the negotiations are going on in the Council , but we also know that these systems cannot be extended or generalized , given their disadvantages and imperfections which Mr Cox has also highlighted with great clarity .
Furthermore , the implications of the application of a single quota to telecommunications remain , at the end of the day , without objective , because I understand that Parliament is not asking for the introduction of such a single share .
Given that the Commission 's approach is not in question and , lacking concrete suggestions for improvement , the Commission considers it particularly inappropriate for the signals put out to the operators to seem to deprive them of the possibility of having , in a short time , a fiscal framework capable of allowing them to benefit fully from the liberalization of telecommunications services , to the profit of our companies and all the consumers .
Finally , Amendment No 2 , which I have not mentioned up to now , is not acceptable because , in fact , it is not correct .
However , in substance it is taken up in Amendment No 4 which the Commission accepts , as I have already mentioned .
The Commission was asked , amongst other things , to clarify the reasons why it was not possible to maintain in force the principles provided for in the derogations , the 15 derogations , including them directly in the sixth directive .
At bottom , the response is already clear in Mr Cox 's report .
There are three disadvantages : the system provided for derogation is not practicable , the control raises concrete problems , and there is also the critical element , raised by some of you , about the contrast between the mechanism of derogation and the structure of the conditions and clauses provided for in the ambit of the GATS .
Finally I want to observe , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that on the question of " why are we in such a rush , we have time ' in reality there is not very much time , because the derogations end at the end of 1999 and the new system must be adopted , say , before the end of 1998 , to allow for incorporation into national legislation .
So perhaps , there remains between us this divergence of appreciation of the urgency of the matter , on how much time we have available .
Mr President , in view of the late hour , I do not wish to re-open any of the points of substance in the debate .
However , I am intrigued by one remark by the Commissioner which gives me pause for thought as to how we should proceed at voting time tomorrow .
If I understood him correctly he said with regard to exploring a single rate of value added tax for the telecom sector that it may be pointless at the end of the day but that in any event the European Parliament is not asking for it and since there is no proposal the Commission , in a sense , is not taking on the possibility .
Let me put the direct question : it is a hypothesis , I am the rapporteur and not Parliament , but if Parliament was to come to the Commissioner and say : we want in a proposal not just a revision of the Eighth VAT Directive but we also want a single rate for telecoms , could I take it , as implied in the Commissioner 's response , that he would answer in the affirmative ?
Mr President , in reply to Mr Cox , on rate harmonization it is true that under any tax scheme involving taxation at the place of establishment of the supplier or at the single place of registration within the EU some distortions of competition can occur due to the different level of rates of Member States .
The Commission would be prepared to suggest the application of a uniform rate for telecommunication services which the current proposal does not provide for and could consider in depth , and probably with a favourable disposition , an indication from the European Parliament pointing in that direction .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.07 p.m. )
Madam President , I would like to speak on a point of order .
The Aftonbladet , a Swedish evening newspaper , of 9 January , had an article on its front page which contained three factual errors , two of which could be verified by Parliament .
Seventeen Members of this Parliament from six different groups are accused of being involved in Mafia practices , in particular in the drugs Mafia in the European Union .
Since a system and unit have been set up to act against such scandalous articles , I would like to ask whether the Swedish Information Bureau has produced a fiche d 'alerte about this yet , and whether it has arrived at our unit in this Parliament yet , and what this will result in .
Because it is clearly extremely damaging for this Parliament , and moreover complete nonsense that seventeen members are accused of playing a role in the drugs Mafia , and that they appear in the paper , with pictures and so on .
I would like to know whether you , or the unit which was set up to deal with these things , will take action against it , and whether a fiche d 'alerte has been issued .
Mrs Van Dijk , to answer the question you have just asked me , I can say that the Bureau did in fact consider , at yesterday evening 's meeting , how best to counter this type of accusation or aspersion and that we decided in principle to set up a rapid rebuttal unit , to counter such absolutely inadmissible , unacceptable attacks as effectively as possible .
And I would like to take this opportunity of informing the whole House of this .
Madam President , my sincerest apologies for bothering you with a personal problem .
I tend to start the monthly part-session in Strasbourg in good cheer and in good physical condition , but practically every part-session I end up catching a hefty cold .
I have noticed that many people have similar problems .
I think it has to do with the air conditioning system .
My question is whether you would be willing to ask the relevant services what can be done . Because , Madam President , speaking for myself , by the end of the week it is really unbearable .
Mr Cornelissen , we cannot start a discussion on this point .
I am not sorry that you have mentioned the problem .
I think that you are not the only person to be afflicted , probably because of the air conditioning , at the end of a sitting .
My answer is that the department responsible will look into the matter , and that we will do everything we can to ensure that a suitable temperature is maintained in this chamber .
I give you my word , and steps are already being taken , because many Members of this House have already said the same thing .
Madam President , thank you .
I think , the explanation , Mr Cornelissen , is much more simple .
We are pooling the latest viruses and bacteria from the four corners of Europe every month , bringing them here and exchanging them .
It is our contribution to the single European market and the free circulation of bacteria .
Thank you , Mr Corbett , for your very amusing contribution to this discussion .
On the same subject , Madam President , I haven 't actually got a cold here in Strasbourg , but if your maintenance engineers are efficient , perhaps you could also send them to Brussels , because I often leave Brussels with a cold .
We have the same difficulties there ... sore eyes ... there is a problem .
Drugs
The next item is the report ( A4-0359 / 97 ) by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , containing a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the harmonization of the Member States ' laws on drugs .
Madam President , my problem does not involve my immune system but the agenda .
You have called for Mrs d 'Ancona 's report and I should like to request , pursuant to Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure , that we refer Mrs d 'Ancona 's report back to committee .
I should like to justify my request on the following grounds : Our Group , together with Mrs d 'Ancona the rapporteur , has held intensive discussions with the other groups in this House .
We had 36 amendments to discuss , received between the approval of the draft report by the committee and the plenary sitting .
These 36 amendments , Madam President , include a number of requests which , were they to be accepted , would not simply involve minor changes to the report , but would completely change its stance .
Over the Christmas break ...
( Noise ) Ladies and gentlemen , there are minimum rules of social courtesy and if you don 't known them yet , perhaps you should learn them this morning .
( Applause ) The rapporteur was unable to discuss these amendments with the petitioners in sufficient detail over the Christmas break .
Mrs d 'Ancona and my group therefore request that we be given the opportunity to do this and to endeavour to reach a compromise on this highly sensitive topic of drugs policy .
( Applause )
Mr Schulz , you have made a request pursuant to Rule 129 .
We will therefore apply that rule by the book and I must ask whether there is a speaker in favour this request .
There is not .
Against ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this amendment represents quite simply a vote of no confidence in the work of my charming colleague Mrs d 'Ancona .
This fact should not be concealed .
Obviously you do not have the confidence to open this amendment to discussion or put it to the vote .
You should also know - despite what my charming colleague Mr Schulz would have us believe - that he is not motivated by improved understanding . Lurking behind this amendment is the long arm of Tony Blair .
What he has told us here today was actually scripted for him in London .
It is the work of Tony Blair .
The British Government has issued a statement which says : But the UK government has made clear that it has no intention of legalizing or decriminalizing any currently controlled drug .
They can feel their majority wobbling and that 's why they want to refer the report back .
We say that a European drug policy should ask only one question : Does it make access to drugs for young people and children harder or easier ?
Mrs d 'Ancona 's policy would make access to drugs for young people and children easier .
We can say no to that by voting no today .
And for this reason we reject the petition .
Mr Nassauer did not exceed his speaking time , nor did Mr Schulz .
I can assure you that I am extremely vigilant on that point .
I have already asked someone to speak in favour , in accordance with the Rules .
No one wanted to do so .
I can see Mr Dell 'Alba .
Mr Dell 'Alba , do you wish to speak in favour ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Nassauer is obviously responsible for his own remarks , even the political remarks he makes .
I do not want to make any more comments on that subject .
I will confine myself to saying that in this House , you have to accept responsibility ...
If you want a report to be rejected by means of a show of force by the majority , I would say to you that is not how it is done in politics .
When there are sixty amendments in Parliament ...
( Uproar ) Madam President , please ask my Italian friends to be quiet .
I will speak in whatever language I choose .
All right ?
( Applause ) All I wanted to say , Mrs Muscardini , is that , when sixty amendments have been tabled , you have to work sensibly , not just make gestures .
It is therefore in order , in a democratic parliament , for the Committee to whom the matter was been referred , to resume the debate , examine the sixty amendments and present another report to the House .
We have now heard all the speakers required by the Rules .
I shall now invite Mrs Green to make a personal statement .
Madam President , I really cannot resist it .
Thank you for the invitation to speak and also for recognizing me as Pauline Green .
I would just like to say that as Mr Nassauer read out one bit of the British Home Office 's brief on this , he did of course fail to read out all those bits in it that express sympathy with the report and what it was trying to do and some of the elements that Mrs d 'Ancona is trying to cover .
Mr Schulz , can I presume that Mrs d 'Ancona does not wish to speak , as you have expressed her request ?
I am asking you this because the Rules say that the chairman of the committee , or the rapporteur , may speak .
So , you have spoken on her behalf .
That is right , is it not ?
( Parliament approved the request for referral back to committee )
Fingerprinting asylum seekers ( Eurodac )
The next item is the report ( A4-0402 / 97 ) by Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the draft Council Act drawing up the Convention concerning the establishment of ' Eurodac ' for the comparison of fingerprints of applicants for asylum and the Convention drawn up on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union , concerning the establishment of ' Eurodac ' for the comparison of fingerprints of applicants for asylum ( 11079 / 97 - C4-0506 / 97-97 / 0915 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , the topic I intend to speak on is extremely important although it may not provoke the same emotional response as the other topic we have discussed this morning .
We can debate this matter in a somewhat more peaceful frame of mind , but I have to tell you honestly that I am discussing it with mixed feelings .
I will explain why .
Yesterday evening we had an excellent debate about the refugee policy and about the situation which has arisen out of the fact that 1200 Kurds have asked for political asylum in Italy during the past few weeks .
Again , it was a good debate which did not split the left and right as the debate on drugs did . From all contributions to the debate it became clear that what we are missing at the moment is a common asylum and migration policy .
All our colleagues here expressed their disappointment with the fact the Treaty of Amsterdam did not provide for such a common asylum and migration policy .
Maybe in the long term , but not at the moment .
We then see that when an incident , such as this situation with the Kurds , concerns us , we do not really know how to respond to it .
Well , I certainly have mixed feelings . I find it extremely difficult to start talking about instruments which have a sound function within the context of a common asylum policy , but in isolation seem to be there to keep asylum seekers out .
That is why I thought it was important that we should express an opinion on it .
Firstly , I find it a sign of excellent goodwill by the Council , and I do not mind repeating this here , that it has decided to involve Parliament in the decision-making process concerning the establishment of this Eurodac instrument .
In order to do justice to the idea that it is dangerous to make use of specific instruments outside their context , I have introduced a large number of amendments at the request of the Council , and I obviously hope that my colleagues will support these .
They are based on the belief that we must create the greatest possible security for those in distress , those we are discussing here today : people seeking asylum .
Specific instruments can be used positively .
Taking fingerprints to stop people from being sent from one Member State to the other is a case in point , because there might be uncertainty over which country is responsible for their application for asylum .
This procedure is effective in such cases , and ensures that this situation no longer occurs .
Secondly , I think that sending people to a third country outside the EU where there are different standards , possibly to the disadvantage of the asylum seeker , is ruled out .
That is also a good thing .
In one of the amendments I have also warned that it must be unambiguously clear that the comparison of finger prints should under no circumstance be used for any purpose other than to determine the responsibility of the Member State of origin .
So it cannot be used for any other purpose than for the one it serves .
I also think it is important that the register of fingerprints is only kept for a limited amount of time , so that it cannot be misused .
The other thing I find extremely important is that the European Commission , and not one of the Member States takes on the management of Eurodac .
I also think there should be a kind of European protector of data , as the number of data bases is increasing , and I think that , in view of people 's privacy , we have to treat these with greatest possible care .
I have suggested that the European Court of Justice should continue to be the appointed institution to turn to as a last resort with complaints in these matters .
To conclude , Madam President , I have already told you that I think it is a great pity that this procedure is given priority over the total policy .
It is a pity , but I hope that , once the Council has fine-tuned what is being proposed on a number of points , Eurodac will still be able to fulfil a useful role .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although the report prepared by my colleague Mrs d 'Ancona on the drawing up of the Convention concerning the establishment of " Eurodac ' is , in essence , a factual and technical report - as my colleague has already pointed out - the tone is of great significance for those people involved .
The individuals to be registered using this system have left their home countries for a number of different reasons and by a number of very different routes .
For the most part they have done so because they were fleeing terror , torture and persecution , but also - and we must not underestimate this - because they come from hopeless social and economic backgrounds .
They have all chosen flight in the hope that wherever they may one day find refuge , they really will be able to find better and more secure futures , and above all live safer lives .
However , due to the influx of refugees into the European Union , the receptiveness of Member States has declined rapidly in recent years .
On one hand , the many common regulations and conventions existing between the Member States create the impression that fortress Europe is expanding . On the other , Europe is becoming more and more unified , internal borders are becoming increasingly less significant and here too there is a need for a common set of regulations .
This is particularly important in the area of the third pillar .
However , - and here I must agree with Mrs d 'Ancona , and thank her for the excellent work she has done on this report - it is essential that when we talk about an asylum and immigration policy , we talk about a common asylum and immigration policy .
There should not , therefore , as is currently the case , be a raft of very different regulations applicable in the various Member States which are then brought together into a minimal piece of legislation by the Council , effectively restricting the level of protection for refugees to a minimum .
I also agree that we should draw up a common framework .
But there are a couple of additional comments which I would like to make about the report , which I think are important .
The most important is that data protection be guaranteed for the individuals involved .
Since it has been laid down that there should be a central organization , but not exactly how this organization should function , it is also important that we agree , as Mrs d 'Ancona has stated , that this central unit be based within the European Commission .
I also think it is important that the Member States have only limited access to this central unit , and for a period of only three months , as they are also able to set up their own registers .
Therefore , in my view , it is necessary that access by the Member States to this central register be limited .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the core of this automatic data processing system relates to the fact that , in principle , future applicants for asylum in the European Union should be fingerprinted as soon as they enter a Member State , as long as they are at least 14 years old .
I should like to make it clear from the outset that , for reasons I shall go into later , the PPE Group supports this intention , and that we cannot therefore see the point in linking it to the criticism that , as in other circumstances finger-printing is used as a method of the criminal justice system , it would effectively criminalize applicants for asylum .
In this regard , there are certain technical requirements which I should like to outline briefly .
It is important that asylum proceedings in Europe are decided quickly .
This is the right of applicants for asylum , irrespective of whether or not their applications are founded or whether or not they are victims of political persecution .
Whatever the case , they need to know as soon as possible whether they can remain in Europe .
Secondly , jurisdictions must be clearly defined .
It must be clear which Member State is responsible for dealing with an asylum procedure , i.e. who examines the application .
Thirdly , we must avoid a situation in which applicants for asylum are shunted back and forth between EU Member States .
These are the prerequisites of proper , constitutional and humane proceedings and in order to achieve them it is necessary to establish the identity of applicants for asylum , and where appropriate their family members , and that is what this system is for .
This is , of course , subject to data protection legislation . The relevant agreement states that the Council of Europe Convention on Data Protection of 1981 is applicable in all cases .
This convention specifies , inter alia , that such finger prints must be deleted if , for example , the applicant receives citizenship of a Member State or is recognised in a Member State as a refugee .
However , not all those seeking asylum are the victims of political persecution .
Yesterday the figures relating to applicants for asylum in Germany last year were published .
They numbered more than 104 000 , and of these , just over 5 % received recognition as political refugees .
Of course , there are a considerable number of asylum seekers who make not one , but two or more applications in order to receive several lots of social security benefit .
This is a regrettable fact which should not be overlooked .
In Germany , for example , investigations were carried out covering the period from January 1993 to September 1996 and no less than 46 000 cases of fraud were detected - a rate of approximately 1 in 10 .
Since the introduction of an automated finger-printing system in Germany this figure has dropped considerably .
A comparative study has also been carried out examining asylum application procedures in Switzerland and Germany .
It revealed that double applications giving rise to payment of double social security benefits were received from the main applicant countries - Turkey 12 % , Pakistan 19 % , Zaire 12 % , Lebanon 12 % - and this fact cannot simply be ignored .
Similar figures also came out of a study comparing Switzerland and Austria .
Therefore , it makes sense to have such a procedure .
It benefits those who are genuinely the victims of political persecution and for this reason the PPE Group supports this Council Convention and has some reservations about the restrictions contained in Mrs d 'Ancona 's report .
Madam President , today we are considering the report from Mrs d 'Ancona on the proposal from the Council for an automated system for recognizing the fingerprints of asylum seekers .
We agree with the rapporteur that we need to improve citizens ' legal position , through clear measures and quick procedures , in recognizing the right to asylum .
Moreover , we support the desire to establish a European data protection system , particularly given the growing number of systems which facilitate the exchange of personal data and the difficulty in defending these systems against possible abuse of the individuals they include .
Asylum is a basic human right .
To grant or deny access to the asylum process may mean the difference between a person 's life and death , as is pointed out in the report .
This feature must be there in every instance , and the necessary precautions have to be taken so that the people affected can benefit from the most favourable legal conditions .
In this context I would like to recall the passivity demonstrated by the Spanish Government in the face of asylum and refugee applications from more than 270 Algerian immigrants who are still waiting in Melilla - and have been in some cases for more than two years - for their applications for legal protection to be dealt with in the face of the terrorist threat to which they are subject in their country of origin .
Meanwhile , the Spanish authorities maintain - incomprehensibly - that Algeria is not an area of conflict .
The coordination of asylum policies needed in the European Union must not be allowed to erode the system of international protection .
In this sense , the future political union will have to maintain and develop the traditional European policy of the right to asylum .
We advocate a progressive attitude with respect to the right to asylum , subject to all the international conventions , and through a progressive application of that right to nationals from countries within the Union .
However , when political union is fully achieved this right will only be necessary in terms of nationals from third countries .
Madam President , all over Europe at the moment people are thinking back to the words Emile Zola threw at his government exactly 100 years ago : J 'accuse - I accuse .
It was the expression of his despairing resistance against a despotic power which had branded an innocent man guilty in a calculated political manoeuvre , flouted the dictates of justice , ignored the dignity of man and sacrificed him to the opinion of an enraged public .
One hundred years later we are safe in the knowledge that we have finally tamed this kind of power , finally subjected it to justice .
Yet still we are forced to watch just such an accusation levelled against just such despotism reforming in the hearts and minds of thousands of men and women at the borders of Europe who are being prevented from enjoying their human right to asylum with ever new forms of harassment , with denial and perversion of the course of justice .
We are forced to watch how justice and politics retreat in the face of a hysterical public and the mass phenomenon of xenophobia .
No other region in the world has triggered more or larger streams of refugees than did this continent in the 20th century .
Millions of men and women from Europe have been received into countless countries all over the world , very often countries themselves suffering ruin and poverty .
Today , at the time of our greatest historical prosperity , an incomparably smaller number of oppressed and persecuted individuals is taking flight in our direction . And what are we doing ?
We are refusing an ever growing number of them the right to shelter .
Instead , we are using police methods to monitor them .
European co-operation sees its only duty as being their rejection and , if necessary , their deportation .
In the face of a mere 2000 fleeing Kurds politicians conjure horrific images of an uncontrolled flood of refugees .
Phrases such as " illegal immigrants ' are used .
Europe , which owes its cultural wealth to its openness to the world , is becoming a fortress .
If that " j 'accuse ' forms in the minds and hearts of the men and women waiting at the walls of this fortress , then it is we who are accused .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , recent events have forcibly and tragically reminded us of the importance of the asylum policy to every Member State of the European Union and to the European Union as a whole .
Although it is obvious that inter-state cooperation is not only useful but also necessary in this area , it is nevertheless true that the problem of accepting refugees , and the right of asylum , are essentially , a question of national sovereignty , as moreover , the French Constitutional Council recently ruled .
These principles are reflected in the ' Eurodac ' report , which is above all a technical report , but also a political report .
The rapporteur suggests that responsibility for the management of the Eurodac system should be entrusted , not to a Member State , under the responsibility of the Council , but to the Commission .
It seems to us that it would be preferable for the management of such a system to remain under the responsibility of the Council instead of being entrusted to the Commission .
Indeed , the Council , emanating from the Member States , has a more accurate perception of the real , practical issues associated with the problems of accepting refugees , whereas the Commission is likely to have a more ' disembodied ' view , more remote from practical problems and real life in each of the Member States faced with an influx of refugees .
That is why we will vote against the Committee on Civil Liberties ' amendments .
The refugee problem is an extremely serious human problem , but politics is the art of reality .
A few years ago , our colleague , Michel Rocard said that France could not accommodate all the poverty of the world .
I do not think that Europe can accommodate all the poverty of the world either , and it is a question , as far as we are concerned , of being able to organize cooperation and development policies for poor countries , to enable their inhabitants to prosper at home .
Madam President , the Kurdish refugee case is a current reminder that the problem of the asylum seeker is perhaps one of if not the greatest challenges for Europe in the coming years .
I should add , however , that the Kurdish problem is still very small in comparison to the tidal wave of millions which threatens to come our way if the situation in Algeria escalates any further .
But I am already wondering which European government will have the courage to call a halt to this tidal wave of millions , which , with all respect , would render today 's debate on the registration of fingerprints totally obsolete .
We obviously support the Council 's Eurodac proposal for a central fingerprints register for asylum seekers .
In my opinion it is one of very few interventions which might alleviate to a small extent , not enough , but to a small event the negative effects of the loss of border controls in the Schengen countries , which , for that matter , we continue to challenge .
We reject the amendments of the d 'Ancona report equally obviously , amendments which on the one hand serve to hamper the much-needed fingerprints register , and on the other hand give the European Commission a decision-making position in asylum policy which the Commission is absolutely not entitled to .
Lastly , it is also my duty to broaden the debate a little , and to remind you that experience teaches us that , after investigation , more than 90 % of applications for asylum turn out to be completely unfounded .
This should be said now that so many politicians in my country and outside continue to argue for a kind of Santa Claus politics which is ultimately pursued on the back and at the expense of the less well-off and the poorest amongst our own people .
So to conclude , I repeat that in my view genuine political refugees should be received in countries neighbouring their countries of origin which have on the whole a similar way of life and culture , and therefore not in Europe , and that we are prepared to support this policy materially .
Secondly , we believe that illegal asylum seekers , in other words 90 % of applicants , should be categorically deported , yet in a humane manner .
Only then will renewed support be found in Europe to help all genuine refugees .
Today , sadly enough , yet for understandable reasons , this is certainly not the case .
Madam President , this Eurodac Convention is essential in order to get the Dublin Convention to work .
It is necessary for us in Europe to cooperate on questions of asylum seekers .
The current , tragic situation of the Kurdish refugees is an example .
It is necessary to have an effective and responsible asylum policy in the EU .
The issue is not who should have a right to asylum in the EU .
Rather the issue concerns a better sharing of the responsibility for refugees in Europe .
It is simply a matter of getting better tools to decide which Member State is responsible for dealing with an application for asylum which is submitted within the EU .
On the one hand we should avoid turning asylum seekers into political footballs between different countries because no-one wants to take responsibility for dealing with their case .
There are many tragic examples of cases where asylum seekers wait for years to get their applications processed , or are sent back and forth between different European countries because no-one wants to accept responsibility .
That is not the way for us to treat people who in many cases have escaped from oppression and torture .
On the other hand , we should prevent too much cheating .
It is important that every country is obliged to take fingerprints .
That is the only way that we can prevent asylum seekers changing identity after being turned down by one Member State .
If we have a database of fingerprints , we can uncover cheating and abuse immediately .
This would also be beneficial for genuine asylum seekers .
I am very pleased that the rapporteur emphasizes the fact that the setting up of this database must not mean that the asylum seekers ' legal protection is compromised .
Asylum seekers have a right to data protection .
There should be security and control of the data , both in terms of who has access to it and who is able to use it .
Mr President , the recent upsurge of refugees arriving in Europe has had the merit of drawing attention to the problems of asylum seekers in the European Union .
The Eurodac system presented by the Commission is a response to one aspect of the problem .
The Dublin Convention did say that a refugee must apply for asylum in the first host country and comply with that country 's decision , which would apply to the whole EU .
The Eurodac system is now trying to transpose that principle into reality , in order to ensure that certain people , without identification , do not travel from country to country , according to the welfare benefits they can obtain , whilst awaiting a decision .
Fingerprinting would make it possible for find out quickly , without having to wait a long time , whether the person in question applied for asylum in the first host country .
The main advantage of this system is its rapidity , which will therefore be of benefit to real refugees , who apply for asylum within the law , and will prevent others from taking unfair advantage of the hospitality of the Member States .
Eurodac is not a tool to be used for repression , to drive out refugees .
As was said yesterday evening , Europe must not be closed to refugees ; it must remain open to people in distress .
Eurodac should , on the contrary , help contribute towards our ability to provide hospitality , whilst preventing abuse of the system .
The system is very often abused - as recent events have shown - by extremely well organised and well-informed criminals , who , for enormous sums of money , transport people in distress , and provide them with information about the loop-holes and weaknesses in the laws of EU countries .
Those who cry shame as soon as the word ' repression ' is mentioned , disregard the fact that , to Mafias of all types , illegal border crossings are the most lucrative form of criminal activity after drug dealing .
During the debates on the Kurdish refugees , the need for European harmonization , with regard to asylum policy , suddenly became apparent .
Eurodac is one element of European cooperation , a tool to help us handle the arrival of refugees .
Although the Eurodac system must be welcomed as a technical instrument to prevent abuse , we should not lose sight of the root of the problem , that is , the situation in refugees ' home countries .
It is here that European internal and foreign affairs policies should meet in order to form an overall , and therefore more effective approach .
The European Union must incorporate human rights considerations more fully into its relationship with such countries , support the reconciliation of people within the framework of the rule of law , and denounce the political , economic and cultural oppression of minorities .
The European Union is one of the largest distributors of economic aid throughout the world .
May we at the same time gain a reputation for our protection of democratic values !
Mr President , Eurodac is part of a restrictive and to some extent brutalizing refugee policy which we can see developing in Western Europe today .
The countries of the EU are closing themselves more and more to large parts of the surrounding world .
Far too often refugees are treated in a shameful manner , as if they were criminals rather than people seeking protection .
The basis of Eurodac is that an application for asylum should only be dealt with in one Member State .
I do not share this basic view and therefore support paragraph 8 of the report , which I believe is absolutely crucial .
Every asylum seeker should be dealt with separately , regardless of whether they are included on such a database or not .
That is a fundamental point .
There are innumerable examples of asylum seekers who have been rejected by one EU country , but have later been able to seek asylum in another country and have had their applications accepted .
I myself have several personal friends who have managed to do that .
One wonders what is going to happen to them when this system begins to work in practice .
Taking fingerprints is an infringement of personal integrity .
An obligatory system of fingerprinting is ultimately based on the idea that people who do not want to give their fingerprints should be forced to do so , by violence in extreme cases .
This applies to children from the age of 14 upwards .
That is a serious infringement of personal integrity .
I believe this is not really necessary .
In Sweden we used to have a system which meant that only those who could not prove their identity in a reliable way were required to provide fingerprints .
That is a method which is entirely sufficient to clarify who the asylum seeker is .
In practice the asylum seekers cannot say no , because it would damage their case if they refused to provide fingerprints .
The draft convention also contains several other weaknesses .
I think the age limit of 14 has been set too low . It should be at least 18 or 21 years , or another age when a person may be regarded as an adult .
The requirement that data should be erased from the system is incomplete .
There are clear risks that people are going to be registered who are resident quite legally in various Member States .
We know that there are British and German reservations about the proposal which was discussed at the Ministers ' meeting in December .
In that it is made clear that people who have a residence permit in a Member State should not be included on the database .
I believe it is a quite natural demand that has been made in connection with these negotiations , it is a demand for legal certainty .
It is also unclear , in spite of what is in the draft convention , what opportunities the asylum seekers actually have to get information , to be able to appeal and to assert their rights .
There is a similar system of control for the database in the Schengen Information System called JSA , Joint Supervisory Authority .
At the moment that operates alarmingly badly .
We know that the supervision is poor , the legal certainty is weak and the opportunities to appeal are small .
I believe there is an obvious risk that there will be the same weaknesses in the Eurodac system which exist in the Schengen system today .
It is a system which means that in practice the refugee is always at a disadvantage .
With these words I want to show that I share much of the rapporteur 's criticism .
She points out serious defects in the existing system .
I do not share her view that the Commission should have influence over this .
It is an intergovernmental issue and an issue for the Member States .
In spite of this criticism , I am going to vote for Mrs d 'Ancona 's report because it raises important issues about the Eurodac system .
Mr President , I would first of all like to say to Mr Buffetaut who spoke earlier , that he did not quote Michel Rocard in full .
I would like to finish the quotation .
Michel Rocard did indeed say that France could not welcome all the poverty in the world , but he added that France should accept its full share .
I think that is important .
When we discuss the Eurodac report , we are right in the middle of the problems caused by non-harmonization of our immigration and asylum policies .
Yesterday , we had a debate on the arrival of Kurdish refugees in Italy , and we saw how difficult it is to discuss problems in the heat of the moment .
Although it was rightly emphasized that the Italian government 's attitude is perfectly respectable , we also had to recognise that on the whole , the behaviour of EU countries is undecided and questionable , as we have failed to establish any prior agreement , upstream , on measures to be adopted in this type of situation .
The Eurodac project is part of the pursuit of harmonization of asylum practices .
I therefore agree with it in principle , provided of course that we are very watchful with regard to human rights , as Mrs d 'Ancona said .
Her report makes provision for this and I support it .
But I should like above all to emphasize the need to progress rapidly towards the harmonization of asylum practices .
Madam Commissioner , you have made a proposal with regard to the temporary protection of displaced persons , which I have already had occasion to applaud .
But as you know , when the Council finally adopts that initiative , it will solve only part of the problem .
Because what have we seen with regard to applications for asylum in the EU for several years ?
The number of requests for asylum peaked in 1992 , and has since decreased every year .
National provisions have been adopted by many Member States to discourage people wanting to seek a better future in Europe , who are unable to enter Europe because of stricter immigration controls , from trying to obtain the status of refugee .
Such new provisions largely explain the decrease in asylum seekers .
But it therefore seems obvious that there should now be a higher rate of acceptance of applications .
But Mr President , Madam Commissioner , what we see taking place is exactly the opposite , the rate of acceptance is also decreasing .
Has the world suddenly become a haven of peace and prosperity ?
Every day brings us new proof that it has not .
There is a simpler reason , that can be seen , the increasing timidity of Member States and the more and more repressive policies being set up .
The laws of some Member States interpret the Geneva Convention in a spirit contrary to its promoters .
People who are really persecuted are refused the status of refugee , on the grounds that their persecutors are not Government agents , and the Council ratified this restrictive interpretation in a resolution of March 1996 .
As of course the risks such people run if they return are well known , they are tolerated within the EU , but without status or rights , in several of our Member States .
Some have already created a complementary protection status , others like my own , are working on it .
Madam Commissioner , would it not be preferable to have a common policy on this point , and to work towards the definition of a status of subsidiary protection at the European Union level ?
Mr President , it is the goal of the European Union to devise an asylum policy which helps the real refugees , that is those who are entitled to refugee status under the Geneva Convention , and , secondly , to prevent abuse of the right of asylum .
Amsterdam set the course for a route to a common asylum policy .
The Dublin Convention which is currently in force is a first , quite crucial step towards the development of a common asylum policy .
The tool we are now discussing , the Eurodac system , is a tool which ensures that those who need help actually get it and prevents those who are abusing the right of asylum from doing so .
So it is a good tool .
The proposal put to us by the Council is a tool which is acceptable and which helps to achieve the European Union 's goals in terms of asylum policy .
What the committee with its restrictions and tendentious conclusions has made of it , on the other hand , does not help us achieve the goals we have set ourselves .
When you consider that if an application is re-presented , although it has been rejected by only one State , the same applicant and all his or her arguments have to be heard again in all the other Member States , this represents a huge amount of time and money .
Our systems are overloaded and at the end of the day we are unable to offer help or guarantee asylum .
As my second point , I should like to note here that , due to a proposal from the committee , it is not possible to compare fingerprints with those of applicants who have made applications in their own countries , even though this would show us that only a small proportion of the applicants are actually suitable candidates for asylum .
These are single figure percentages in each of the countries , which , in fact , means that very many applications are made without grounds .
I know of cases in which up to ten applications for asylum have been made in different states and yet people still say that the right of asylum in Europe is not abused .
We have to do something about it .
We need to ensure that , in general , those who support the fingerprinting of applicants for asylum are not looked at disapprovingly ; otherwise , we would be giving the wrong signals and going down the wrong path .
We need the Eurodac System because it supports a good and proper asylum policy and is designed to stop abuse .
So we will support Eurodac in the form that has been proposed by the Council .
However , I - and this also applies to the European People 's Party Group - cannot endorse the proposals coming from the committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the opportunity which the Eurodac System will afford us in terms of fighting the current abuse of the asylum application system , for a great number of reasons , must be welcomed .
If it should be possible , through the use of fingerprinting systems and the storage of fingerprints to prevent multiple applications , irrespective of the reasons for which they are : on social , economic or family grounds , because people do not want to stay in one place and decide to make an application somewhere else , that is OK .
But time and time again we restrict these debates which we are having on the right of asylum here today to technical debates .
We did it yesterday , and we are doing it again this morning .
Let us ask ourselves the question once and for all : Why is it that we are obliged to talk about a Eurodac system at all ?
Why , as soon as the discussion turns to asylum , do we always concentrate on abuses of the right of asylum in a criminal context ?
Mr Pirker , for eleven years I have been the Mayor of a German town which lies on the Dutch and Belgian borders .
The town of which I am Mayor has the highest percentage of refugees from the Bosnian civil war .
Most of them came to my town from Srebrenica und Gorazde . We took them in and then we had to beg them to declare themselves asylum seekers because Germany does not recognise a right of asylum for refugees from civil wars .
In Germany there is no legal basis for refugees from civil war .
I have begged these people to claim asylum , though they say they are not victims of political persecution , but are fleeing from a civil war and want to return to their country when the civil war is over .
Which is just what they have been doing since the Dayton Agreement !
I was forced to ask them to consider themselves as asylum seekers , which meant that they were forced to stay in my town .
If they had gone anywhere else , which would have made me for one very happy since it would have meant a little respite for my finances , someone like Mr Pirker would have come along and said : Just a minute , Eurodac , fingerprinting system for asylum seekers , you can 't go there !
With this small example , I am trying to illustrate the fact that the European Union 's refugee policy needs to be a combination of various different areas of policy .
For time and time again we face a situation in which people say : I want to emigrate to the European Union .
It is possible , in theory .
It might not be advisable because of the great defensive front , but if someone wants to emigrate he is allowed to in principle and so we need to create an appropriate new legal base .
We do not have one .
There is no European immigration law , there are no national immigration laws .
We force people who want to migrate here to assume the status of an asylum seeker .
That is the danger we ourselves are creating for the right of asylum !
In the European Union we always adopt the same approach : we deny the fact that Europe is a continent which attracts immigrants , even though it is due to the poverty gap for which we are in part responsible , in particular the difference in poverty levels between the north and the south as well as between the west and the east , along with the lack of willingness on the part of some EU Member States to share their wealth .
This will be shown very clearly in the remainder of the debate .
Naturally , our wealth has a magnetic effect on the poorer regions which surround us .
The answer to the problem cannot be defence , it must lie in control , and particularly in three interlinking areas of the law : immigration quotas , clear rules for the acceptance of refugees from civil wars needing temporary protection and , finally , the core of political persecution which is then no longer a problem .
And even then you don 't need Eurodac !
If you think that you can solve the problem at the inter-state level , colleagues in the PPE , let me tell you today : Forget it !
You have created the European Economic Area , you have created a de facto EU state , but now you want to continue the process , focusing on specifics , dissected for want of long-needed progress in terms of harmonization .
If we do not remove this disfunctionality , Europe will fail its own citizens as a result of this imbalance .
You should be a little more harmonization-friendly in matters of integration , not just in matters of defence .
Mr President , let me begin by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs d 'Ancona , on a good and thorough report on the Eurodac Convention .
I also welcome the quick reading which the matter has received here in Parliament .
When we discuss the Eurodac Convention , we must do so in the light of the Dublin Convention , because that is where we find the criteria for which Member State is responsible for the examination of an application for asylum .
That is also where to find the rules on how an asylum seeker may be returned to the country which is to decide the application for asylum .
The Dublin Convention was signed in June 1990 .
Seven years later , in September last year , it entered into force .
However , it is not enough to have a legal system for the first asylum principle and for it to be able to work .
That is why the Dublin Convention refers to Article 15 , paragraph 12 , and the fact that we need computerization of information about the identity of asylum seekers .
It is in that context that Eurodac comes in as a complement .
It is , after all , as a complement to the Dublin Convention that Eurodac should be seen .
Through Eurodac it will be possible to find out whether asylum applications are being made in several places by one and the same person .
It is important for us to know that if the Dublin Convention is to function effectively at all .
That is in turn only possible through a computerized system for fingerprints , which is found in the Eurodac Convention .
We are working within an institutional framework which is in a state of change .
The draft Eurodac Convention we are debating here today has been drawn up under the rules of the Maastricht Treaty .
The Commission is aware that the Amsterdam Treaty means another institutional framework , but we do not think that we can wait until this new Treaty enters into force . We need the Eurodac system now if the Dublin Convention is to be able to be credible and effective .
Like Mr Nassauer , I think it is important that we have a quick procedure and that people are informed very quickly about the situation they are in .
I also think this is demonstrated by recent events in Italy , i.e. that we need a different system to the one we have today .
At the same time I would like to emphasize that if the Eurodac Convention is not in force when the Amsterdam Treaty is ratified , the Commission will of course come back and propose a Community instrument .
The Commission shares Parliament 's view that the Convention should be entirely in agreement with the rules on data protection , which I think it is in its current form .
During the discussion on the proposal the Commission urged that the principles of data protection should be in agreement with the Community 's rules in this area , even though the Regulation on Data Protection is not applicable in the third pillar area .
I think that we have now reached an acceptable level of data protection .
We should therefore support the compromise on Article 6 which requires that after a five year period the Council of Ministers should consider whether it is still necessary to keep data on people who are granted refugee status .
The Commission also welcomes a number of the amendments which have been proposed .
That includes in particular Amendments Nos 1 , 11 , 16 , 19 , 20 , 27 , 29 , 30 and 34 which we are now considering .
Amendment No 20 includes parts which we can accept , particularly the principle on decisions with regard to implementation measures and that they should be carried by majority decision .
Finally , I would like to underline the fact that Eurodac 's operation is going to be entirely dependent on how we manage the financing , both with regard to setting up the system and the operation itself .
It is my hope that the principle of Community financing will be adopted and that is also what the Commission supports .
If that is the case , the European Parliament will have a decisive role to play in how the future Eurodac shall operate .
The Commission looks forward to being able to deal with the question of Eurodac 's financing together with the European Parliament .
Thank you , Commissioner Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Green Paper on the statutory auditor
The next item is the report by Mrs Sierra González ( A4-0373 / 97 ) , on the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Green Paper on the role , the position and the liability of the statutory auditor within the European Union ( COM ( 96 ) 0338 - C4-0451 / 96 ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , a series of recent financial collapses , which have had serious consequences for investors , have brought to the fore the question of liability in financial accounts as well as the role played by the auditor .
The question deserves particular attention for two reasons : firstly , since the auditor has become responsible for the accuracy of financial statements ; and secondly , since there is no uniform legislative framework within the European Union relating to the role , the position and the liability of the statutory auditor , to respond to society 's demand for better and more transparent information concerning companies ' accounts .
With the appearance of new company and business models , as well as new financial products , the auditor 's report has taken on not only an extremely important role but also acquired features relating to its independence and professional nature .
In the Green Paper the lack of a common position or joint action within the European Union has been assessed as a negative factor .
In regard to the statutory auditor 's role , there is no specific Community directive regulating all its legal aspects .
Such a need is catered for only through reference to prejudiced questions contained in various different directives . In addition to this , the basic national legislation of Member States , where regulations are normally not specific , is normally used when considering this diverse and varied situation .
From the plans drawn up for both the single market and the single currency it would seem appropriate to move towards common action .
However , the Commission expresses doubts in the Green Paper in regard to the fund and as to how the appropriate legal means will shape any joint action .
Sometimes the need to establish minimum principles is referred to , while at other times the possibility of making a single recommendation to the Member States is mentioned .
Given this situation we must call on the Commission to set out its objectives in the short and medium term , for the creation and operation of an internal market for auditing , as well as a timetable and the measures which must be adopted or rejected .
In any case , the need to press ahead with legislative action to harmonize the minimum content of audit reports cannot be delayed .
The Green Paper seems to tend towards establishing a common concept of auditing or establishing a set of objectives to be followed by this entire sector throughout the European Union , and which can then be used to define the obligations or legal requirements which the auditor will have to fulfil in carrying out his role .
The problematic nature of this issue comes from the fact that , although it is recognized throughout the Member States that auditing should have a common objective , namely to guarantee that the accounts , financial statements and assets published offer an exact and fair picture of a company 's situation , the legislation , customs and practices of Member States vary considerably , and this affects the efficiency of the audit trail .
There again , I should point out that the accuracy of reports is dependent on the truthfulness of the information the auditor receives .
The Commission 's idea to present a draft recommendation to improve the management of companies in Member States is , in this sense , very relevant .
Finally I would like to voice a complaint that we have not had access to the study which the Commission has begun on the impact of different national legislations in the matter of civil liability . Nor have we had access to the provisional conclusions of the conference held in December 1996 to discuss the Green Paper .
It is clear that Parliament will not be able to decide on this issue without full knowledge of the facts . Of course , in every country in the European Union , the auditor is potentially subject to both criminal and civil liability and to professional sanctions .
However , the kinds of liability and time periods allowed vary from one country to another . Therefore , while adequate legal recourse is not available , it seems that to protect users - in the widest sense of the term - we have to study the possibility of every auditor having minimum obligatory insurance equivalent in every Member State or making it compulsory to be affiliated to a guarantee fund .
To conclude , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the technical subcommittee - within the planned contact committee on accountancy directives - must involve representation for a wide range of people who use the audit reports , because the outcome of accounting reports is not only the responsibility of professional auditors .
Mr President , this is an important report on the Commission 's Green Paper on the statutory audit , and I wish to thank Mrs Sierra González for the completeness and thoroughness of her report .
This is an important subject : it ensures the solvency and financial probity of companies and it is especially important in view of the limited liability of companies .
It must be in the interests of the consumer , the investor and the company itself that reliance can be placed on the company 's accounts .
The report deals with five main themes , in my view : the role of the auditor itself , the liability of auditors , the qualifications of auditors and professional regulation , the mobility of auditors in the European Union , and the need for universal standards for the statutory audit .
I particularly agree with the rapporteur 's recommendations in paragraph 11 that auditors should have a minimum level of compulsory insurance and be required to join a guarantee fund .
My group will be supporting the report and , in particular , the amendment by Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi , which adds to the clarity and certainty of paragraph 7 .
I wish to highlight one particular concern : it is believed that Article 51 of the Fourth Company Law Directive has not been properly implemented in Italian law .
It is estimated that 100 000 companies are not receiving a statutory audit in Italy , which puts in danger the reliance which can be placed on the accounts of these particular companies .
It would be helpful if the Commission could address this question , and I understand the Commission has already sent Italy a reasoned opinion in respect of the Eighth Company Law Directive relating to the professional qualifications of auditors .
In conclusion , this may appear to be a dry subject but is in fact of great importance for the proper functioning of the economy in the European Union ; it is a measure of protection for consumers and investors and should be supported for those very reasons .
Madam Commissioner , it is difficult to add anything else to what the previous speakers have said in regard to the importance of the statutory audit .
It is difficult because , in an ever more complex society , you will frequently find different interpretations as to the legal parameters of the companies being expressed .
And I am only going to quote two examples , which the rapporteur has pointed out with the accuracy which has characterized all her work . Two of the examples she has mentioned , financial engineering - the socalled financial engineering - or the qualification of credits can spoil the given picture , which is a true and real picture , the one set down in the company 's accounts .
Such ambiguity , of course , makes it necessary to look back to the security of mercantile traffic , for society as a whole , between the services of these professionals which , to give them their due , have to respond to the features of independence , free competition , responsibility and clear rules which have been mentioned .
But these are concerns which worry everybody - states , companies , consumers alike .
Perhaps we should also mention that there has been competition since the treaties , that is to say competition to shape the internal market .
Firstly that competition is exclusive ; we are not dealing with areas of shared competition where the principle of subsidiarity acts as an authoritative principle for that competition .
Here competition belongs to the European Institutions .
That should be made perfectly clear .
It has been pointed out , but it must be emphasized .
Secondly , without doubt , this has to be set against the question of how far is it necessary to take action . However much competition is exclusive , no-one considers it appropriate to act more than is strictly necessary to achieve the objectives of harmonization and consolidation of the internal market which the Treaties specify .
For that reason , if spontaneous harmonization of these rules could be produced , which have been shown , day after day , to be completely different in the Member States , this task of setting rules and regulations - that is community competition - would not need to be carried out .
In this case , as in so many others , the best authority is the one which does not have to take action but may initiate the action process .
In this sense I wish to emphasize that the sectors concerned are carrying out an important consultation programme , within the Member States , in order to attain such spontaneous harmonization .
So as it is , we have community competition which must be put into practice .
Indeed it has been put into practice .
Not only the Fourth Directive for accountancy , which has been mentioned , but the Seventh Directive too and the Bank sector and Insurance directives refer to the function of the statutory audit .
And it is certain , as has also been said , that in some cases - specifically in Article 51 of the Fourth Directive relating to annual accounts - it is not administered very well , but today we are discussing about another question : about lege ferenda , for which we must establish norms .
This is a problem .
Certainly , the matter of excessive concentration in large auditing companies is a process in which we are immersed . No longer do we have the big six , but now even less than that and recently we have often had occasion to listen to or read such news in the media - which does not affect the Green Paper ; they are questions concerning the Department of Competition in the Commission and , certainly too , it is the Commission 's task to monitor the strict application of the Treaties .
Here we are talking about something else .
We are talking about what must be done , about how to establish standards in order to reach such an internal market , to establish coherent and harmonized rules in the different Member States . Mrs Sierra 's report , which takes up the idea from the Committee , is one that the Group of the European People 's Party - on whose behalf I am speaking - is going to support with the qualification that it puts forward in the amendment set down in paragraph 7 , about which I will now speak .
Basically , this concerns the contents of the auditing reports .
It cannot be that in one Member State such obligatory content is one thing and in another something entirely different , regarding the external and internal auditor , the practice of that profession - this is a liberal institution - , the creation of subsidiaries and the guarantee for the free flow of these services .
Likewise the idea from the technical committee becomes clear - as has already been mentioned - and , finally , we need to set clear limits on what are parallel services , which in a straightforward , trading and entrepreneurial expansion auditing companies tend to deliver .
This need to be independent , this need to portray an unbiased view , and to show that they are absolutely unconnected with the company that they are auditing , ensures that they have to guarantee not to prejudge any solutions ; this is the point of the PPE amendment . However , the Commission needs to address the problem of how to establish or guarantee such independence , particularly in relation to legal services since , the legal adviser is an independent professional but one who is partisan , who is within the company , who has his own interests .
His role has to be well and clearly separated from the role of the auditor who , and I finish with this , if he is to be anything , must be totally independent .
Mr President , let me start by thanking the rapporteur for her careful and extremely in-depth report .
The previous speaker said that a over-concentration of accountancy firms is taking place .
The rapporteur says the two things are unrelated , but they are definitely related .
Just as the large financial conglomerates , the banks and the insurance companies , have now merged , we are also seeing that in the service industries all kinds of professional groups are now amalgamating ; lawyers , notaries , tax specialists , and consultants .
Now it appears that the accountant , previously the prototype of a dry , upright figure working on his own who would only get a look in to see that figures entered in the books were correct , has now become someone who also intervenes in what happens in companies . Herein lies the responsibility of the Commission given the fact that there is no harmonized European fiscal legislation .
How can we tackle this ?
It appears that these international mergers between large accountancy firms and consultants are indeed due to this fact , and that the Commission neglected once again to achieve fiscal harmonization , which plays an important role while the Member States did not get involved because they did not want to . However , the Commission is in favour of it .
This also means that the professional risks accountants run at the moment differ widely .
Because they vary between billions in the case of the BCCI to a legally limited risk of DM 500 000 in the Federal Republic .
This is such a big difference , Mr President , that something simply must be done about it .
We do not want accumulation .
That is why we submitted our amendment to paragraph 7 .
I think the amendment by Mrs Palacio goes just a little too far ; it leaves too much room for manoeuvre .
It is crucial for the consumer and for small companies , that in addition to pure control , a mild form of consultation is allowed to continue .
We would like to retain this for the benefit of the consumer .
Mr President , Mrs Sierra González has tackled a variety of complex issues in her report .
However , in commenting on the Commission 's Green Paper I believe it is our task to pose questions and to point directions rather than to deal with it as if it were legislation .
There are micro and macro sides to the problems .
The micro aspect covers minimum standards for the auditing exercise .
Financial reports of any enterprises , including trusts and charities , should be subject to similar rules right across the Community , and there should be mutual recognition of the qualifications of those empowered to sign audit reports .
The Commission has not been very successful in bringing about the implementation of all the directives which have already been placed on the statute book .
Article 51 of the Fourth Directive has been mentioned by two colleagues , and implementation of the Eighth Directive in all Member States also calls for more work by the Commission .
Of course it would be helpful if all the Member States had similar statutory requirements of financial accounts , and that is something which is yet to come .
From the macro point of view it must be recognized that business has gone global during the time that we have been trying to achieve harmonized audit standards .
Multinational companies , international companies and - hopefully one day - European companies will require harmonized audit rules to be in place .
Naturally , the professions have moved with the times themselves and several auditing firms have become global in their activity .
I feel a personal worry about the over-concentration of these firms into too few hands .
It is my belief that there should be at least five multinational audit groups in the world .
This is more necessary now that these firms offer advice and consultancy .
Shareholders need to know that advice being offered to their companies is truly independent .
The theory of Chinese walls is not good enough .
Of course I realise Commissioner Gradin will tell me that the regulations concerning those problems are not part of this exercise , but those problems are looming and need to be ventilated and understood .
Paragraph 7 has caused some problems and the wording of Amendment No 1 by Mrs Palacio does not in fact make absolutely clear what she intended , but her explanation this morning in the debate has made it clear that we can support that amendment .
This group supports Mrs González 's report .
Mr President , this debate concerns the future of auditing in Europe .
Auditing and accounting are sometimes regarded as specialist topics which do not deserve any political attention .
However , good auditing increases the likelihood that financial information is reliable . And reliable financial information is important for the single market .
Those who make use of accounts regard the auditor 's report as a guarantee that the calculations are reliable .
There are few rules about auditing at the EU level .
We have different auditing systems in the Member States , both with regard to the content of the audit and the standards to which it should be carried out .
In many cases this lack of consensus obstructs the operation of the single market .
It was against this background that the Commission issued its Green Paper , in order to start a highlevel debate in Europe on these issues .
That was received well at a conference which the Commission arranged in December 1996 .
More than 200 representatives of government and business expressed their general support for the approach in the Green Paper .
The position of the European Parliament is very important for our analysis .
Your opinions will help us in the Commission to soon be able to draw up a Communication on auditing .
Let me pick out some points of view .
We are all agreed about starting work on creating a mechanism for auditing standards at the EU level .
This mechanism may take the form of a technical sub-committee to the contact committee for the auditing directive .
The sub-committee would consist of representatives of the Member States and professional bodies .
I agree that users of auditor 's reports should be closely connected with the work of the technical sub-committee .
The sub-committee will in particular follow the work of the professional bodies and in due time show us whether legislation is required to achieve the objectives .
The amendments tabled here concerning the independence of the auditors illustrate how important this question is , especially at a time when there is uncertainty about the future shape of the profession .
Those who use auditor 's reports have to be able to rely on the auditor being independent .
Therefore it is necessary to decide what services other than auditing services which an auditor may carry out , and to ensure that these rules are followed .
If the professional body does what is required , all well and good .
If not we must consider legislation , because we are all agreed that the auditor has a key role in the company 's control and supervision system .
The Commission and the new sub-committee shall consider the various proposals which have been made in connection with the Green Paper and , of course , on the basis of the report which we are now debating here in Parliament .
The question of the professional liability of auditors is very complex .
We need to examine more closely how various systems affect the single market .
On this point the Commission is currently carrying out a separate study on how questions of liability are dealt with in different countries .
We are agreed that all current regulations in Member States which restrict the Treaty 's fundamental provisions on freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services should be abolished .
The Treaty provisions are fully applicable to trade in auditing services .
We must make greater progress with regard to facilitating mutual recognition of auditors ' qualifications between the Member States .
With these points of view I would also like to give thanks to the rapporteur for a good piece of work .
Thank you , Commissioner Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 : 00 .
Alpine transit
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-1009 / 97 - O-0111 / 97 , by Mr Simpson , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission , on negotiations between the UN and Switzerland on overland transport ; -B4-1014 / 97 - O-0138 / 97 , by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on EU-Switzerland negotiations on land transport ; -B4-1105 / 97 - O-0180 / 97 , by Mr Jarzembowski , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission , on negotiations between the European Union and Switzerland in the land transport sector ; -B4-1106 / 97 - O-0181 / 97 , by Mr Santini , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , to the Commission , on Alpine transit ; -B4-1107 / 97 - O-0183 / 97 , by Mr Wijsenbeek , on behalf of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Commission , on Alpine transit ; -B4-1108 / 97 - O-0184 / 97 , by Mrs Leperre-Verrier , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on Alpine transit ; -B4-1015 / 97 - O-0185 / 97 , by Mr Puerta and Mr Papyannakis , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Commission , on Alpine transit .
Mr President , my remarks will be very much tailored towards the Commission .
This particular issue - the issue of a transit agreement with Switzerland - has involved a long-running series of negotiations .
It is rather like climbing a ladder : we seem to go up one or two rungs and then something happens which means that we slip down one or two rungs and end up right back where we started .
At the moment , the problem seems to centre around the level of road tax levy on heavy goods vehicles passing through Swiss territory .
We need to recognize that other problems arise because of this lack of an agreement .
The congestion in Austria and Italy on the Brenner route is now so serious that the environment is being totally devastated and people who are avoiding Switzerland face great hold-ups .
But there is also congestion on the French side of the Alps .
The EU Member States are facing problems because we have failed to reach an agreement with the Swiss .
We must also recognize the need to protect the Alpine environment , including the Alpine areas of Switzerland .
The Swiss Government has , in recent weeks , shown some flexibility in the negotiations .
That is to be welcomed .
However , we need an agreement urgently - not at any cost , that has to be stated - that recognizes the needs and aspirations of both the European Union and Switzerland .
I am grateful for the efforts in the past of Commissioner Kinnock and of the recent presidencies of the Netherlands and Luxembourg .
The fact that the UK Presidency has taken on board this issue of an agreement shows how important it is .
We need an agreement .
We can all go to the barricades and defend our strong positions .
The Swiss can hide behind the Alps .
The European Union can hide behind its need for this transit .
But if we do that , then the danger is that we will not get an agreement and the people who will suffer are the people of Austria , in the Brenner , of France and of Italy .
Therefore I ask for a redoubling of our efforts to try to get this important transit agreement with Switzerland signed , sealed and delivered .
Mr President , my group would like the Commission , in this case Commissioner van de Broek , to tell us whether the European efforts during the negotiations with Switzerland can be reconciled with the obligations the European Union committed itself to at an earlier time ?
I am referring on the one hand to the transit agreement with Switzerland , but on the other hand to the Alpine Convention .
According to the Alpine Convention which was signed by all Member States , and is therefore simply binding on us , the Union has committed itself to making efforts to switch transport across the Alps from road to rail .
It says in the transit agreement that lorries passing through Switzerland must be charged the external costs , in particular the environmental costs .
In the light of the obligations I do not consider it justifiable for the Commission and the Council to resist Switzerland 's ambitions for a sufficiently high levy on heavy goods vehicles to bring about an actual transfer from road to rail .
I would like to recall once more the Swiss referendum of 1994 which laid down that transit traffic must switch to rail before the year 2005 .
In the current negotiations with Switzerland , the Union is showing disgracefully little respect for the constitution of Switzerland , which is , after all , a sovereign country .
Neighbourliness is cynically sacrificed to the interests of the road haulage lobby .
I have to add , in particular Dutch road haulage , in this case .
To my regret Minister Jorritsma is allowing himself to be used by the Netherlands , distribution country par excellence , as a kind of ventriloquist 's dummy .
Last Tuesday , this Parliament , in Mr Sarlis ' report , underlined once again that transalpine transport should occur by rail as much as possible .
We must be consistent , we must ensure that we actually realize this , and this means that we will have to take steps towards Switzerland .
Mr President , I cannot entirely agree with the previous speaker , although I would like to .
This is not a question of Dutch interests , if it were I should indeed be on your side , rather it is a question of Greek , Italian , Austrian , German , French and English interests . And I could cite many other Member States .
Quite simply , we need to transit through the Alps .
As far as we are concerned , it is not acceptable for the Swiss to say : We are happy in our isolation .
Do whatever you want in the Brenner . Do whatever you want in France .
We 're shutting up shop and going home ! My dear colleague , we could also let the Swiss know that anyone who makes it economically impossible for us to transit through Switzerland should watch out that we don 't make coming out of Switzerland economically impossible , not to put to fine a point on it !
It is not acceptable that the interests of our businessmen and consumers are treated as if we constantly have to kowtow .
Quite the opposite , we can use a two-track approach .
We want to protect the environment .
We want to move to rail . But I see no evidence that what the Swiss government wanted to do in order to move to rail has actually happened yet .
To be honest , neither can I see any evidence that the Austrians , the Germans and the Italians are making as much progress with the Brenner Base Tunnel as they should be .
But we can 't blame the fact that we haven 't got further with the railway on the heavy goods transporters and then clout them with exorbitant charges .
Let me say it once quite bluntly : It is not acceptable for the Swiss to expect us to be grateful for dropping their claim for the passage from 410 to 360 Swiss francs .
That is still unacceptable .
We must tell the Swiss this .
We must also tell them that they are part of a larger picture , namely the land transport debate .
There are also many other issues which play a role in the negotiations .
Our colleagues in Switzerland will have to think about what it is they want .
I don 't mind taking the part of the Swiss government .
Thanks to their constitution they are in an extremely difficult position .
However , I don 't think they can simply announce that they 're introducing an output-related heavy goods vehicle tax , say this is our standard and expect the rest of Europe to fall into line , just because they , the Swiss , say so !
We can 't work together on that basis .
I hope that the Swiss recognise that workers in Greece and Italy also have an interest in getting their goods to market .
For this reason I believe we must tell the Swiss that we cannot and will not accept exorbitant charges .
I would also say to some of the members of this House , including my colleague Mrs van Dijk : I often hear you say : If you would drop at least as far as the Austrian Brenner rate , we would be happy .
My response is No !
If my memory serves me correctly , this Parliament supported the Commission in its legal action against the last toll increase in the Brenner .
I would like to remind you that the Commission won 't forget that .
And so we should both press for a quick agreement with the Swiss .
But , as Brian Simpson said , not at any price .
Mr President , it seems clear that there are two main players involved in this game . On one side there are the citizens of Europe who , when it comes to this type of regulation , tend to defend their own territory , the environment , and thus their own lives ; and on the other side - and we cannot dismiss these concerns - there are the needs of , for example , the road hauliers and all economic sectors linked to that activity .
If not lives , there are certainly jobs to be defended on that side .
So the Commission has a delicate role to play in the negotiations between Switzerland and the European Union .
Everyone knows that the results of this agreement will also determine the transit conditions for all the other Community Alpine passes , starting with the Brenner , certainly the most delicate , the key point in the great north-south linkage , above all on completion - as soon as possible we hope - of the great rail axis linking , to take a rather optimistic view , Stockholm and Palermo .
But we must return to the narrow scope of the Alpine passes .
A Commission document says that the level of the future road tax should be directly linked to the effective infrastructure costs , and this also relates to the negotiations with Switzerland .
Those costs include the maintenance and modernization of the infrastructure , but not new building or the external costs of road transport .
In parallel , the European Union maintains that the level of road tax in Switzerland should be comparable to that applying to the Brenner .
Clearly there are very close connections between the two dossiers .
Apparently , Commissioner Kinnock actually hoped to be able to conclude the negotiations with Switzerland prior to agreement by the Fifteen on the Euro-stamp .
Austria was hoping so too because , in short , they were waiting to find out what the Swiss toll would be so as to apply a heavier one to the Brenner and thus encourage the largest lorries to go through Switzerland .
They are just keeping to the rules of the game , in sporting terms , and the Commission needs to be very careful to referee properly , because the agreement with Switzerland is at stake and so is internal credibility .
The Brenner has already received special treatment in the great Alpine passes dispute thanks , remember , to a compromise plan based on four main points : a different tariff system , with vehicles classified Euro 0 , Euro I and Euro II ; a reduction of 50 % for countries like Greece and Ireland which have asked for this special tariff because of their geographic location ; temporary derogations , up to the end of 1999 , for Spain , France , Italy , Portugal and Greece . But there is also a general Alpine clause , with a specific fiscal regime for the Brenner already identified .
So I would like the Commissioner to explain the purpose of these guidelines , how the negotiations with Switzerland may alter them , as there are also figures given by the Commission : for example a daytime toll of ECU 72 is mentioned for a Euro 0 lorry , that is , a lorry in the four axles and over category , with ECU 165 for a night crossing .
This situation becomes even more acute if we take a look at the statistics , which are important and show that in 2001 only 15 % of transit will be by rail and water and 81 % by road ; at the moment the equivalent percentage is 72 % .
So a solution must be urgently found , alongside the one , Mr Commissioner , mentioned here many times , of completing the rail infrastructure to give the road hauliers a genuine alternative .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , it is high time something was done .
Because as long as the agreement has not been signed , there are unnecessary traffic diversions .
This also means that where the lorries cross the Brenner route , we are giving the Austrians an opportunity to squeeze us unilaterally .
It is good that the Commission is presently initiating a procedure against this .
Mrs van Dijk and Mr Voggenhuber may keep repeating over and over again that freight has got to go by rail , but there are no facilities .
There are too few facilities for getting lorries onto the railways .
The height of the Lötschberg and Gotthard Tunnels have not been altered yet , and in Austria , absolutely nothing has been done about the Brenner railway .
This means that we find ourselves in a situation in which we simply have to reach an agreement .
That is also the fault of the Member States , which have left the Commission too little room to manoeuvre in the mandate .
In a word , we agree that in the negotiations with Switzerland we must start with the right measurements .
As a Community we therefore have to contribute to the fact that the Swiss in the new alpine transit tunnel agreement have promised us to alter , and indeed are in the process of , altering the height of two tunnels .
They have stopped the work on one of the tunnels in the meantime , and it is still not possible to get on the train in Basel and to get off again at Chiasso .
The Swiss had promised this .
In a word , I would like to call on the Commission once more to enter into the negotiations in all peacefulness and openness .
Mr President , we meet here today to discuss an important question .
For months , negotiations with Switzerland have been at a standstill because of the transport problem .
We therefore urgently need to take stock of the progress of our relationship with our Alpine neighbour .
It seems that the Swiss authorities have agreed to make concessions .
We therefore would like the Commission to give us some specific information on progress , which has been mentioned in the press .
In fact , the problem of crossing Switzerland is of some consequence with regard to road traffic in the whole of the Alps .
For that reason , I and the whole of my group consider that the EU 's relationship with Switzerland with regard to transport cannot be isolated from the overall context of Alpine transit , and that the disastrous effects of the increase in road traffic on the environment must be taken into consideration urgently .
Let me give a single example : the level of pollution in the valley of Chamonix is as high as in a large town because of the Mont Blanc Tunnel .
It is therefore understandable that the inhabitants of the Mont-Blanc area , and also the Val d 'Aosta area , should express concern with regard to the possible construction of a second tunnel .
However , there are solutions .
First of all , settling the dispute with Switzerland and setting up a pricing system , which will encourage the use of pollution control equipment .
Secondly , and this is a very important aspect , promoting rail transport and developing piggyback transport systems .
Of course , the changeover from road to rail will be expensive , and will necessitate large investments . But do not let us forget that this is a solution for the future .
Within this context , the Lyon to Turin HST link , including freight transport , when the Monmélian to Turin rail tunnel is built , will facilitate combined transport in the Alps .
It is therefore necessary to make this project a reality and for the Member States to commit themselves to building the necessary infrastructures .
Furthermore , special attention should be paid to the rail project linking Geneva via Mâcon , Bourg-en-Bresse or Chambéry .
The new President of the Swiss Republic has made optimistic remarks on the future relationship between the European Union and Switzerland .
Let us hope that it will enable us to sort out this difficult situation .
Thank you , Mrs Leperre-Verrier .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is something I wanted to ask you .
Mr Baldarelli has asked if he can bring his speech forward as he has to leave immediately for Italy .
I do not have competence to change the order of the agenda and the order of precedence in the right to speak , but , if no-one objects , I could satisfy Mr Baldarelli 's request with the recommendation that he shorten his speech .
If no-one objects , that is what I will do .
Mr President , I think we should hear the Commissioner and then no one else , otherwise we will have to plan another round .
It is not acceptable that anyone should be given preference .
I suggest that the Commissioner speak , that we finish and take the vote .
No other speakers should be allowed to speak after the Commissioner .
Thank you , Mr Jarzembowski .
Naturally , there is an objection .
Mr Baldarelli , I cannot grant your request .
Mr President , this debate is certainly taking place at an interesting time , both because of the phase which the negotiations with Switzerland have now reached , and because the current phase in the internal discussion within the Union is particularly centred on road transport charging .
As the honourable Members of Parliament know , realistic progress was made during the most recent Transport Council last month .
The Commission continues to hope that during the presidency , our work concerning the most important obstacles can be completed in a satisfactory way .
I would like to point out that although this debate is concentrating on transport problems , the negotiations with Switzerland cover a large number of dossiers , and that the agreement within the Union , which the Commission also wishes to retain , is that the negotiations in the different sectors must be brought to a balanced completion , both within the sectors as such , and between the sectorial dossiers .
As far as overland transport is concerned , we have always striven towards laying the foundations for the gradual development of a cohesive policy and the achievement of comparable conditions for sustainable transport across the Alps .
We have made considerable progress towards agreement with the Swiss , and agree with Switzerland on the following points .
Increases in the maximum weight of lorries in Switzerland from 28 to 40 tonnes in two phases , which will commence in 2001 and which must be completed in 2005 .
This in combination with the introduction of a new charging system on a kilometre basis for road transport in Switzerland .
Second point of agreement : liberalization and adjustment of the promise concerning the infrastructure development for railway corridors through Switzerland .
Also liberalization with regard to railway capacity , and as regards the quality and price of the service , in particular for combined transport , as well as a more liberal promise with regard to the integration of the Swiss railway system within the same legislative context in which it also exists in the Union .
Moreover , on the development of so-called high speed freight freeways .
Suitable protective measures have been agreed to remedy the imbalances within Alpine transport .
Lastly , agreement on a number of improvements which can be made immediately on access and transit opportunities for 40 tonne lorries .
As you are aware , there are still considerable differences of opinion on a number of not insignificant details . Particularly as far as the tolls for driving on Swiss roads , to be set in 2001 and 2005 , respectively , are concerned .
Other complex problems relate to the possible levying of tolls on the four most important passes through the Swiss Alps , a ban on night journeys , and transition quotas for 40 tonne lorries .
The Swiss have expressed their sympathy for the Union 's concerns , and as the negotiations progressed , have showed themselves willing to make efforts to meet those concerns on a large number of points .
Now that there is a realistic political willingness on both sides , it can be reasonably assumed that the remaining differences of opinion will also be ironed out .
So far as the so-called equal treatment is concerned , the Commission can confirm that the principle of nondiscrimination would form an integral part in the future agreement with Switzerland , and that both parties agree on this point .
Last year during the talks about the proposal for a Commission Directive concerning user rights for the roads , the so-called Euro-sticker problem , the Transport Council was not prepared to accept the opinions of the Commission on the concept of sensitive areas .
The Council is now looking at the possibility of including an Alpine clause , so that within certain obvious limits , and under certain conditions , a higher user 's levy could be applied on the relevant Austrian route , a higher user 's levy than the average charge .
This clause , combined with a satisfactory outcome to the negotiations with Switzerland , is intended to help spread traffic over the entire Alpine region in a sustainable way , and that this is maintained .
Both the Commission and the Council have pointed out emphatically that , either during the negotiations with Switzerland , or during the talks on the Alpine clause , we cannot agree to an outcome which would make the Alpine route exorbitantly expensive .
To answer Mrs van Dijk , the European Community is obviously party to the Alpine Treaty .
Parliament can therefore rely on the Commission to see to it that the Community will meet its obligations under the Alpine Treaty , and will attune its transport policy to the aims of the Treaty .
The Commission does believe , however , that little will be achieved by designating the entire Alps a sensitive region .
It would be much more useful if agreement could be reached within the Union about the Transport Protocol in the Alpine Convention .
Regrettably one Member State as yet has not been able to agree with the proposals which are acceptable to all parties entering into the agreement .
To conclude , Mr President , it should be mentioned that the Commission was pleased with the result of the Transport Council of the past month in which the Member States asked the Commission to continue negotiations on the basis of Switzerland 's most recent proposal , and to prepare an agreement which , amongst other things , will provide for charges based on infrastructure costs , and which provides for an increase of the quota for 40 tonne lorries for the period 1999-2005 .
No doubt this matter will be looked at again during the next Transport Council in March , after which the Commission will obviously inform this Parliament of the latest developments via the usual channels .
In view of the magnitude of the issue and the lack of time , Mr President , I do not want to go into all the other aspects .
I hope that the esteemed members of Parliament will understand this , and I for my part will of course try to formulate an answer to specific questions at the end of this debate .
The debate will continue at 3 p.m. this afternoon .
Mr President , on a point of order .
There is a rumour going round that a recent edition of the Official Journal , published in the Finnish language , has had to be scrapped and is about to be reprinted .
I should like to ask the presidency to look into this and report back to Parliament the full circumstances .
It appears that it relates to a Parliament advertisement in the Finnish Official Journal seeking , in the Finnish language , to recruit for our Legal Service an A3 , and I quote in as far as I understand Finnish , ' to be in charge of a group of idiots ' .
I have described our Legal Service as all sorts of things but that has not entered the vocabulary .
Could you ask for an investigation to see how it occurred and what steps are being taken to make sure that the culprit pays for the reprinting ?
Thank you , Mr Tomlinson .
I shall ask the Secretary-General to find someone in the services who is not an idiot to respond to you .
Votes
Mr President , this is a short but very complicated report which generated a high level of consensus on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The committee unanimously backed seven amendments .
Several were acceptable to the Commission , as indicated last night , and some were opposed by the Commission .
I believe from the debate , which was adequately attended at 11.30 p.m. last night , that there is room for further exploration and dialogue between Parliament and the Commission on some sensitive aspects of this .
Rather than develop the point and substance at this stage , my preference would be to take advantage of more time for reflection , to refer the report back to committee and then to return here with something acceptable to both institutions .
( Parliament referred the report back to committee )
Yes , Mr President , after discussing this with my colleague , Mr Schwaiger , I would like to propose an oral amendment to simplify the amendment I proposed earlier , to delete the words ' the setting of ' .
So I agree to the removal of the words ' the setting of ' from the amendment I tabled .
( Parliament agreed to the oral amendment )
Mr President , once the word " setting ' has been removed so that the Council of Europe does not set the exchange rate we can adopt this amendment and the whole report .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
We would like to thank the rapporteur for his report .
We think , however , that there is reason to be sceptical about the structure of the system of compensation which the report has to consider .
It is a position which should not be seen as a lack of understanding of the role which the sale of fishery products plays for the Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands and the French department of Guiana , and of the need for solidarity with the peripheral areas of the Community .
However , we believe that structures of the type covered by the proceedings are impeding an essential reform of the common fisheries policy .
The Committee on Fisheries ' legislative proposal does not help to change this relationship , rather the reverse .
d 'Ancona report ( A4-0402 / 97 )
Mr President , the aim of what is called the Eurodac Convention is to set up a European database of fingerprints of asylum seekers , in order to determine , pursuant to the Dublin Convention of 15 June 1990 , which is the Member State of first application , and consequently , which Member State is responsible for examining the application .
The Europe of Nations Group is overall in favour of this Convention , under the inter-governmental system of the present Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union .
We should just like to point out that the Council has not clearly explained all the reasons for its actions , and that is rather a pity , as they are perfectly feasible .
There is no reason why citizens should not know about them .
There are in fact habitual false asylum seekers who , having failed in one Member State , are likely to try their luck in all the others in turn , in order to turn a possible loophole to their advantage .
It would be useful to be able to detect them in order to prevent the same application being considered two , three or four times .
But as these people change their names each time , it is difficult to detect them other than by fingerprinting .
However , the Council has had the bad idea of putting a finger into the Community pie , making the Court of Justice responsible , providing funding from the European budget and consulting the European Parliament on the whole thing , although in our opinion according to Article K.6 , it did not have to .
The result is that this House has leapt into the breach , voting amendments that have put the system back into the hands of the Commission , which has made sure that it is managed entirely by the Community , and is trying to weaken its scope .
Of course , we are opposed to these amendments .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for a thorough piece of work on the report .
We would emphasize that the introduction of a system to compare the fingerprints of asylum seekers is not in itself a guarantee that we will achieve the desired humane and generous asylum policy which means that the Member States together provide asylum seekers a right of asylum .
In order for such an asylum policy to be achieved we need other measures and far-reaching work which will increase the consensus between the Member States on the need for a generous and humane asylum policy .
On the other hand , we think the setting up of Eurodac should be seen in the light of the opportunity to achieve such a generous and humane asylum policy within the European Union .
The amendments to the Council 's legislation which are expressed in the report entail a strengthening of the natural right of integrity of asylum seekers , which we see as a good reason to support the report .
We are very critical of the Council 's proposal to set up the Eurodac database .
Eurodac could result in a far more restrictive and brutal refugee policy by the Member States in the European Union .
Every application for asylum must be dealt with separately , regardless of whether the asylum seeker has previously sought asylum in another EU country .
We are therefore critical of the grounds for setting up the Eurodac database , which are that an application for asylum should only be dealt with in one country .
Our view is that refugees should have the same right of personal integrity as our citizens .
We take exception to the routine taking of fingerprints of refugees .
The logic of this rule also means that in extreme cases force and violence may be required against people from the age of 14 years .
The rules which exist for the erasing of data from the central database are also inadequate .
In the current computer system the guarantees are insufficient to ensure that all data has really been erased .
It must also be clear that no data on people who have received a residence permit in one of the EU 's Member States should remain on the database .
The supervisory authority 's powers need to be further clarified .
The same also applies to the ability of asylum seekers to obtain information about their rights and to check the accuracy of the data .
The draft report directs substantial criticism against Eurodac with which we agree .
We are therefore voting for the report in its entirety in the final vote .
However , we have voted against certain parts of the report .
The European Commission is a bureaucratic institution with very weak democratic control .
Secondly , we are strongly opposed to the Council being able to make decisions by qualified majority voting in the implementation of Eurodac .
Our fundamental view is that cooperation on this kind of issue should be conducted at intergovernmental level .
Today the Danish Social Democrats voted for a report concerning the setting up of a database ( Eurodac ) of the fingerprints of asylum seekers .
We believe that such a database is a necessary tool when deciding which Member State is responsible for dealing with an application for asylum presented within the EU .
Eurodac can also help prevent asylum seekers becoming political footballs between the different countries because no-one will accept responsibility for dealing with their case .
It can also help to prevent cheating , i.e. prevent asylum seekers from changing identity after being rejected by one Member State .
We support the d 'Ancona report because it emphasizes the fact that the database must not compromise the asylum seeker 's legal protection .
We also believe it could be an advantage both with regard to efficiency and data protection to involve the Commission in the administration of the database .
The National Front has always and will always fight against illegal immigration .
Efficient control of asylum applications and criteria is one of the means of stemming the migratory flow .
The Eurodac computerised system of recognition of the fingerprints of asylum seekers , makes it possible to bring together any legal or criminal information about them , and thus enables a Member State to have some control of asylum requests .
On sight of the personal data available on an individual , the Member State can grant or conclusively refuse an asylum application .
In this report , Mrs d 'Ancona proposes to take away from Member States their supreme authority in this respect .
She considers that the Eurodac system should be managed by the Commission and not by the Member States .
She also introduces more restrictive limits to the use of the system .
Once again , it a question of the dissolution of the Member States and their authority , in an area which , by nature , should belong to them .
The aberration imposed by the Treaty of Amsterdam , which brings the laws and internal affairs of Member States within the scope of the Community , is once again apparent here , in all its splendour .
The great European ' sieve ' is becoming more and more of a reality .
We have had the Europe of Schengen , which removed the internal borders of the European Union , and here we have the Europe of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which is removing its external borders .
The undersigned Members are very critical of the Eurodac database which the Council wants to set up .
Eurodac is part of the far more restrictive and brutalizing refugee policy which is emerging within the EU , a policy which often means that refugees are treated as if they were criminals .
We think that every application for asylum should be dealt with separately , regardless of whether the asylum seeker has previously sought asylum in another EU country .
We therefore question the basis of the Eurodac system , the aim of which is that an application for asylum should only be dealt with in one country .
We believe that refugees have the same right of personal integrity as other people .
It is therefore unreasonable to routinely take the fingerprints of refugees .
This is particularly serious because in extreme cases such a rule requires that force and violence may be used against people from the age of 14 years .
We think that the rules on erasing data on the central database are inadequate .
Obviously nobody who has received a residence permit in a Member State should risk having his or her data remaining on the database .
We also think the supervisory authority 's powers are unclear and inadequate .
The same applies to the ability of asylum seekers to obtain information about their rights and to check the accuracy of the data .
In Mrs d 'Ancona 's report substantial criticism is directed against Eurodac , criticism which largely corresponds with our views .
We have , however , voted against all parts of the report which mean that the Commission would be responsible for the database .
The European Commission is a body which is under very weak democratic control .
We also think that cooperation on this kind of issue should be intergovernmental .
Erika Mann report ( A4-0403 / 97 )
We have voted for the resolution because we think it would be correct to develop economic and commercial relations with the USA .
At the same time , however , we think that the resolution avoids criticizing the USA on several points where it would have been proper to do so .
For example , on the issue of human rights it would have been appropriate to point out that a majority of the States in the USA use the death penalty .
On the issue of the environment , attention could have been drawn to the USA 's opposition to more extensive international agreements in the area of the environment , most recently manifested in Kyoto .
As far as the labour market is concerned , attention could be drawn to the strong anti-union actions which many US employers take , often with the full acceptance of the authorities .
Sierra González report ( A4-0399 / 97 )
Mr President , the report by Mrs Sierra González relates to the use of the information society , that is , more clearly , electronic means such as the Internet , in the service of economic and social cohesion and to combat unemployment .
We cannot fail to approve her wish to see the information society of use to all , including and particularly , the least developed regions and the most underprivileged people .
We also appreciate her proposal to increase training throughout people 's careers , or indeed the determination to respect multi-lingualism within the information society .
Furthermore , the report rightly emphasizes the positive effect , which the information society can have on rural areas .
Thanks to teleworking , which can enable many types of professional activity to be carried out in the country , it can be an important factor of balanced development of urban and rural areas .
However , it is necessary for us to ensure that the information society does not become a two-edged sword .
Once again , may I emphasize the danger that these new technologies could facilitate the relocation of part of the service sector of the European Union to countries where wages are low and social protection is poor ?
European companies are already having their accounts or customer service departments transferred to India or Singapore .
This constitutes a serious risk to employment in the Community , which we must take adequate measures to counter .
We are also pleased to note that the rapporteur has taken a keen interest in our concern with regard to this matter .
That is why the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has decided to support Mrs Sierra González 's report , and at the same time , applauds its consensual nature .
The report on cohesion and the information society , on which we will vote today , is complementary to the Green Paper entitled ' Living and working in the Information Society - People First ' .
This document has the merit of analysing the consequences of the emergence of new information and communications technologies ( ICT ) on cohesion and on the various regions of the European Union .
For my part , I will confine myself to two areas : the consequences for individual citizens and the effect on regional disparities .
As far as the human dimension is concerned , for several years , we have concentrated our efforts on the development of the above-mentioned technologies from the angle of the development of employment .
As the excellent report by my colleague , Mrs Sierra González stresses , it is not certain that they will create more jobs than they destroy .
However , they must be developed in a manner that puts the individual first .
With regard to training , young people must be able to keep up with the developments of this new society .
We must start by making an effort to ensure that primary and secondary schools and training centres have the right equipment .
Thanks to this new equipment , a qualified , efficient labour force will emerge , and will be in great demand .
We must also make an effort at the level of the economic operator .
I am referring to measures to support SMEs and SMIs .
As they themselves become users of new technologies , they are becoming a source of highly qualified jobs .
As far as the geographical dimension is concerned , it is obvious that the development of ICTs is likely to increase regional disparities .
One only has to consider that in terms of users , the percentage ownership of computers , particularly in rural areas , is low .
We must therefore make an effort with regard to infrastructure and encourage the creation of networks .
As Mrs Sierra González ' report rightly emphasizes , barely 2 % of the structural funds have the right finality .
Until now , the action taken has been confined to basic equipment ( telephone lines , etc ) .
The areas in which the structural funds are used must be reviewed , in order to diversify .
Access to new information and communication technologies can be facilitated if we make room for them in schools , libraries and public centres .
Similarly , let us support the innovative experiments of SMEs , and accompanying measures in their favour .
The Commission , which could act as a driving force , must provide encouragement using the resources it has available .
In the introduction to her report , Mrs Sierra González states that the information society is the most significant economic , cultural and political challenge of these final years of the century .
I concur with that statement , although I am very concerned about the current process of globalization and interdependence of economies .
I am afraid that cohesion within the European Union may be endangered by the unequal division of the benefits of technological progress .
In fact there is the risk that the investments will be delayed in some regions .
The spread of technology does not mean automatic sharing of opportunities and the enormous benefits .
The development of the information society absolutely must be complemented by adequate political action which guarantees even development across all the regions of the European Union .
This is because there are countries where the culture of the information society is more widespread than elsewhere , and naturally they have greater opportunities to utilize the new technologies and advance and prosper in this new work environment .
The great challenge for the European Union as a whole is that 30 % of Americans are interested in this development , while only 2 % of Europeans are .
This gives the United States a clear advantage over us , which means we have to trail behind .
It is a shame , because we have great potential but we are not succeeding in fulfilling it so , we are losing jobs compared to the USA .
We need to be more united and we particularly need to devote more resources to research and development .
The continuous use of the technology by SMEs will constitute an essential factor for competitiveness .
The information society offers the SMEs the possibility of creating highly specialized new jobs and reducing unemployment .
Above all in the less favoured regions and in the rural areas , the SMEs represent the backbone of the local economy .
The rapid evolution of modern technology and the globalization of markets influences competitive conditions and creates new opportunities for SMEs . They then have an essential role in increasing the economic and social cohesion of the European Union .
Mr President , many of the less developed regions of the European Union suffer from the problem of peripherality .
Technological advance particularly in the context of the information society is one method of overcoming the problem of geographical dislocation .
Information and communication technologies have a significant contribution to make to boosting both the overall competitiveness of Europe and also improving regional cohesion .
Unfortunately , however , different regions are moving at a different pace because of the imbalance in their respective use of information technology .
In order to halt this unequal development it is important that more structural funding is invested in this area .
There is also a lot to be gained from the sharing of experience in this field .
I would like to draw the Commission 's attention to an innovative pilot experiment that is being introduced in my constituency in Ennis , Co . Clare .
Ennis was selected in a competition organised by Telecom Eireann and designated as an ' Information Age Town ' and the project will examine the benefits of the application of many aspects of information and communication technology .
I would hope that the Commission will monitor this and similar projects in other countries to discover what lessons can be learnt and applied to other parts of the European Union in an attempt to contribute to regional cohesion .
Mrs Sierra González has given us an excellent piece of work , and I cannot fail to agree with her vision of the utility and shared benefits of the information society .
Indeed , as the elected representative of the Nord-Pas-de-Calais region , I can see that the availability of new information technologies and their use , by companies of course , but also by individual citizens , can enable an underprivileged area affected by a high level of unemployment , to catch up economically and socially .
That is what is happening in my region .
Our rapporteur is therefore right to emphasize the need to give all regions an opportunity to invest in telecommunications and information infrastructures .
This sector is as important as training and vocational qualifications and / or the role played by the public and private sectors .
This should be a national priority as well as a European priority .
It is one of the means of combating exclusion .
Once again , based on the practical example of my region - without the help of European programmes such as web for school and net days , our regional and local authorities would not have been able on their own to provide our young people with the information technology equipment which they now have available .
That is why I support the rapporteur , so that the aid she asks for may be generalised and even extended .
The Commission 's findings and estimates , and much more so those in the report by Mrs Sierra Gonzáles , reflect today 's reality of unequally distributed possibilities for access to and real utilization of the information society among Europe 's various regions .
However , the proposals in the Commission 's Green Paper do not respond to the needs created by technological progress and the aspirations of Europe 's peoples for making the most of it to reduce and eliminate regional inequalities and to improve the living standards of working people .
On the contrary , the proposed liberalization of the telecommunications market will downgrade the services offered , especially in less-developed areas , and will make it more difficult for citizens , organizations and businesses to have access to the networks , so increasing the already existing inequalities .
The lack of infrastructure and appropriate equipment to make the most of the potential offered by today 's electronic systems and multimedia , especially in remote areas which have considerable difficulty in connecting up to central networks because of the high costs involved , as well as the lack of education and training in their perfection and use , constitute a negative factor for development leading to an extension of the gap between the information haves and have-nots .
A central element of these proposals is to further the increase of profits for the major enterprises in the sector , to the cost of public services and of the social role which they should play .
The abolition of public services , and of the corresponding obligation of the state to ensure the access of all citizens to the services offered , cannot be replaced by deceptive and false statements about universal services whose content remains unknown , and which are essentially a cover to allow the way to open towards still greater overconcentration of capital and of the means that control the transmission and spread of information , ultimately ending in the creation of a huge industry of news and information production as is already happening in many cases with SMEs .
To promote those aims a tactic is being mobilized to avert social reaction and create a new organization of labour .
An element of that organization is the proposed spread of tele-employment , which will have strikingly detrimental effects on the social , unionistic and employment rights of working people .
How are businesses with ' outdated ' means and restricted access to investment capital to compete with the vast multinational organizations ?
The abolition of state support and the limited Community subsidies , which for example provide financial assistance for telecommunications from the structural funds only to an extent of 2 % , operate to prohibit indiscriminate access to all the information available on the network and equal and impartial conditions of connection and interaction .
However , the people and the workers will not allow the implementation of plans whose result would be to exacerbate the already existing differences . They will react against the already perceptible dangers of dislocation , isolation and depression of remote and structurally weak areas , and will not allow the ambitions of capital to entrap and bleed dry the ' grey matter ' of Europe and bring about the suppression of citizens ' rights , acquisitions and liberties .
Waddington report ( A4-0405 / 97 )
I was very interested to read the report by Mr Waddington , whom I wish to congratulate .
There is no doubt that whenever the European Parliament has to vote on a subject relating to employment , there is no lack of lively debate between political currents and political powers .
Whereas the Luxembourg Employment Summit in November concentrated mainly on training , the rapporteur has rightly observed that there is a wide gap between the political commitments and the proposals made by the Commission in this area .
I sometimes wonder why some of our Commissioners , always eager to advocate ever more liberalism , suddenly become paralysed , when the question of combating unemployment arises .
I cannot believe that they have no wish to combat this scourge .
So I support the questions Mr Waddington has asked the Commission without reservations .
I hope the Commission will reply .
I approve of the direction of this report , which wants a close connection between access to training and the organization of work .
We cannot and must not isolate the various problems relating to employment .
The solutions are only effective inasmuch as they are interdependent .
I therefore share Mr Waddington 's concern with regard to the need for the professional diversification of female workers .
I think that we need to go further in this diversification , which should not be confined to women , equality is obligatory ...
We must be wary of the pitfalls of training mainly for jobs relating to new technologies and services .
Many such jobs are of low value and cannot be multiplied indefinitely .
Disappointments are in store for us .
Once again , I should like to congratulate Mr Waddington .
Like him , I would like some serious proposals from the Commission .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted for a report on access to continuing training in the European Union .
It is very important to focus attention on continuing training and further education in the present time , when adaptability and flexibility are of crucial importance for the chances of workers to cope in a constantly changing employment market .
The competitiveness of European businesses depends to a large extent on our efforts in the area of continuing training .
If we do not pay attention to these challenges it will cost jobs in Europe .
We therefore support a report which calls for comparable statistics on continuing training in the Member States and recommends the setting up of a reporting system on access to training .
We are particularly pleased that the rapporteur puts great emphasis on the equal opportunities aspect and the problems women can have with regard to access to continuing training .
Finally , we would also like to support the request to the social partners at the European level to enter into framework agreements on training .
Hermange report ( A4-0292 / 97 )
We have reason to thank the rapporteur for carrying out the work on this report .
The report concerns an area which is important for our ability to increase productivity and employment , something which is also emphasized in the Committee 's draft resolution .
However , we would like to express a view on one point .
We are critical of government stimuli in the form of tax concessions in line with what is said in the first indent of paragraph 9 of the report .
As far as the opportunity for employees to share in company profits is concerned , we think this is a matter for the social partners , and it is the duty of society to remain neutral and not to intervene through tax subsidies .
We voted against this resolution .
The Swedish Left has always thought that the people who work in a company should have a major influence , both over the total corporate environment and over the application of profits .
We think it is a great mistake to one-sidedly emphasize individual shareholdings as a driving force for increased productivity in this way .
We would instead like a dynamic and creative development of corporate democracy .
We would like to stress the need for funds for the future and long-term continuous training in companies , instead of individual shareholdings .
The National Front always has and always will defend the position and role of the individual within the firm .
We refuse to consider the individual as a variable or piece of economic data , as all policies on the left or the right invariably have done up until now , and without any encouraging or positive future result .
In this report , Mrs Hermange gives employees a real economic dimension , which we cannot fail to applaud .
We should encourage this form of popular capitalism , and develop measures that encourage the participation of workers in the capital of firms .
In order to combat unemployment , it is necessary in fact for workers to regain their confidence , in order to increase productivity , and the flexibility of work and wages .
But in order to achieve the aims of stability of employment and growth , it is necessary to protect the market , to throw out all the false precepts of Maastricht and Amsterdam , to staunch the migrant flow and give consumer spending a boost .
Then and only then will new jobs be created .
Our reservations on this matter do not stem from specific doubts , which we could easily find and which would easily serve to justify our vote .
However , stating these reservations would also be a way of remaining aloof from the real heart of the matter on which our position is based .
It would certainly be a way out of saying what has to be said , substituted by formal observations .
And nor is it a question of whether or not you trust in the goodness of the policies and measures proposed on which reports will be made in this Parliament .
Clearly , our concept of social relations is not compatible with the illusion that other concepts , or the lack of them , insist there are no social classes or that , although they exist , their interests and objectives in private company economic activities are coincidental , converging or simply non-conflicting .
On that account , irrespective of valuable opinions on the intentions of the policies and measures , and also of those signing the reports , which may be excellent , and in some cases are , these policies and measures may have the harmful effect of diverting attention , of diverting men and women from the real questions relating to male and female workers , which will never cease to exist as they have been granted a moderate participation in certain limited areas of management and in the financial results comprising the appropriation of the proceeds of their work .
This strategy is not a new one , and long reflection on this matter reminds us that around 30 years ago , when similar policies and measures were presented as remedies , we read and wrote that participation ( of workers in the management and results ) was a kind of " red light ' at the end of a series of situations formed by a highly degenerated social situation to ask for basic solutions or giving rise to mere diversions , which had precedents and has repetitions .

We would review this position if it were not confirmed by reality .
But reality has proven that it is right .
It will happen again now .
For that reason , our vote is not against the excellent intentions , of those who hold them , but cannot be in favour of an illusion that is revived and that aspires to communicate with those who do not need them , or who should flee from them , like a scalded cat .
Resolution on the situation of the Kurdish refugees
Mr President , on behalf on behalf of the Green Group I would like to protest in the strongest possible terms against the complete erosion of general refugee rights of which we have seen repeated examples in the past few months .
As regards the Kurdish refugees we have established that , on the one hand the EU Presidency and the EU Council of Ministers say in December that Turkey has no concrete prospect of joining the Union , rightly to my mind , partly because of the fact that the Kurdish issue is not being dealt with in a political manner .
On the other hand we then when see small groups of refugees , because we are not talking about floods of refugees , we are talking of a mere few hundred , this same European Union adopts an extremely evasive attitude .
In my own country , in Belgium , the Minister for Foreign Affairs says that because there is a hunger strike , we will investigate the political question which this problem poses , whilst on the other hand it was stated a long time ago that it is a political problem .
In other countries you get the fight between Italy and Germany , for example .
But in any case , the fundamental line taken by the European Union was not the recognition of the fact some political refugees from the region might come here .
We find this extremely sad .
The same is happening again with regard to the escalating drama in Algeria .
This morning some German ministers declared publicly ; yes , we will have to do something for Algeria , because otherwise the waves will hit us again .
If we are going to conduct international and internal politics in these terms within the EU , we are absolutely on the wrong track .
Europe today is faced with the problem of thousands of Kurds illegally disembarking on the Italian coast , at the end of a voyage obviously organized by Mafia organizations and professional people smugglers .
Are they really refugees and if so , are they political or economic refugees ?
Also , are they from Turkey or Northern Iraq ?
Can people who themselves are ( or who have been ) persecutors , be recognized as refugees ?
Let us not forget that the Kurds have always been the great slaughterers of Syrian , Chaldean , Nestorian and other Armenian Christians , and that quite recently ( no later than 1984 ) , they perpetrated massacres in Southern Anatolia .
This influx of refugees , or false refugees , poses Europe a problem of incoherence .
Firstly , it is not by chance that this problem has come to light today , when Italy has only been an integral part of the ' Schengen space ' since 26 October 1997 .
It is clear that , to illegal immigrants , the prospect of being able to travel , without any border controls , from the far South to the far North of Europe , is a powerful incentive .
As for the country of arrival of the immigrants , Italy in this case , what incentive does it have to resist them , when it knows that they will not stay in Italy , but are only passing through ?
Why should Italy earn itself a bad reputation , from a humanitarian point of view , without any benefit to itself , but only to its neighbours ?
This experience shows us that Schengen provides an additional incentive for illegal immigrants , and takes away the responsibility of the first host country .
The re-establishment of real individual controls at internal borders would already solve part of the problem .
Secondly , we are told that this type of situation would not occur if the right of asylum were harmonized throughout Europe .
It is true that Italy is using it too extensively if , as is being said , even economic refugees are being accepted under the Geneva Convention .
But on the other hand , what is this harmonized right of asylum that we could have instead , at the European level ?
It is in fact exactly the same , that is , an extended right of asylum , as the proposal on refugees recently submitted to the Council by the Commission , shows .
We do not see the point of harmonization at the European level , if the result is going to be even more laxity .
If a country wants to be laxist , it should do so by itself and under its own responsibility , and not pass the problem on to its neighbours , or to Europe .
Thirdly , the proposals for a European refugee policy ( of which the resolution adopted yesterday by the European Parliament is a good example ) consists above all , of sharing responsibility between the Member States for welcoming and providing for refugees .
That is not a sensible long-term solution .
What will we do tomorrow if , as is unfortunately possible , hundreds of thousands of refugees arrive from all over the world , attracted to Europe by its welcome , its promise of status and financial aid ?
If we wish to behave responsibly , we must set up solutions today which will work tomorrow .
That is why the European refugee policy should be :
1 ) To maintain controls at internal borders in order to ensure Member States accept responsibility ;
2 ) To keep to a strict definition of the right of asylum ;
3 ) To organize cooperation in order to provide financial aid for Member States who play a disproportionately large part in the supervision of external borders ;
4 ) To find solutions other than allowing refugees to settle in the EU , if they are from countries far from our immediate area : on the contrary , such refugees should be sent to third countries able to offer them a suitable asylum , even if we have to provide aid to such countries .
If the European Union adopts a different policy , as it now seems tempted to do , it will do serious harm to the longterm interests of our countries and will be unworthy of its citizens ' trust .
The Kurdish problem will continue to get worse and to come up before us so long as the Turkish authorities persist in their flagrant violation of the fundamental human rights of an entire people , stubbornly refusing to progress towards the search for a political and peaceful solution of the Kurdish issue by direct negotiations with all the representative bodies of the Kurdish people .
So long as major economic and political , oil-related interests continue to back Turkey 's intransigence , criminal groups favoured by Turkey 's tolerant attitude will continue the illegal transport of Kurds under the most inhuman conditions , while ' well-governed ' Member States ' sensitive ' to human rights try in unacceptable ways to exploit the drama of the refugees in order to intensify their policing and oppressive measures .
It is now urgently necessary to persuade the Turkish government to change its policy , to cease its warlike escapades against the Kurdish people and to recognise their rights .
It is essential for the issue of the violation of those rights and Turkey 's attitude to be raised at the next meeting of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and before the Human Rights Commission of the Council of Europe .
All necessary steps should be taken to intensify the struggle against the criminal networks which transport illegal immigrants and refugees , and at the same time all the necessary prerequisites must be put in hand to ensure respect for the right of refugees to request political asylum , pursuant to the Geneva Convention , and to receive immediate and effective material and moral support .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for a resolution on Kurdish refugees .
The unhappy and tragic situation of the Kurdish refugees has highlighted the need for cooperation on refugee policy in the EU .
We would also like to urge people not to overreact .
The Kurdish example shows once more that the debate has become a little overheated .
In reality fewer than 1 , 000 Kurds are involved , and the total number of asylum seekers actually fell in the EU in 1997 .
It is a shame and a disgrace that people in need are hitched to the anti-EU wagon in Denmark .
There is a clear need for an instrument like Eurodac which we have also voted on today .
It will help us to determine which Member State is responsible for dealing with an application for asylum in the EU .
In addition , there should be a responsible sharing of the burden of refugees between the EU countries .
I have voted against the joint resolution because it follows the Italian Government 's approach of taking a favourable view of asylum applications from citizens of Kurdish origin .
This introduces the dangerous precedent of granting political asylum on an ethnic basis .
In the case in point , there has been a classic initial flow of Kurdish immigrants from different countries - together with other clandestine immigrants from the Maghreb , China , Sri Lanka , Egypt , and so on - impelled by economic reasons .
Moreover , after the first major landing from the M.V. Ararat , we are witnessing a daily and constant trickle of landings of small groups of Kurdish immigrants organized by the Albanian " scafisti ' .
Political asylum on an ethnic basis amounts to a clear call to all Kurds to come to one of the EU countries , attracted by a blanket asylum opportunity which is based purely and simply on the fact that they are Kurds .
The principle of asylum on an ethnic basis is not manageable either in the case of the Kurds , which constitute an ethnic grouping of over twenty million people , or in the case of the many peoples who , for religious , linguistic , political or economic reasons , are persecuted by other peoples or by other majorities .
Suffice it to mention the case of the Tibetans in China , the Tamils in Sri Lanka , the Tutsi in Central Africa , the Chiapas Indians in Mexico , and so on .
Kurdish illegal immigrants should have their cases dealt with under other criteria , rational and humanitarian criteria .
The ethnic political criterion , with the individual exception of genuine victims of political persecution , like Leyla Zana or Wei Jing Sheng , must be dropped because it will lead to unforeseeable and uncontrollable developments .
The European Union must press for an international political solution to the tragedy of the Kurds , and not fall back on the unsustainable principle of the guaranteed right of asylum but get the problem dealt with through the UN , starting with human rights violations by Turkey , Iraq and Iran .
Sainjon report ( A4-0392 / 97 )
The Sainjon report provides quite a dull vision of relocation , perhaps because , from the start , its had chosen to stick to an overly limited definition of this issue : according to the report , relocation only takes place when a contractor - head of a company - deliberately decides to move production , by direct investment , subcontracting or trading , to a country where social costs are lower .
This definition , which is too restrictive , could lead us to quibble indefinitely about a movement , the size of which we cannot calculating - and which we can also quote counter-examples of - but which is carefully interpreted to give the impression of a two-way movement .
That is the maze into which the Sainjon report has wandered .
In reality , if we stand back , we can see that the rise of unemployment in Europe is concomitant with international openness .
Certainly some countries , such as the UK , manage to avoid it , by means of energetic liberal policies .
That is in fact one way to proceed .
But I must emphasize that the British success in combating unemployment - now 5 % - is certainly due in part to having attracted economic activities which were once carried out in neighbouring continental countries .
In other words , the experiment would probably be less successful if France and Germany had also adopted the same policies .
If we want an overview of the whole process of relocation , it should be given a wider definition : relocation takes place whenever the process of international competition results in the creation of a job in an emerging country , and destroys a job in our own .
In our opinion , a healthy process should on the contrary , create a job in both places at once .
When defined in this way , the relocation process shows its true character : we are opposing international competition which works on a distorted basis , as the countries of Europe , paralysed by false notions , are unable to establish even a slightly voluntarist policy in order to defend themselves .
In the hope that , on the basis of its narrow definition , everything will develop spontaneously in the right direction , the Sainjon report therefore makes minimal proposals : a non-binding code of good practice for multinational companies , a confidence agreement between distributors , manufacturers and subcontractors ; the creation of a global ' social label ' by the ILO , etcetera .
These proposals are interesting but , in our opinion , unlikely to straighten out the situation .
The proposal from the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations is simple and definite : we should decrease the benefits of relocation by decreasing the benefits of reimportations when they are harmful to us .
For that reason , we must ask the next round of international commercial negotiations , due to start in 1999 , to consider the fairness of international competition and the legitimacy of areas of regional preference if they are asked for democratically by the populations concerned .
The report submitted to us overlooks the conflictive dimension of international economics and the effects of the domination of a large power which has an interest in unrestrained free trade .
The real cause of relocation is this policy , whereby the costs of production and wages around the world are extremely heterogeneous .
The report only superficially analyses the consequences of relocations on employment in Europe , and underestimates their negative effects .
It also disregards the role of the tax and National Insurance contributions , which are too high in Europe and are an often-disregarded cause of relocations .
The rapporteur pins his hopes on the signature of voluntary Codes of Conduct , which is obviously inadequate .
It is therefore necessary to re-examine the question of relocations , from a point of view other than that of unilateral free trading .
I shall therefore vote against this report .
Every week , there are European firms that announce relocations , usually without notice , and without consulting trade unions .
These relocations are based on competition between populations , and they speculate on social and wage differentials .
There are also used by employers as a means of pressure and bribery so that they can apply pressure on employees and jobs .
Such relocations often destroy jobs .
In France , the three sectors most affected - the textiles , shoe and electronics industries , have lost half the number of their employees in 15 years .
But other sectors are also affected , such as the car industry , and more and more service industries are being affected by relocations .
Relocations are based on the logic of liberalization and deregulation within the framework of globalization .
Instead of trying to combat and resist the damage caused by globalization , the European Union is contributing towards its reinforcement , by submitting to the dictatorship of the financial markets .
Measures can and must be taken at the Community level , to counter the deregulation of financial markets and the volatility of investments which can be directed at any time towards profitable short term activities , to the detriment of the employees and economies of whole areas .
The taxation of capital movements would make it possible to control and restrict them .
The report by the Committee on External Economic Relations , which I approve , makes other proposals which could contribute towards reducing relocations , or which could at least prevent their most injurious consequences in terms of employment and purchasing power .
I am pleased , from that point of view , that the report has adopted our group 's amendments , on the one hand , with regard to the inclusion of social and environmental clauses in international agreements and in the WTO rules , and on the other hand , that the multilateral agreement on international investment currently being negotiated within the framework of the OECD should not hinder the right of States to monitor human rights and the environment with regard to multinational companies operating within their countries .
In view of the seriousness of these issues , it is essential that we do more , that we demand that the multilateral agreement on international investment should recognize the cultural exception , so that culture is not considered a mere commodity subject to the laws of a market dominated by American firms .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted for the report by André Sainjon concerning the relocation of businesses and direct investments in third countries seen in the light of the globalization of trade , production and investment .
The report calls on the Commission to draw up a code of conduct for multinational companies based on a number of social obligations .
The code of conduct will be based on the following points :
the promotion of trade union freedom-combating forced labour-combating child labour-the elimination of discrimination in employment and careers , and equal pay for men and womenThe Danish Social Democrats are positive towards the proposal , because this proposal can contribute to a fairer labour market in third countries and ensure fair competition in a globalized economy .
The report mentions that social harmonization should be speeded up .
The Danish Social Democrats draw attention to the fact that social policy is a national concern .
The proposals made by the Sainjon report are like putting a wooden leg in plaster .
If you accept the globalization of the economy and total freedom of investment , if you engage the entire fabric of industrial production in an unbridled productivity race , if you persist in the belief that multinational firms are not stateless entities only interested in profit , if you are convinced that efficiency demands international division of work ... you should not be surprised when firms adapt to the environment they find themselves in and react in their own interests .
The ' social label ' is a huge piece of hypocrisy , which aims to pacify the conscience of European consumers ; the Code of Conduct for multinationals is a hoax , generalized freedom of movement of capital will be a source of regional problems , which will imperil the whole of a financial system which has become a global system , and as a consequence , all the economies in the world .
The rapporteur writes , ' relocation is a logical economic development , which should not be approached from an ideological point of view ' .
But why should we not look at it from an ideological point of view ? We have reached this point , because you consider that economic development is an aim in itself .
We believe that economic development is a means , which should serve the political aims of employment and the well being of the people , environmental protection , and the organization of society .
We shall always oppose our human vision of the world , to your accountant 's , mathematician 's vision .
The relocations are connected with the dynamics of the so-called globalization stemming from an increased mobility of factors .
But this mobility does not maintain the same rates for the various factors and activities .
Production is relocated at a speed conditioned by all the equipment and requirements of complex combinations , trade may benefit from greater facilities and speed of transport and financial capital benefits from changes that can be described as revolutionary in communications , in a legal framework of freedom of movement achieving licentious privileges .
Consequently , at present , the so-called relocations are the result in particular of the spiralling circulation of capital , looking for places and situations where more and better are reproduced and accumulated , increasing their already disproportionate volume in relation to the requirements of the real economy in a disturbing way .
Substantial production plant , unemployment and deteriorated social situations may remain , abandoned or transferred under insecure conditions and / or under used .
This is a characterization which , unfortunately , is not a caricature and this report deals with this question by analysing what it calls the " foreign investment ' and a division of relocations into offensives ( connected with direct investment ) , defensives ( connected mainly with subcontracting ) and those of " international business ' ( connected with the dynamics of transnational groups ) .
It seems to us , however , that this concept of foreign investment has different contours and content from those they began by defining .
With the relocations , an investment somewhere may , as is happening more and more often , correspond to a disinvestment somewhere else .
And it is very positive that the report should indicate ( or reveal ) the possible bad effects of the relocations , and point out four factors with a social basis that need to be introduced into this problem ( trade-union organization and joint negotiation , prohibition of forced labour and child labour , and equal treatment ) , corresponding to minimum social clauses and to the appreciation of the role of the ILO , as the UN agency which the WTO , in the ultra-liberal drift that gave rise to them , has sought to level and cause to ignore .
Although we are expecting little from the recommendations on codes of good conduct for transnationals , the statement / report of this characterization of the relocations and foreign investment is positive .
As the content of the Sainjon report has remained unchanged , as far as the diagnosis and treatment of relocation is concerned , we were unable to vote in favour .
It reflects an analysis of the problem that is more and more disputed by economists .
And the measures , mostly optional , which it envisages to remedy the negative effects of relocation do not seem equal to the economic and social problems generated in our countries by a procedure closely connected with the whole-hearted adoption of the principle of free trading .
We have seen that , in order to really measure the consequences of relocation in our countries , it essential for the approach to the question to be much wider than the rapporteur 's .
It is also necessary to avoid giving an impression that everything balances out and that there is a similar movement in both directions , by mentioning a few cases which have taken place in the opposite direction , but which are not representative of the main trend .
Thus , the highly publicised relocation of Toyota to Valenciennes seems rather like a chance event , or a temporary relocation , whereas most Asian companies which did relocate to Europe are , now that European markets have become much more open , tending to repatriate their establishments and to use traditional export procedures , rather than maintain production in Europe .
The process of relocation is in reality fundamentally unilateral .
Corrective measures must therefore be closely suited to it .
It is strange that the only regulatory policy the rapporteur will not envisage is the policy which would best protect European labour-intensive industries flexibly against unfair competition , and which our partners know how to use : import quota measures .
When forced to use them , the Commission regrettably tends to make them inoperative , by implementing a policy of derogation to the full , as we have seen in the car industry .
Mr Sainjon does not unfortunately propose to correct the present incoherence , as he suggests at one and the same time , that the Community programme ECIP should be developed , which acts as an incentive to relocations , and that structural funds should in the future focus on the areas most affected by relocations , which would mean subsidizing both relocations and the damage done by relocations .
It would certainly be more appropriate to consider how to make it less attractive to re-import , which destroys so many jobs in our countries .
( The sitting was adjourned at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Mr President , I must report a very serious matter currently occurring in Italy .
After betraying the legitimate expectations of the breeders , the Italian Government is using police methods and repression to damage and harm them , and at this moment , hundreds of breeders are being arrested and having their tractors and any other working equipment seized .
We are indignant and call on the European Parliament to show solidarity .
We want to tell Parliament that falsifying the balance sheet is not sufficient to join the single currency ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Alpine transit ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on Alpine transit .
Mr President , since the failure of Switzerland to join the European Economic Area , negotiations between the European Union and Switzerland have covered various sectors .
So it is important to achieve balanced results both in the negotiations overall and for the individual sectors involved .
Five important negotiations have been concluded successfully and every effort is needed to reach an agreement in the transport sector too .
The Italian Government is strongly committed to reaching a balanced agreement .
The long term objective of a progressive transfer of traffic from road to rail is supported and in this sense the financial commitment of the Swiss government is much appreciated , just as we share the Swiss concerns about the environment - and Parliament has made its views known on that point many times .
But I think some precise definitions are needed in the negotiations overall .
The Italian economic interests involved in the discussion should not be prejudiced as compared with the current situation .
It is not just the cost to the hauliers that is under discussion but the competitiveness of Italian products on the European market , since taxation issues cannot be introduced and hauliers are burdened with external costs before these are precisely defined at Community level .
So we need to take a position on toll systems which brings them into line with Community arrangements and correlates them with the implicit cost of the infrastructure used and its management and maintenance .
Furthermore , while it is necessary and important to pay attention to the environmental problems , and the European Parliament is particularly sensitive to them and has frequently debated them , it has to be recognized that moving the traffic to rail in a short time is illusory , because the necessary infrastructure is not there .
So the planned infrastructure solutions must be speeded up as much as possible and to this end the Government of Swiss Confederation should be asked , in the negotiations , to move in that direction .
Then there is something Switzerland does not mention , and that is its interest in air traffic .
Now if we want to find solutions to the problems , all the interests need to be put on the table so that we have the full picture and can deal with everything .
To conclude , the agreement currently in force expires in 2004 .
So we have time to deal with the problems , although personally I think we should try to do it sooner , and find a balanced agreement which takes account of all the aspects and above all provides reciprocity of understanding between the respective regions .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as we are talking about transit today , we are , of course , also going to be talking about the fact that for 40 years in Europe we have supported a common market and that we have therefore always promoted a society based on the principle of the division of labour .
Today we find ourselves in a position where two out of our four major routes through the Alps run through Switzerland and we cannot therefore accept the creation of an artificial barrier which would burden the other two routes , our friends in the Brenner - Mr Voggenhuber , you were quick to pick up on your cue there - with additional traffic .
The European Union has always supported the principle of the shortest route and that means that we need the appropriate transit routes through Switzerland .
In terms of the Alps in general , we have a set of very different rules .
In Austria 40 tonnes , but an eco-point system , in Switzerland a 28 tonne limit and bans on night driving . That does not constitute the uniform policy which we , as the PPE , are calling for and expect from the Commission .
However , we also expect an alpine traffic policy to be based on a set of uniform rules applicable throughout Europe rather than the methods of highway robbery and the robber barons .
I have already mentioned the principle of the shortest route , which must has to be taken into account .
There is also the question of the environment .
No one can tell me that long diversions are better for the environment .
And no one can tell me that rail can be made more competitive by artificially making roads more expensive .
On Monday we had the Sarlis Report on the revitalization of the railways .
The railways also have to get into shape so that they can compete with the roads .
This will not happen simply by making lorries more expensive .
In this spirit , I call upon the Commission to continue its negotiations with Switzerland .
I hope that the matter will be brought to a close under this British Presidency .
Mr President , in the European Union there is a strange obsession with the idea that everything should be harmonized , regardless of geographic , environmental or climatic differences .
That is why people do not want to recognise the difference between heavy traffic through Alpine valleys and the same heavy traffic on the plains of Flanders .
But it should be obvious , just as obvious as the fact that you cannot have the same traffic noise in a residential area as on a through road or drive at the same speed in town as you can on a motorway .
The European Union is also suffering from another obsession , that of wanting to control and dictate the internal policies and relations of other countries , and wanting to force them to accept bad regulatory systems which belong in the Union .
Switzerland is a free and sovereign State .
Switzerland is neither a member of the Union nor the EEA , the European Economic Area .
If Switzerland wants to take care of its citizens ' environment , that is a Swiss matter .
To subject a country to pressure to make it take a step backwards in its environmental policy is highly objectionable .
Instead the Union should see Switzerland as an example of environmental and traffic policy , because Switzerland is taking the path which we will all have to take eventually if we are to save the environment in our part of the world .
The fact that Switzerland is advanced in this area and is ahead of the European Union is due in part to the fact that Switzerland is a real democracy where the citizens ' awareness of environmental policy can be expressed .
The Union , on the other hand , with its closed institutions , is far too easily influenced , at least in its current form , by internal lobbying on behalf of interests like those represented by road traffic .
That is why the Union currently has an immature position on many important environmental issues .
It is high time that people took a different level of responsibility , both within the Union and in attitudes to other , more advanced countries , countries where the sacred market does not have the same paramount position as it has unfortunately been given in this Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for my country the transit agreement between Austria and the EU was a central prerequisite for entry into the EU .
The people of Austria attached great hopes to this agreement . Hopes of an end to ecological destruction .
Hopes of an end to health damage caused by excessively high noise and air emissions . But , encouraged by the Austrian government , the Austrian people also hoped that this agreement might lead to a rethink on ecological issues in the European Union , that this agreement might provide the trigger for a new , sustained traffic policy .
Just a few years later we have come to realise that in hoping these hopes millions of people in our country failed to reckon with the Commission .
Millions of Swiss have done the same and voted to changed their law in a referendum .
These two countries represent models of modern traffic policy , not obstacles to it . The Commission on the other hand is not a model of modern traffic policy in Europe , but an obstacle .
It is still entangled in the interests of the transport lobby .
It remains fixed on the idea of an uncontrolled division of labour across borders into which it has failed to factor the costs in terms of either health or ecology of this traffic madness .
Mr Ferber has now left the room .
If he were still here I would have explained the basics of this problem to him once and for all .
For the Alps are not an artificial barrier which some environmentalist or politician in his foolishness has planted in the midst of the internal market , but a natural barrier in a highly sensitive ecological region .
At the time the Commission promised much in its negotiations on transit traffic .
None , I repeat none , of which has been realised to date .
The Commission is taking legal action against Austria over the level of its toll charges , although they comply with the Commission 's Green Paper .
It is delaying recognition of the inclusion of external costs .
It has made no attempt to implement the Alps Convention .
What we see here is the almost pseudo-religious worshipping of an internal market without regard to the human principles of life and health .
Mr President , this debate is proceeding in our language , as might well have been expected , given that it is an issue that is particularly close to our hearts .
It therefore amazes me - while I welcome the presence of Commissioner van den Broek - that after having had over two days of the assiduous presence of Commissioner Kinnock while the British Government was here - and I regard the Commission with friendship , take note - at the very moment when an issue falling within the specific competence of Commissioner Kinnock is being discussed , we have instead the authoritative presence of Commissioner van den Broek .

I cannot but emphasize the concern we feel at the slow pace of this agreement , the secret , opaque way we are kept informed , and the way in which this agreement more or less reverberates across the Alpine problem as a whole .
How can I understand - and we are trying to understand it better through this debate - that the agreement is still something to come and therefore the traffic can only find outlets in other areas , on other routes of communication like the very important one which links the Val d 'Aosta with France and which is at risk , if things carry on this way , of gridlock and calls for doubling the width of the Mont Blanc motorway which would be catastrophic for the countries , the valleys and the citizens who inhabit the regions the motorway must cross .
I hope the large groups will accept the amendments tabled by the group of the European Radical Alliance and thus take the opportunity - in this debate on the problem of Alpine transit , as we have defined it , but not agreed with Switzerland - to insert two or three paragraphs which broaden the context and highlight the need for combined transport rather than taking a mere sectoral view of the problem .
Mr President , the free movement of goods , services and people is of enormous economic importance to the European Union .
Its policy therefore aims to remove obstacles to traffic , both by lifting administrative impediments at borders , and by building a new infrastructure , the Trans European Networks .
The fact that this policy has been effective is obvious from the large growth in freight transport , in particular on the road .
The problem of Alpine transit traffic illustrates that there are also limits to this free movement of goods .
The ecologically extremely vulnerable Alpine region shows more quickly than elsewhere that the environment 's ability to cope is limited .
It is partly for this reason that Austria has multiplied the charges for the Brenner Tunnel , that there are protests in France against road building at the Mont Blanc , and that the people of Switzerland declared in the Alpine Referendum of 1994 that all freight will have to pass through the region by train .
Austria , meanwhile , finds that membership of the EU does not only entail benefits .
The country has been summoned before the Court of Justice for increasing toll charges on the Brenner .
Fortunately , European politicians are not blind to the environmental damage resulting from road transport .
The by now famous Green Paper ' Towards Fair and Efficient Pricing in Road Transport ' makes it clear that the ' external ' factors around transport have to be included in the price .
The review of the Euro-sticker mentions the so-called ' sensitive ' routes .
On these routes extra levies are allowed , to reduce air pollution , for instance .
According to a report in Agence Europe of 12 December the Union does not want to allow Switzerland to apply similar principles as yet .
Commissioner Kinnock and the Luxembourg Minister of Transport Mrs Delvaux afterwards said to the Transport Council that future Swiss tolls must be based directly on the costs of the existing infrastructure .
The costs of the new infrastructure , let alone external costs , are not to be included .
I ask Commissioner van de Broek whether the said report is correct .
In that case I would like him to tell me to what extent these statements are compatible with the Green Paper , and the recent proposals for the Euro-sticker .
Finally , does the Commissioner share my conviction that the free movement of goods , too , must respect the limits set by the environment ?
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the starting point for our discussion are the negotiations with Switzerland .
Switzerland has taken the view that by not joining the European Union it can remain in a sort of happy isolation .
Switzerland can see that it is in an isolated position .
However , I would like to reject most adamantly part of what has been said here today - by Mr Ferber and previously - and that is that this is the behaviour of robber barons , of highway robbers .
As has already been said , Switzerland has a very specific , highly comprehensible traffic and environmental policy .
However , Switzerland must also fit into the overall European picture .
There 's no way around it .
Secondly : Obviously the basic characteristics of the landscape are a given .
It may be the case that other landscapes are worth protecting .
But that shouldn 't stop us giving special protection to this special landscape and to the special situation of the populations in the narrow valleys , whether they be in Switzerland , Austria , France or Italy ,
Thirdly : The European Union has a set of traffic policy principles .
Some speakers appear to have forgotten this .
I would reject absolutely accepting the principle of the shortest route , which I otherwise support , without mentioning that there are also other principles , that we have environmentally friendly and environment-oriented traffic , that it is indeed a matter of external costs .
It is not that we want to pass the external costs on to lorries without justification , but rather that the external costs only arose in the first place due to the excessive number of lorries .
The step-by-step transfer of traffic from road to rail is the founding principle of European traffic policy .
And in the interests of our environment and our population we must deviate not from it .
However , we must understand that , as a result , we need to find a way of incorporating Switzerland into an overall concept , that the diverting of traffic which is currently taking place - and represents some 30 % to 40 % of the traffic in my home country of Austria , especially in the Tirol - where it still exists and has not already been transferred to rail , must be stopped .
Our goal must obviously be a general reduction in the level of traffic on the roads .
But this goal cannot be achieved by simply blocking off one country and diverting the traffic into others .
In Europe , at the end of this century , it must surely be possible to create a genuinely common traffic policy .
So , where are the policies which the Commission , the Parliament and the Council should be following ?
I should also say that I would not lay all the blame at the door of the Commission .
The Parliament too was very circumspect in making it last resolutions and in general terms agrees completely with what Commissioner Kinnock said .
There are certain countries which are represented in the Council and exert more resistance there .
Firstly : The aim must be , step-by-step , to reintegrate Switzerland into an all-European traffic policy shaped by the EU , and to do this as quickly as possible !
Secondly : No traffic should be diverted .
Thirdly : Wherever necessary diverted traffic must be returned to original routes .
Fourthly : No single country in the EU should be placed in a worse position than Switzerland in terms of the levying of charges , tolls , etc .
We accept the fact that charges have to be levied , that there is place for the toll and that it fulfils a control function . But it must be clear that a country outside the EU cannot be afforded more opportunities than the countries within the EU .
If these principles are observed it must surely be possible to create a reasonable European traffic policy and to use the instruments available , including the toll , to create an environment- and therefore people-oriented traffic policy for the whole of Europe .
Mr President , firstly I should like to express my pleasure that Switzerland is moving ever closer to the European Union and that the European Union is making every effort to move this country at the very heart of Europe closer to Europe .
However , we must all share the same rights and the same duties .
I believe that there should be one agreement , not a number of different agreements .
The Alps are , without question , a sensitive area ; that is something which is felt particularly by those who live there , like myself .
Although transit is currently having a huge impact , one which we feel on a daily basis , it would be incomprehensible and unacceptable for the population living along the Brenner , whether in Trentino , the South Tirol or in Tirol Province , if Switzerland were to receive special treatment , leaving us worse off .
Quite clearly , the aim of the policy is to protect a sensitive area - whether by toll or by positive support - by providing the sensitive zone with new opportunities such as the expansion of rail facilities or under-tunnelling .
And no doubt there is still much negotiating to be done .
In conclusion , the rapprochement between Switzerland and the European Union , whatever form it takes , is a positive factor , but it should be without privileges , affording the same rights for all .
Again , there is no reason why privileges should be granted for a limited period .
Mr President , the Greens are asking the EU and the Federal government in Germany to strongly support Switzerland 's plans for the introduction of an output-related heavy goods vehicle tax and an alpine transit tax in order , at long last , to move forward on the protection of the alpine habitat and the transfer of heavy goods transport from road to rail .
Similarly , external costs - in particular environmental costs - as well as road costs should be passed on to road traffic , taking into account the especially high costs in the alpine regions .
For we have a particular responsibility to the people and their alpine habitat .
It would appear the Messrs Jarzembowski and Ferber , in particular , have not quite grasped this point .
We cannot , as they suggest , try to blackmail Switzerland with the argument that if they don 't do what the EU wants them to do , the Swiss will no longer be allowed out of their own country , that they will , so to speak , be imprisoned in their own fortress .
Let me say once and for all and quite clearly , this behaviour is nothing but more imperialist delusions and status craving .
In actual fact , Switzerland 's plans support the EU in as far as they are an attempt , at long last , to develop a sustained traffic policy .
That can hardly be described as an attack on the EU ! Against this backdrop , the blockade being operated by Bavaria , the Federal government and the Italians is quite incomprehensible .
The Greens are organizing a conference on this complex question with the representatives of the various countries involved on 1st February in Lindau .
Turning to the Netherlands : If the alpine habitat is destroyed , it won 't be the sea that you will need to build your flood dams against , it will be Rhine .
For once the Alps are destroyed , you 'll find yourselves under water all year long !
The Alps provide a reservoir of potable water ; one which we need .
If we continue to destroy the Alps in this manner , it may well be possible to ski everywhere in the Alps , because there won 't be any trees .
But if that 's the point , why not go skating in Holland instead !
I advise you to take a completely fresh look at this habitat , and as a farmer , I say to you : We live off 30 cm of this earth , and if these 30 cm are destroyed then we quite simply won 't have to worry about free trade , transit and goods transport any more . There won 't be any need .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , anyone looking for long-term progress in traffic policy in the Alps today will swiftly come to the conclusion that in Europe everyday is soap-box day .
For the number of soap-box speeches to be heard demanding a common , transnational , environment- and people-oriented traffic policy is large and they all promise great things . However , not much is actually being done .
We are simply trying to stop things happening .
Listening to the discussions and the Commissioner 's information today , I have to conclude that nothing concrete is coming of today 's debate either .
None of these speeches and statements actually represent a step forwards .
In fact , here in the European Parliament - this is a European Community - soap-boxes are making a great comeback .
What we have heard so far today is the German MEPs who have spoken taking part in a competition to find the most stupid soap-box orator .. This is not way to construct Europe .
No way to make progress .
The EU Commission should see itself as the engine of the Community 's traffic policy .
Laying out the external costs of traffic is indeed highly commendable .
Drawing up an Alps Clause with the European Parliament is indeed progress . But the Commission doesn 't have the courage to implement these ideas , to get anything concrete off the ground .
That is why the EU Commission and the presidency of the Council of Europe are being asked to do something about the situation .
That 's why they are being asked to do something in the heart of Europe , in the foothills of the Alps in southern Germany .
And here I also include the Austrian areas .
At the present time the situation is such that most of the accent is being placed on the Munich-Verona route where an impossibly expensive , 20 km long mega tunnel is being proposed .
Unfortunately , we know that the completion date of this much needed project will be a long time coming .
What we must do now is involve the Court of Auditors and , at long last , start to operate a reasonable policy which the people , the economy and also the environmentalists in Europe can understand .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , the north-south link through the Brenner is one of the most important routes for road haulage .
The impact suffered by Austria as a result is enormous .
Disproportionately so , in comparison to Switzerland .
Some 30 % more lorries travel through the Brenner than through the Swiss passes .
Many haulage contractors choose the longer routes through the Brenner because they are more financially viable .
This way of thinking on the part of the hauliers must be stopped and the cost advantage involved in using the Brenner must be removed .
The diverted traffic must return to its original route .
In a verbal supplementary amendment we , together with our Austrian colleagues in the Social Democratic Party , are therefore asking the Commission to ensure that in matters of alpine transit no EU Member State is placed in a worse position than Switzerland .
This unfair burden must also be stopped to protect the populations involved .
In order to remove the financial advantage which exists on the Brenner route a common charging system should be introduced for Austria , Switzerland and France .
Lowering the charges in the Brenner , which are already lower than those in Switzerland , sends out the wrong signal and will not help to shift heavy goods traffic to the Swiss routes .
If the burden of charges placed on the haulage contractor were the same on all the routes over the main ridge of the Alps there would be a chance that routes other than the one through the Brenner would be chosen .
For this reason , in its negotiations with the Swiss , the Commission should work towards balancing these charges and securing the admittance of 40 tonne lorries .
The Commission must not shy away from its responsibility to the Member States and to the population , especially in regard to such a sensitive region as the main ridge of the Alps .
Mr President , following on from my contribution during the first part , perhaps I can respond to a few of the speeches made by the honourable Members .
First of all , concerning the Brenner , which seem to raise some questions .
Firstly , whether Austria should simply be allowed to maintain these higher tolls on the Brenner motorway .
It is generally known that negotiations are still taking place to see whether agreement can be reached with the parties to find a solution on the basis of the so-called Alpine Clause .
If this fails , obviously the Commission will feel obliged to await the verdict of the Court , before whom the case is at present , as you know .
But we would much prefer an agreement between the parties concerned , and we will continue to work towards this .
The next matter , Mr President , the comments which have been made regarding the inclusion of external costs or not .
Let it be clear that at the moment the Commission must base itself on the community law which only allows inclusion of part of the external costs , not the total .
As far as that is concerned we should therefore say that we are acting on the basis of the existing community law , and not on the basis of what the Commission would like to see ; which is broader , as is also evident from what the Commission has said about it in the Green Paper .
Finally , Mr President , on the subject of charging for transit transport .
As I mentioned to begin with , we do not yet fully agree on the figures .
One of the most important points is the level of the tariffs which will applied from the 1st of January 2005 .
As we are still in negotiation I am sure this Parliament will understand that I cannot give any further specific details about the strategies pursued by us .
This Parliament will get the opportunity to give its opinion when it is consulted on the Union 's decision regarding ratification of the agreement .
For that matter I pointed out , and I am being unanimously supported by the Council , that the levy presently proposed by Switzerland , is still not acceptable .
We are talking about sums of 410 Swiss francs for a 40 tonne lorry travelling from between Basel to Chiasso .
But in view of the fact that Switzerland has indicated that it wishes to take up a flexible position , I trust that we will be able to reach agreement in due course .

To comfort Mr Dell 'Alba , who is surprised not to see Mr Kinnock behind this table , let me say to him that it is not possible for the Commission to organize its work in such a way that all questions posed to this Parliament are answered by the Commissioner under whose authority this falls .
But the comforting phrase I wanted to utter is that this Commissioner is responsible within the Commission for the relations with Switzerland .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Community aid
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0388 / 97 by Mr Goerens , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on improving the effectiveness of Community aid ; -A4-0391 / 97 by Mr Fabra Vallés , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on Special Report No 2 / 97 by the Court of Auditors on the humanitarian aid of the European Union ( 1992-1995 ) ( C4-0219 / 97 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we now have an opportunity finally to end this House 's debate on improving the efficiency of development aid .
To discuss development is to discuss one of the noblest tasks .
However , that does not enable us to dispense with certain elementary principles and rules .
I refer , in particular , to the need to ensure that Community aid and the aid provided by Member States are complementary .
Various players are involved in development , and everything possible must be done to avoid duplication .
Inadequate coordination or even a total lack of coordination between the various players in the field will inevitably lead to negative effects .
Better coordination involving all the players involved in development , good internal coherence between the various instruments of development policy , and better visibility , are certainly not aims in themselves , but they are means to ensure that more citizens of Europe accept the idea of the need to continue to ensure cooperation between the European Union and developing countries .
That is particularly important at the moment , when we are observing a decrease in development aid , a trend to which we should not be indifferent , under any circumstances .
This should therefore be put right .
That is what this report is trying to do , by first of all , raising the question of instruments , measures , and the question of efficiency criteria relating to development aid .
Development aid is efficient compared with what ?
The Development Assistance Committee of the OECD provides a more or less satisfactory answer to this , by proposing to use as development aid evaluation criteria , pertinence , efficiency , impact of the development and durability .
Pertinence is a result of reflecting on the problems to be solved and the aims of a programme .
The search for efficiency is reflected in the ability to achieve those aims at the lowest cost .
Efficiency is measured in relation to the expected result and the situation of the beneficiaries , and also in terms of unexpected results or negative effects .
The impact of a development programme must relate to the medium term and well as the long term .
Finally , the last criterion relates to the durability and sustainability of the development undertaken .
Mr President , all the evaluations of development programmes to which my written report refers show some interesting trends , and in particular , I will quote three examples - the small but positive impact of European Commission development aid on the economic growth of receiving countries , the increase in the average life expectancy resulting from improved health indicators , which is appreciable , and thirdly , the not very durable nature of a large number of development programmes .
This list is not exhaustive , but I have selected some examples , which adequately illustrate the need to continue the evaluation work .
Another lesson to be drawn from the evaluation is that microanalysis , project by project , is useful , inasmuch as it highlights exemplary achievements funded by the European Community .
I am obliged to note however , that the approach to evaluation by sector is more reliable , as it provides a more global appreciation of the efficiency of the development or otherwise .
It also seems sensible to me to consider another aspect : is there a vision of development specific to Europe ?
If so , what is it ?
The measures in favour of human rights and democracy already undertaken by the Commission , not only send European development policy in the right direction , they also to some extent raise the question of conditional aid .
Indeed , the correct management of public affairs and development does not escape this rule .
It is to a very great extent dependent on the nature of the political system in place , on the honesty and quality of the local authorities , on the level of democratic activity within the local population and on the quality of the policies adopted .
Mr President , I will spare you the details .
Furthermore , the Members of this House who are going to speak have no doubt read my report , which is not disputed , inasmuch as I have not seen any amendments .
I do not wish to end without listing various conclusions that seem important to me .
There are six of these .
First of all , we have asked for the European Development Fund to come within the scope of the EU budget , which is one of this Parliament 's previous demands , and which is likely to considerably improve the visibility of European policy on this subject .
Secondly , we consider it essential that lessons are drawn from evaluations , in order to influence future programmes .
Thirdly , the Commission does not have enough human resources to handle and manage the administration of cooperation projects .
This must be put right .
Fourthly , the crucial role of women in developing countries must finally be recognized .
Within the framework of development programmes in particular , the role of women is essential , if only because of the positive influence of women with regard to birth control .
Fifthly , the intensification of the dialogue with NGOs is indispensable .
Mr Fabra , I believe , will have more to say on that point .
We have discussed the suitability of setting up a development agency at length .
We are not yet ready to do so .
During the debate with the Commission , it was considered appropriate to move forward to an intermediate stage .
I refer to this in my written report , and I believe that the compromise we have found is a good compromise .
It will enable us to prepare even more substantial projects with regard to evaluation , which seems indispensable to me , and is the very essence of this report .
Mr President , before anything else I would like to stress that when we talk of ECHO we are talking about a very young organization , which in a very short time has managed to forge an excellent reputation .
ECHO was created in 1992 , therefore it can only call upon five years of experience .
Since it began ECHO has faced up to considerable problems : the war in Yugoslavia , Rwanda , the refugees in northern Iraq and here I am only giving three examples which have required outstanding efforts and without ECHO being allowed to enjoy a long apprenticeship period .
In its special report , the Court of Auditors confirms that the outcome has been successful .
ECHO , in the first five years of its existence , has acquired an important wealth of experience which ensures that it will be in the forefront amongst international organizations dedicated to the question of humanitarian aid .
Similarly , that front line role is confirmed by the facts and figures : in 1996 , the rate of participation in ECHO was higher than 20 % of the total of the world 's humanitarian aid .
If we add to this percentage the efforts of the Member States we confirm that the European Union is , outstandingly , the highest donor in the world .
The European Union has provided about half of the world 's humanitarian aid , more than ECU 1.6 billion in 1996 .
Unfortunately these endeavours are carried out in a diverse way .
The Court of Auditors has confirmed that , quite simply , there is a lack of coordination and cooperation between the Community and its Member States , as well as between the Member States themselves .
The result is that the Union and its Member States often waste their energy and cannot pull their weight as they might , and ought to , do .
It is in this context in which the proposal from the Court of Auditors , for a charter regarding humanitarian aid , has acquired its full importance .
Such a charter might be useful to stimulate a debate about the need for cooperation between the Community and its Member States , as well as about the principles which ought to govern such cooperation .
All this is urgent and necessary since the Treaty of Amsterdam makes no reference to humanitarian aid , which means at the moment there is a lack of a true foundation document .
I must add that the way to arrive at such a charter as well as the subsequent debate will show , would be as important as the result .
It would be a question of a process with which national parliaments should be intensively associated .
For example , in the framework of an interparliamentary conference .
In a much more general area , it is a question of being aware of the fact that humanitarian aid often takes place in complex , crisis situations .
Those crises do not suddenly happen unexpectedly , as with natural catastrophes .
Rather they have their origins in political , ethnic and economic tensions .
As a reaction to these crises , rapid response aid , although greatly needed at the time , is not enough .
In view of the existence of such crises only an integrated approach to coordinate political , economic , military and humanitarian measures can ensure success .
A Charter for humanitarian aid might be the formula for a greater awareness about this phenomenon .
For all of this , we hope that the Committee makes full use of its powers of initiative and propose as much to the Council , as well as to Parliament , the Charter which has already been referred to so many times .
Allow me to point out that it is the Committee who can and must provide an important political lead .
In the same way there are many other actions which , in addition , we expect from the Committee .
And I will put forward , as I see it , the three most important .
Firstly , the Committee in a progressive way should replace the aid system directed towards single and precise operations by an approach to a more long term strategy with a specific programme .
To this end the services of the Committee ought to establish strategic relations with key partners - of course , the large NGOs and the United Nations itself - so as to jointly produce and put into operation a common global strategy for urgent , chronic and complex areas .
I am referring , for example , to the situation in the Great Lake region of Africa .
Secondly , about 45 % of the credit made available by ECHO is used by non-governmental organizations .
The Accounts Court has made a study of credits as a function of national origin for these NGOs .
The result of this study reveals that there are notable imbalances .
The Committee should strive to rectify these imbalances since there are strong agreements with the NGOs in France and Belgium while these agreements should be made stronger with NGOs in Germany and Portugal , for example .
Thirdly , the Committee needs to put into operation a central evaluation unit for its development programmes including ECHO , MEDA , Phare and Tacis .
This unit should supervise the appropriate quality control as well as comparing results from internal assessment , being involved in improving the exchange of experiences , not only in the heart of the Committee but also with other institutes responsible for development aid .
The key word given by the Court of Auditors in this context of evaluation is independence .
For this independence to be real , and as a result to be credible , this evaluation unit should be placed outside the broad operational General Management .
It is with some satisfaction that I conclude now , Mr President , by underlining that the Goerens report is asking for exactly the same as I am doing .
I congratulate you , Mr Goerens , on your report and thank you for your support in the opinion I have expressed .
What is clearly shown is that if the Development Committee and the Budgetary Control Committee met more often we would have a lot more to say .
All this , of course , with the aid of the Accounts Tribunal 's reports .
Ladies and gentlemen , as the time allocated for urgent and topical debate starts at 4 p.m. , I will call only two more Members and then we will adjourn this debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Goerens on his report , and on his extremely balanced resolution in particular .
The effectiveness of community development aid regrettably often leaves much to be desired .
Because despite of years of aid from Western nations people in less-developed countries are not able to support themselves , and economic growth is minimal .
In order to increase the effectiveness of development aid I believe changes are much needed on three fronts .
The OECD has pointed out that the best aid for less-developed countries is education for women , not least because there is an inverse relationship between how highly women are educated and the birth rate .
Therefore , colleagues , how can we stop the explosive population growth in these countries ? By educating women .
A lower population growth is the only way to break through this vicious circle .
That was the first point .
My second point is that knowledge and information are also important for sustainable development .
To create a supporting base in the country itself and amongst the population , local universities and national research centres need to be involved in the dissemination of technology and knowledge .
Thirdly , investment in the private sector towards entrepreneurship , and especially in small and medium-sized enterprises , and a better development of the market mechanism are crucial to economic and social progress .
In this context too , women should not be overlooked as potential entrepreneurs .
I understand that international banks are cooperating on developing initiatives .
I hope Europe will not fall behind .
We will now adjourn the debate and resume it at 6 p.m.
Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent matters of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0056 / 98 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Mexico ; -B4-0057 / 98 by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra , Mr Galeote Quecedo , Mr Soulier and Mrs Esteban Martín , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the killing of 46 indigenous peasants in the Mexican state of Chiapas ; -B4-0066 / 98 by Mrs Karamanou , Mr Newens and Mr Cabezón Alonso , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in the state of Chiapas ; -B4-0073 / 98 by Mr González Triviño , Mr Novo Belenguer , Mr Hory and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in the state of Chiapas ; -B4-0085 / 98 by Mr Carnero González , Mr Wurtz , Mr Manisco , Mrs González Álvarez , Mr Novo , Mrs Pailler , Mr Alavanos , Mr Svensson , Mr Ephremidis and Mr Seppänen , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in the state of Chiapas ( Mexico ) ; -B4-0095 / 98 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , Mr Tamino , Mr Ripa di Meana and Mr Orlando , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in the state of Chiapas ( Mexico ) .
Mr President , there are no half measures where human rights are concerned and , in the specific case of the right to life , which when you lose it you can never get it back , you know , Mr President , that moderation becomes a vice when it stands back .
Therefore it is important that this Parliament - I said it on 24th of December , I repeated it on 6th of January in the Foreign Affairs Committee , I put it to my political group again afterwards , and today I will say it again before the full session - this Parliament has to speak up to condemn unreservedly this slaughter which has shaken public opinion throughout the world .
As well as vehemently condemning this barbaric act and showing solidarity with the families of the victims , this Parliament should also condemn every form of human rights ' violation and violence , regardless of who is responsible for such criminal acts .
Mexico , under the mandate of President Zedillo , is today immersed in a complex and unfinished process of reform .
Many things have changed in that country since the elections of the 6th of July last , but there are other things which have not changed so much : violence , insecurity and impunity .
It is certain that the measures taken by the Government - in the case of the massacre at Acteal and the events in Ocosingo - are an attempt to restore confidence and the country 's credibility , within the limits of the legal system and the rule of law , under which all subjects must be seen as equal , beginning with the Government and ending with the citizens .
But this is not enough , Mr President , it is not enough to react , since the loss of life , of one single human life , is irreparable .
These measures should not be considered exceptional as they serve as a model for normal behaviour in any legal system .
Because when freedom is violated - which begins with respect for the right to life - justice must be applied strictly , Mr President , For that reason this Parliament , by means of the resolution , appeals to the Government - which has the prime duty of looking after its citizens - to mobilize all its forces to prevent such shameful and dreadful deeds being repeated .
And it stresses again that dialogue and the eradication of violence , of all violence , form the best path - rather the only path - to reach a lasting solution to the conflict and a just and durable peace for everyone .
Mr President , the violent death of 45 defenceless people , most of them women and children , in the Mexican town of Acteal on 22nd of December last , once again presented us with a Mexico which is showing its deepest divisions in the state of Chiapas , where a rich Mexico and a poor , unequal and disadvantaged Mexico live uncomfortably side by side .
I condemn unreservedly such an extremely serious act and express my solidarity with the victims and their families .
The real situation in Chiapas today needs to be analyzed rigorously and sincerely .
We cannot dismiss what is happening in Chiapas with a simplistic analysis or with western standards because very serious errors may be made .
Rejecting the use of violence as a political instrument , I would like President Zedillo and his Government to find a solution to the Chiapas conflict and to the political , economic , social and cultural causes which are behind this conflict . I would like the Republic 's legal system to keep the investigation open until the facts have been fully clarified and to avoid these going unpunished ; for the Mexican political parties to reach agreement on national policies and decide upon a common legal approach to native autonomy , as an important step towards implementing part of the San Andrés agreements ; for the presence of paramilitary groups in Chiapas to be eliminated and the Zapatista insurgents integrated as a civil organization - sooner rather than later - in Mexican political life ; and finally for the Committee , in collaboration with the Mexican federal authorities , to support urgent aid programmes for the Chiapan refugees .
I acknowledge the role of the Mexican Army in disarming the paramilitary groups and its activity in the distribution of aid to refugees ; but all their efforts should be increased so that there are no armed confrontations between the Mexican regular army and Zapatista insurgents .
If this confrontation should unfortunately occur , its consequences would be unpredictable .
Today what really matters is to save this delicate mosaic of solutions and the peace we want and should be building .
Mexican society should see in the European Union not just an accusing finger , but instead a loyal ally working with it to avoid conflict .
The resolution which we wish to adopt today represents a modest contribution to that alliance established for the purpose of sharing problems and solutions together .
Mr President , when we tabled this resolution , there may still have been some doubt as to whether the Mexican authorities were responsible for the massacre at Acteal .
There is now no longer any doubt .
It has been proved that the local authorities at least were warned of the preparations for the massacre on 21 December , that they were advised of the involvement of members of the Institutional Revolutionary Party and the police in those preparations .
Far from understanding the feeling generated by the massacre , a feeling that brought 100 000 demonstrators out onto the streets of Mexico , the Mexican authorities are continuing to carry out repression , and another young Indian woman has just been killed by the Police .
That is why I believe that this House should take up this issue , and although many of us do not share the romantic fascination , which the archaic left-wing notions of the Zapatista movement have for some , this House should loudly condemn the Mexican authorities , and exhort them to finally open a debate on the many problems , particularly with regard to property , which they face in the state of Chiapas .
Mr President , the appalling slaughter at Acteal and the previous events testify to the serious problems which the democratic transition in Mexico is going through .
Also they provide evidence for the lack of respect for human rights in that country and , of course , the explosive situation in the state of Chiapas .
Europe should contribute to making Mexico a democracy which fully respects human rights , and we have to demand this , above all else , from President Ernesto Zedillo and his government .
We have to ask the Mexican authorities to detain and find guilty those who are to blame for the slaughter at Acteal ; to disarm the paramilitary groups who , as has already been noted , were working in Chiapas before the crime in Acteal , and to discourage them ; to cease military operations in Chiapas and to withdraw the Army ; to fulfil the San Andrés agreement and set up a real dialogue with the Zapatista Army ; to respect human rights and to extend the democratic process as far as possible .
Such a democratic process showed a marked improvement with the fair election of Cuahutémoc Cárdenas as governor of the Federal District capital .
There is no doubt that we should agree with what the majority of Mexicans are asking for - and thousands and thousands have just done so on the streets of their cities - as well as with what most Europeans want too .
Our citizens do not want vague promises about Mexico , they want clarity .
We have to demand the same clarity here for Parliament , for the Council and for the Committee , and we have to ask for an international agreement in respect of human rights in Mexico and for the Committee to inform us about this issue in a regular and organized way .
For all these reasons , good words are not enough ; words have to be based on deeds and if we want all these demands to be met we have to use the means at our disposal .
This is the reason why our resolution calls upon this Parliament to suspend the procedure for ratification of the bilateral agreement concluded last December between the European Union and Mexico , until President Zedillo meets the demands which were expressed before , and I think that we ought to ask national parliaments to take similar action .
Mr President , the callous slaughter of 45 people at Acteal in the state of Chiapas in Mexico shocked human rights workers round the world .
This resolution reflects a widely held sense of outrage .
The prompt condemnation of the massacre by the Mexican President and the steps taken to root out those responsible and bring them to justice , as the resolution states , is welcome .
But the Mexican authorities must recognize that any failure of the system which allowed the guilty to evade judgement would gravely damage their reputation .
In the past Mexicans have suffered grievous violations of their human rights without the culprits being detected or punished .
But it is vital on this occasion that those who committed so appalling a crime should not be allowed to avoid the consequences of their acts .
The Government of Mexico must , furthermore , reiterate its declared commitment to a peaceful resolution to the conflict with the ZNLA .
We must strongly urge both sides to renew their efforts to ensure that the objectives of the San Andrés agreements are achieved in full , without any further injuries or loss of life and , to this end , to meet with a will to succeed , come what may .
If the terrible events of 22 December jolt those in a position of responsibility to take the actions required , not only to resolve the conflict , but also to tackle the underlying problems of poverty , deprivation and discrimination which lie behind the Zapatista revolt , the victims of Acteal will not have died in vain .
At this stage I do not think that we should seek to impede the EU-Mexico agreement of December 1997 which includes the issue of human rights since the Mexican Government is taking action on the issues of this massacre .
Inevitably , however , if human rights violations were to increase or fail to be dealt with , it would not be possible to oppose a much tougher line in future .
Mr President , as I have been to Chiapas , and maintained regular contact , both with militant Zapatistas and many Mexican progressives , I can bear witness to the hope engendered , in Mexico , by the San Andrés agreements of February 1996 .
The culture of indigenous peoples should be recognized as an integral part of the diversity of Mexico , and their participation in its political life should be guaranteed .
It is my conviction that basically the non-respect of these agreements was the main cause of the dramatic worsening of the situation in the state of Chiapas .
Now , the worst has happened , and in the massacre at Acteal 45 people died on 22 December 1996 .
This is a serious indictment of those who , at the head of the State , tolerate such paramilitary groups and what is more , of the local leaders of the IRP who give these murderers their direct support .
It is impossible to deny that the leaders of the country deliberately allowed the situation to worsen in order to try and isolate the Zapatistas or force them to make a mistake , in order to justify their adoption of the military option .
It is within this context that I wish to pass on the express request of many important people in Chiapas and in Mexico in general , that is , that the partnership and cooperation agreement signed on 8 December 1997 between the European Union and Mexico , should be suspended , until the Mexican authorities dissolve these paramilitary groups , condemn the murderers , withdraw the Mexican army from the indigenous areas , and more generally , fulfil their commitments , or in other words , implement the San Andrés agreement , so that the populations of the state of Chiapas may at last achieve peace , justice and democracy .
Mr President , the European Commission naturally shares the horror and dismay about the murder of 45 people in the village of Acteal in the Mexican state of Chiapas .
This means that the hope for a peaceful solution to the conflict in Chiapas has further decreased , but cannot take this lying down , we of course .
On the 22nd of December , in a statement from the Luxembourg Presidency , the European Commission called on the Mexican authorities to immediately set up an investigation into the identity of the perpetrators of the murders and to bring them to court .
The European Union also pointed out that in the agreements between the European Union and Mexico , signed in Brussels on 8 December , both parties undertook to observe human rights and democratic principles unconditionally .
The Commission has meanwhile taken note of President Zedillo 's promise to employ all necessary resources at federal level to find and punish the perpetrators , and to intensify the talks on finding a peaceful solution to the conflict .
This promise has been fulfilled .
The Home Affairs Minister has resigned .
The governor has mandated the Attorney General to lead the investigation personally .
The governor of the state of Chiapas has been removed from office , and a number of people who are suspected of being involved in the murders have been arrested .
The Commission has argued before and continues to argue for a peaceful solution which will have to be the result of mutual consultation between the government and the ZNLA .
We will obviously continue to follow the developments in Chiapas closely .
Our delegation in Mexico continues to report all developments and is in regular contract will all parties concerned .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0033 / 98 by Mr Bertens on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on controls on armaments exports ; -B4-0058 / 98 by Mr Oostlander and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the European code of conduct on armaments exports ; -B4-0064 / 98 by Mr Titley , Mr Swoboda and Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the PSE , on the European code of conduct on armaments exports ; -B4-0081 / 98 by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the code of conduct on armaments exports ; -B4-0086 / 98 by Mr Wurtz , Mr Jové Peres , Mr Alavanos , Mr Ribeiro and Mr Papayannakis , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on controls on armaments exports ; -B4-0104 / 98 by Mrs Hautala , Mr Telkämper , Ms Mckenna , Mr Gahrton and Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the European code of conduct on transfers of armaments .
Thank you , Mr President . The Socialist Group warmly welcomes the initiative taken by the British Presidency to seek to establish a code of conduct on arms exports .
We believe this is essential to the future because , of course , you cannot really have a common foreign and security policy dedicated to crisis management and conflict prevention , while at the same time your big companies are arming the very countries responsible for instability .
It is also essential for the defence industry itself , because the lack of a code of conduct is holding back the consolidation which the industry needs and which will make it less dependent on exports , as I pointed out in my report to this Parliament a few months ago .
In this debate we must not let the best be the enemy of the good .
We should concentrate on two essential principles .
Firstly , we need clear and commonly agreed principles governing the trade .
That would mean distinguishing between the sale of arms to countries that would use them to abuse human rights and the sale of arms to countries that may have a dubious record but , nonetheless , have a legitimate external security concern .
Unfortunately , the resolutions before us do not make sufficient distinction between these two issues .
The second issue we have to address is that there should be no undercutting .
Once a country decides on the basis of these principles not to export arms , no other country should be allowed to complete that sale themselves and so undermine the principle .
We also have to recognize three other issues essential for the effective working of a code of conduct .
Firstly , there has to be maximum transparency , i.e. the Council has to report on what it is doing and allow the European Parliament to comment .
Secondly , we need a fresh initiative , particularly in the light of enhanced police cooperation in the Amsterdam Treaty , to stop the illegal sale of arms .
Thirdly , we have to step up our efforts to make this an international code of conduct , not just a European code of conduct .
Mr President , we , the Liberal Group , are delighted with the initiative of the British Presidency to step up the community criteria on arms exports .
The British Presidency has announced a code of conduct , but this code of conduct must not become a feeble compromise .
A noncommittal code of conduct is of no use to us .
Agreements must be made which are enforceable and can be monitored .
Bilateral agreements are not the solution , because they offer too many opportunities for secret deals .
To facilitate effective consultation , the Member States must make internal agreements to guarantee major openness and public and parliamentary control on arms export licences .
A UN arms sale register is a useful instrument for increasing global transparency regarding arms supplies .
That is why a new criterion should be included which forbids exports to countries which do not meet the terms of this UN register .
We liberals will therefore support the amendments made by the Greens .
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party thinks that a code of conduct regulating the export of arms is a positive step and , what is more , we should consider it vital if we are to build an efficient PESC .
To regulate and control the export of arms to countries at war , to countries which do not respect human rights and to unstable regions allows us to indirectly intervene , avoiding an escalation of conflict in such areas .
If we also establish a clear , unambiguous code which limits the type of arms and technology which can be exported , as well as agreements with other exporting countries - not forgetting companies and other trading countries - we will have taken an important step forward .
It would be good if the Council , as well as drawing up the code I mentioned , could let us know when it has been completed .
Mr President , the manufacture , sale and exportation of arms are activities which have never had a very good press , but which still make very good profits for those engaged in them .
It is also an industry of some political importance , which maintains jobs , which is not negligible these days .
The adoption of a Code of Conduct within the EU is therefore a necessity .
Actively preparing to extend it to other countries is also a necessity , but I should like to draw your attention to the list of items involved .
Certainly , heavy armoured vehicles , supersonic bombers and highly sophisticated equipment should be on it , but we must also remember that the weapons that kill the most , particularly in countries where there is instability , are small-bore weapons , automatic firearms and hand-held weapons .
Such weapons are used more often than the heavy artillery of a nuclear aircraft carrier to bring down farmers , demonstrators and opponents .
We should at least agree that they should one day be included in the Code of Conduct .
Mr President , we welcome the initiative taken by the British Presidency of the Council in playing an active role in this matter and in finally putting this critical point on the agenda .
Of course , the European Parliament has to be included .
But it must also make progressive proposals which will lead somewhere .
For this reason I would like the European Parliament to concentrate on current developments and crisis situations and , this being the case , for light and small arms to play the central role .
We cannot simply leave them aside ; we have to include them .
Anyone who has even been in an area of conflict knows just how important this is .
Cooperation on arms issues requires special consideration of technologies with dual applications .
It constitutes another aspect of the debate .
I am also delighted that our proposal to add a ninth criterion to exclude the supply of arms to countries which do not joint the UN arms register has been taken on board .
Of course , a codex of this nature has to be put into practice .
And that means that arms deals must be controlled by national governments .
Mr President , I would also like to welcome the proposal for appropriate joint action with regard to the EU 's arms exports .
The fact that a majority of the EU 's Member States have at least signalled their readiness for a code of conduct is gratifying .
However , it is surprising that my home country , Finland , has not discussed this or supported the initiative .
It is surprising because for a small country it is more advantageous to have an arms market which has rules than one which is unregulated .
It is also surprising because Finland was prepared to discuss production cooperation .
Why are people not prepared to discuss cooperation and common rules for exports ?
This is serious .
We need new rules urgently because the arms trade grew during 1995-1996 .
The code needs to include rules on sensitive areas where we either have a full embargo , selective restrictions or where the States negotiate between themselves .
All countries should be allowed to participate in these negotiations .
Mr President , the European Commission is grateful to Parliament for putting this topic on the agenda once more . This debate is taking place at a relatively sensitive time for the European defence industry , and at a time of rapid international development .
Because of the violent conflicts in many parts of the world , the issue of improved control on arms exports is high on the international agenda , and is being closely followed by the public .
The present EU regulations concerning arms exports , which are based on the eight points agreed in 1991 and 1992 , have not turned out to be very effective .
These points are too vague and cannot be very easily managed as a guideline either .
The Commission is distinctly in favour of stricter rules , which make up a clear framework for the discussion about the arms trade .
We also favour an improvement in the exchange of information and consultation procedures between the Member States .
This Parliament has made a significant contribution to this debate on the European arms industry by accepting a resolution based on Mr Titley 's report , and he generally supports the findings and recommendations made in a Commission statement in January 1996 .
In the resolution the Commission is asked to draw up a White Paper on arms exports , and the services of the Commission are presently working on this .
I hope that this process can be completed during the next few weeks .
This document evaluates the position of the European Union in the global arms trade , and discusses the role of the Union in the arms exports policy up until at the present time , and presents a number of options for future action .
It will also pay attention to the increasingly important issue of illegal trade in small and light arms .
The British Presidency is determined to make active progress on the road to a restrictive and more transparent European Union arms export policy .
It intends to submit a EU code of conduct on the arms trade regulations .
This means a political commitment will be demanded from the Member States , probably in the shape of a statement from the Council .
I myself raised the subject at the recent visit of the European Commission to the British Presidency in London , and Foreign Secretary Mr Cook assured me that he is presently holding bilateral negotiations with a number of Member States in order to speed up the process towards this code of conduct as much as possible .
The Commission for its part is prepared to support any initiative which will lead to such a code of conduct being established , and the White Paper is intended as a contribution to these efforts .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0050 / 98 by Mr Pompidou , Mr Scapagnini and Mr Baldi , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on cloning of human beings ; -B4-0053 / 98 by Mr Monfils , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on cloning of human beings ; -B4-0068 / 98 by Mrs Green and Mr Cot , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on human cloning ; -B4-0074 / 98 by Mr Liese , Mr C. Casini , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , Mr Trakatellis and Mr Tindemans , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on cloning of human beings ; -B4-0079 / 98 by Mr Hory , Mr Pradier and Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on human cloning ; -B4-0087 / 98 by Mr Papayannakis , Mrs González Álvarez , Mr Gutiérrez Díaz , Mrs Ainardi , Mrs Sornosa Martínez , Mr Sjöstedt , Mr Ojala and Mr Marset Campos , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on cloning of human beings ; -B4-0102 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet , Mrs Roth , Mrs Ahern , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , Mrs Hautala , Mr Lannoye , Ms Mckenna , Mrs Schörling , Mr Tamino and Mr Voggenhuber , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the death penalty in the United States ; -B4-0059 / 98 by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in the Ingusci Republic ; -B4-0077 / 98 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the situation in the Ingusci Republic ; -B4-0100 / 98 by Mrs Schroedter and Mr Gahrton , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the return of the Ingusci in the districts of Prigrodni and Vladikavkaz ; -B4-0060 / 98 by Mr Stasi , Mr Tindemans and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the arrest of Z 'ahidi Ngoma ( Democratic Republic of Congo ) ; -B4-0072 / 98 by Mr Azzolini , Mr Pasty and Mr Andrews , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on the violation of human rights in the Democratic Republic of Congo ; -B4-0078 / 98 by Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the protection of the Aborigine population in Australia ; -B4-0089 / 98 by Mr Papayannakis , Mr Mohamed Alí , Mr Sjöstedt and Mr Ojala , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the extraction of uranium in the Aborigine territories ; -B4-0098 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , Mr Holm , Mr Lannoye and Ms Mckenna , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the extraction of uranium in Aborigine territories ; -B4-0054 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mrs Cars , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the mass executions in South Korea ; -B4-0080 / 98 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the death sentence in the United States on Karla Faye Tucker ; -B4-0103 / 98 by Mr Manisco , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , and Mrs Aglietta and Ms Mckenna , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in the state of Chiapas ( Mexico ) ; -B4-0076 / 98 by Mr Dupuis , Mr Dell 'Alba and Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the human rights situation in China ; -B4-0097 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the appointment of a special representative of the European Union for Tibet ; -B4-0035 / 98 by Mr Watson , Mr Mulder , Mr Fassa and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Kenya ; -B4-0084 / 98 by Mr Hory , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the result of the election in Kenya .
Human cloning
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , great apprehension has been aroused by last week 's announcement from Professor Richard Seed of his intention to carry out research to apply the technique of cloning to man and the ethical consequences that involves .
The European Parliament has already come out absolutely firmly against any form of cloning for purposes of reproduction of human beings and passed a clear resolution on the subject on 12 March 1997 .
Taking account of the right to genetic identity and whereas the principle of equality presupposes parity of rights - and hence acceptance of individual differences - banning discrimination and implying , therefore , the inadmissibility of genetically equal individuals and genetic selection , an explicit world ban on cloning of human beings is considered necessary and the responsible authorities are asked to draw up adequate legislation on the subject .
It is also important to organize a world conference on the issue , in order to reach a common position condemning cloning of human beings .
Encouraging , assisting and supporting scientific research is a moral obligation for the whole of society .
But the news arriving from the United States is extremely alarming .
It smacks of lack of respect for the dignity of the species which governs this planet , even if it does fall into a thousand difficulties and errors .
Scientific research is following its own path - as it should - and at high speed . But our task is to do our best to encompass research in a legislative framework , by banning human cloning and establishing deterrent penal sanctions for individuals and financial sanctions for states which agree to it .
However , we are lagging behind and my personal hope is that all the governments of the planet can come together to draw up rules for proper development in harmony with all the facets of nature , animals and last but not least , human beings .
Mr President , the general disapproval of a project by an American scientist to clone a human being and the initiatives adopted by the Council of Europe in this respect , have indisputably shown that we and a number of countries have not lost our ability to express indignation .
However , in addition to this case , which no one will deny is serious , there is a need for a fundamental debate on the limits of science , or more exactly on the responsibility of scientists .
It would be unacceptable , whilst the emotion created by this business is still high , in the name of natural morals or ethics , to set a limit to the research which can be carried out on the genome , soon perhaps to include certain forms of cloning .
It is always the same old story .
On the other hand , it would be equally unacceptable if , in the name of absolute scientific freedom , a human being was created to be used for organ transplants , without the human being created by means of cloning having the same rights as a human being born by natural reproduction .
Cloning a human being , need I repeat , is not , contrary to what its authors says , a scientific venture .
First of all and above all , it is a media and commercial operation which shows the danger of research which can no longer obtain from public funds the resources it needs for socially acceptable development .
And that is the real danger .
Commercial pressure is certain to destroy any research , whose aim is above all to promote social wellbeing .
Mr President , it has already been said that the cloning revolution we are discussing is nothing new .
The subject was already widely discussed in March 1997 and in the draft directive on patents .
I think that if we start the same debate every time that a scientist somewhere in the world tells the media he has gone beyond what is morally permissible , all each part-session will have to do is to clone a resolution on the previous resolution .
Because , finally , we do have an instrument in Europe . It is , as has already been said , the European Bioethics Convention and its protocol , which prohibits , and I quote : ' Any intervention seeking to create a human being genetically identical to another human being , whether living or dead ... '
It is up to each Member State to approve the protocol and what prevents some Member States from signing and ratifying the Convention is that it is too inflexible , inasmuch as , for example , it prohibits any intervention on germ cells and any use of embryos for the purposes of scientific research .
By wanting to prohibit everything , we are preventing the implementation of the Convention .
Finally , according to us , I would say that it is certainly necessary to prevent aberrations , but we must not however stop scientific research in its exploration of life .
I share Mr Desama 's point of view on this subject .
Although the cloning of human beings is contrary to the dignity of the human being , the cloning of cells or tissues may make it possible to combat hereditary diseases .
People who claim to defend humanity by proposing to stop research on living cells only prevent men and women suffering from genetic diseases , in particular , from having a better quality of life , or even from staying alive .
That is unacceptable .
Humanity needs scientific progress .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has always spoken out clearly against human cloning , arguing not only on purely technical grounds , but also on issues of principle . Therefore we are not in favour of a moratorium on human cloning , but rather a general ban .
I also believe that everyone at this plenary session is united behind this demand .
But what is human cloning ?
That is the question addressed by the previous speaker and which we must now define .
On this subject , too , the EP has always taken a very clear position .
Both in the vote on the Patent Guidelines in June and within the context of the Fifth Research Framework Programme in December we found a clear definition .
The Legal Committee and the Research Committee have both dealt with these matters intensively and in the Research Committee this issue was the subject of a unanimous vote when all others were hotly disputed .
I believe it is very important that we continue to hold this position .
And this is why the EVP has included amendment 8 .
Banning human cloning , for example , does not mean banning work on human cells designed to make skin transplants possible .
It does mean , however , that both cloned babies and the production of human embryos for use as spare parts for organ transplants must be outlawed .
For this reason we are very shocked by amendment 1 proposed by Mr Bowe , Mr Monfils and others which rules out cloning for the purposes of reproduction only .
This could mean , however , that a situation in which one produced a human embryo or , taking the interpretation a stage further , a baby without a brain , cloned it and then used if not for reproduction but as a supply of spare parts for organs , this would clearly not be excluded .
We must be very clear here .
The Council of Europe 's Monday Clone Protocol expressly omits any reference to reproductive clones and is therefore further-reaching than the demand which has just been detailed .
As such , it represents a good step in the right direction .
In conclusion , we must nevertheless ensure that this clone protocol is not open to misinterpretation , like the dangerous image , for example , drawn by the President of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe , and it is for this reason that we have submitted Amendment No 9 to close any backdoor routes .
Mr President , everyone is against the cloning of human beings , of course , and rightly so .
It is well known that is how things stand , apart of course for certain businessmen , disguised as scientists , who see it as a source of lucrative business .
And the combination of the lure of profit and contempt for mankind should not make us change our minds !
We shall therefore vote for this text , but we would however like to emphasize an important aspect . That is , the importance of the call for an international conference which Monica Baldi mentioned .
This conference should take place at the end of a moratorium , a determined dialogue between the scientific world , ethics commissions and political leaders on the subject , which is so serious and new to all of us , that many of us are bewildered and have no reliable points of reference on the subject .
Mr President , we are not speaking here of research relating to therapeutic and medical ends , to which nobody objects .
We are talking about the cloning of individuals , human beings , and the most important thing one can say , at least with today 's attitudes towards the subject , is that nobody can guarantee the health and natural development of individuals produced in that way , in the Brave New World which some people promise us .
We are therefore right to be concerned for that reason , and to call for a ban .
Yet , Mr President , that decision and that action we wish to undertake for the future would be pointless unless its scope is world-wide , and in particular , unless it extends to countries which have the ability to go down that road , most of all the United States , where there is a legal vacuum on the subject .
Mr Clinton 's appeals for prohibition relate only to federal funding and not to the private sector .
On that point I would like to ask : are the Commission and the Council of Ministers disposed , and do they know how and to what extent they could negotiate with the United States , so that we can agree on a common policy over the issue ?
Mr President , obviously we are all astonished today at the announcement from the United States and also , I would add , by what we have heard from a British bio-ethics committee , which has opened up wide prospects of human cloning for therapeutic purposes .
This is astonishing and there is opposition to it , but it demonstrates that we Greens were right when we said last year that accepting cloning of animals was an open door to human cloning .
And here today someone is opening new doors to human cloning , because when it is claimed that human cloning is acceptable for therapeutic purposes , that is another broad path towards the final destination which will inevitably be cloning of human beings .
Also , when we speak of human beings it is clear that we must explicitly define what human beings are and say that cloning must be banned from the start of conception throughout all the embryonic stages .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament 's view is clear and unambiguous .
The dignity of mankind forbids any form of cloning .
In the vote on the 5th Research Framework Programme we also refused the provision of funds for research which amounts to human cloning .
Respect for our fellow creatures as well as other considerations also make the cloning of animals a extremely questionable endeavour at the very least .
Today , reports on a money-hungry madman who calls himself a scientist are forcing us to hold this debate for clarification .
This clarification is required to ensure that one perverse case of abuse does not discredit the entire field of biotechnology which we associate with hopes and high expectations .
But there is also a question which we must ask ourselves . Have we done everything we can to ensure that this new area of research and technology does not slip out of our control and direct itself against men or even mankind ?
We have certainly tried .
Today we have before us a network of laws and guidelines which regulate and protect but which also offer loopholes and hiding places which could lead to the abuse of biotechnology .
It is my view , therefore , that a framework guideline is needed which marks out the field and makes the many individual rules transparent .
It must cover all aspects of the issue , including uniform provisions in criminal law which impose severe penalties on the flouting of regulations and violation of bans .
This difficult work is our duty as citizens of the European Union .
We must not dodge it . We must ask the Member States to sign a Council of Europe document today .
On one hand , the so-called Bioethics Convention fails to solve the problem .
On the other , it offers the principle of subsidiarity under which each Member State may decide whether or not to ratify it .
For this reason let us remove Point 2 from the joint resolution .
Mr President , from a scientific point of view , considering the cloning of humans by the method used with the now famous Dolly , it must be said that the experiment of creating her was the only one to succeed among very many failures .
Consequently , the method has not been scientifically perfected , its medium and long-term results are unknown , and there has been no investigation of all the possible consequences for the organism of the cloned animal .
It is therefore shocking when a scientist says , without circumlocution , that he is going to clone a human being .
Because not only is that not justified on scientific grounds , but it is equivalent to dangerous and I would even say criminal experiments with humans .
Mr President , we still have to consider the ethical , legal and social aspects of the problem , because if cloning is applied to mankind this essentially opens the way towards eugenics .
Echoes of the creation of the Aryan race and the Superman have still not died down even today .
Who is to do the cloning and under what conditions ?
Will it be available for all ?
Will special permits be needed ?
There are still very many related questions , which show that the issue is exceptionally complex , and that it harbours the risk of distorting human societies .
It is a fact that in the face of headlong scientific progress the legal systems of our countries have found themselves unprepared .
And consequently , it is important that the laws should be adapted well in time , with objectives such as protection of the individual , safeguarding the interests of the group , and defending society 's values .
This nightmare prospect of human cloning must be banned well in time , because it would create insuperable problems in our societies .
Mr President , every scientific revolution brings reactions and creates conditions of insecurity .
Galileo was condemned by the Holy Inquisition .
In-vitro fertilization as a way of producing children was also deplored , and world-wide public opinion still regards euthanasia with mistrust .
Cloning , however , reminds us by association of the Nazi doctor Mengele and his tragic experiments .
It is a repulsive prospect to produce human beings who are faithful copies , because every human is unique and his uniqueness is the nucleus of thought and creativity .
The lack of a simultaneous international legal framework and the evident possibility of unethical and politically dangerous exploitation in the cloning of humans has caused the international scientific community to react with reservations .
The European Parliament 's duty is to determine the fine line which defines what is ethically acceptable and socially permissible and beneficial .
The rules , however , Commissioner , must be strict enough to prevent the realization of unwholesome phenomena .
At the same time , they must apply world-wide .
I would like to ask you whether you have considered , within the scope of this effort , trying together with the UN to establish such world-wide legislation in relation to cloning .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are scientists who say yes , we will clone humans .
This is a major affront to human dignity .
It is the irresponsible breaking of ethical dams and taboos .
An absence of ethical boundaries would be a terrifying thing for humanity .
Knowledge without conscience is a horrific scenario !
Yet here we are , faced with a kind of mad and undreamt-of omnipotence .
Unfortunately , the nightmare of a " made to measure ' human being or the breeding of humans as a supply of spare parts is becoming more and more realistic , and unimagined ethics are being pushed ever forward .
The international community still has no binding regulations and even in the European Union science has no ethical boundaries .
On the contrary , increasingly it is the scientists who are setting the ethical boundaries for society .
Even the cloning of animals provides expertise for the future cloning of humans .
So what we need - and I ask the Commission if it is ready to do this - is a worldwide non-proliferation treaty for cloning techniques .
We need the worldwide outlawing of cloning because what is technically feasible will one day be done .
It also seems to me to be essential that we exert some economic pressure !
I believe that within the framework of the WTO we should boycott international groups and countries who are not prepared to devise binding rules on the banning of cloning .
In this regard , I should be glad to know whether the Commission is prepared to go beyond non-binding declarations and statements , whether it is prepared to go a step further , to sign a binding agreement and make a worldwide ban on cloning .
Mr President , in the discussion about what is scientifically possible we must first of all ask : what is its feasibility or its moral desirability ?
This question is also at the heart of this issue .
Considering the many reactions of horror to the plans of the American scientist Richard Seed , the moral undesirability of the cloning of humans in this case appears to be winning against the desire for scientific advance .
And rightly so .
Cloning technology leaves nothing to chance , and makes bad copies .
In actual fact , it adds nothing .
Going a step further and improving a certain gene in the clone , we reach the dangerous zone of racial improvement .
Little good can be expected of this technique , in other words .
What is the situation regarding the clone ?
During the discussions on human rights our group has frequently remarked that the freedom of one is bounded by the freedom of another .
This also applies here .
The human dignity , the individuality and identity of man is at issue , and man is reduced to a consumer article .
So it is gratifying that , at the Council of Europe , a charter awaiting signature which forbids the cloning of humans .
Yet I still have my reservations about the future .
I recognize God as the Creator of man .
I see the new human life which originates in the conjunction between man and women as a unique gift from God .
As far as I am concerned the lines are very sharply drawn .
It means an absolute ban on the cloning of humans .
Yet to many countries this ban already does not seem to be wholly absolute .
Thus it is worrying that the Netherlands , England and Germany have still not signed the charter .
Pressure must be put on these countries .
I sincerely hope that we decide on an absolute , tough position against human cloning .
It is vital .
Mr President , last April over twenty countries signed the Council of Europe Convention at Oviedo , which constitutes the best contribution Europe can make to the world debate on bio-medicine and medical research , but it only represents a first step towards regulating the matter .
At a time when science and new laboratory techniques are being identified as a power capable of conditioning modern man and the man of the future , it is becoming essential , in our view , for this debate to be open and democratic .
Medical research is indispensable for alleviating suffering and improving human health , but there must be boundaries which cannot be crossed - and I say that as a doctor and not as a politician - and those are the boundaries of the actual dignity and identity of man .
Experiments in cloning , but also trade in embryos , gametes and genetic material , are taking place not only in Europe but all over the world without any controls and this demonstrates that it is now urgent to deal with bioethical issues and find solutions .
The signature and ratification of the Council of Europe Convention last April , and its additional protocol specifically banning human cloning , could be the start of the solution , but the Union 's partner countries must be urgently involved .
Determined defence of a people 's rights will increase their dignity , freedom , integrity and right to health .
So it is the duty of the Alleanza Nazionale delegation to give its support and approval to the motion for a resolution .
Mr President , I believe that Dr Seed is a buccaneer who is seeking to create a market opportunity which he will then exploit without licence and without responsibility .
It is also significant that when the Commission 's group of advisors were asked to look at the question of Dolly the sheep and her cloning , they did so after Dolly had been born and the gravest danger is now that even though we know that human cloning may be scientifically possible we are making scientific advance without the same advance being made in our ethical considerations .
That being the case , we need to establish and ethical committee .
The common position of the Council in response to the Rothley report leaves a great deal to be desired .
I do not believe that common position reflects what Parliament has voted and consequently at the second reading of the Rothley report I will retable Parliament 's original amendment thus making it , if we pass it , a precondition of the patenting directive that we shall establish a satisfactory ethical committee .
Failure to do that means that cloning will take place and will take place on an open market .
Mr President , I wonder if there is anything original I can add to this debate when virtually everything has been said .
I think it is right to specify general aversion to cloning of human beings at any stage in their development .
I emphasize " human being ' .
This does not mean individual somatic cells which might be reproduced in order to cure , say , a skin disease , the reproduction of epithelial cells .
That is my first point .
My second point is that there is no international document or internal document in the individual European states permitting cloning of human beings .
The European Parliament itself repeatedly expressed its view on this issue right up to the final proposal for a directive on legal protection of bio-technological inventions , but it was already very clear on the subject in 1989 with two resolutions on ethical and legal problems of artificial human procreation and genetic engineering .
I am pleased to recall , in respect of the latter , that in the report presented by Mr Rothley in 1989 a very strong expression was used to indicate the legal reason which militates against cloning , and that is the destruction of personality .
In reality the cloning of human beings raises two fundamental principles of law : the principle of human dignity and the principle of equality , equality which presupposes diversity , because equality lies in dignity regardless of the diversity which makes each of us unique .
Making us equal - paradoxically - is actually a way of destroying equality .
My final point is this : we can certainly ask whether it is right for a Parliament to be concerned and take action to repeat things already said in television or newspaper statements .
I think it is right ; given the gravity of the matter it is important to be vigilant .
It would have been much better to have talked about the atom bomb before building it .
Science is not at stake , technique is at stake , and technique is in the hands of man , who needs to know which track to go down .
Mr President , as the last speaker on this subject , it will perhaps be even more difficult for me to be original than the others , but I should however like to draw the attention of all the Members of this House to the aberration of the arrival of ' Dolly ' , which has caused considerable emotion in public opinion , and also in this Parliament .
We immediately voted in a resolution prohibiting human cloning , which we feared that Dolly would lead to - which was obviously true .
But what is more serious is that as time has passed , the emotion has died down , and now one can hear , in this House and elsewhere , more moderate statements to the effect that some forms of human cloning would be acceptable .
I therefore believe that what we now need is a totally unambiguous resolution .
We must be quite clear .
Cloning of human beings must be totally banned for reasons which have been widely discussed and which are , of course , related to human dignity and the eugenic threat .
Ingusci
Mr President , first of all I would like to say how pleased I am that we are discussing Ingushetia today .
Many people have forgotten that just a few years ago the conflict in ChechnyaIngushetia was a frequent topic of discussion .
The Ingushetis belong to the same ethnic group as the Chechens .
Today the situation in this country is very difficult , primarily because it is not one , self-contained area of settlement , but two large enclaves , namely Vladikavkaz and Prigorodny .
The Ingushetis formerly living in North Ossetia were effectively driven out as a result of a massive push by the Russians and have had to return to Ingushetia where they now constitute a huge and very difficult refugee problem which we must somehow address because we don 't want to see a repeat of the Chechnya conflict .
A further problem , of course , is the fact that the Russians are now claiming that the Ingushetis helped the Chechens and must therefore be punished .
We are acutely aware that severe restrictions - I am endeavouring to avoid the word blockade - are being imposed on Ingushetia which means that the country is devoid of any meaningful economic development , and that the winter is creating a very difficult situation for the population , particularly for the weakest members , the women and children , who are suffering the most .
Today the situation is such that the UNHCR has asked for our help in resolving it , for considerable funds to provide accommodation so that these refugees are not obliged to live and suffer in these conditions and for our assistance in ensuring that these refugees are able to return to their original settlements .
They will only be able to do this if we make our influence felt in Russia and exert pressure , and if we send aid to the right place .
Mr President , there is nothing much to add after what Carl Habsburg-Lothringen has just said .
He understands the situation perfectly .
It is very difficult situation .
I would however like to stress that a whole region is involved , not just Ingushetia .
It is the Republic of Chechnya , and the after-effects of the war waged there .
There are other adjoining areas , such as Dagestan .
The European Union , and for a start , the Commission , should perhaps pay more attention to that area , because in my opinion , it will be a source of further conflict .
We must envisage solutions urgently .
I think that the Russians have shown that they do not have much intention of changing anything and that the European Union should perhaps make certain suggestions .
We still have a serious humanitarian problem , which cannot wait .
I believe that the Commission is able to oppose this type of situation and I hope that the European Union will very soon become deeply involved in this area .
Mr President , the Ingushetia / North Ossetia conflict is a forgotten conflict .
To date , the 60 , 000 exiles who have been housed in temporary accommodation since 1992 and the children who have been effectively unable to lead normal lives since then have received little attention in European politics .
Although their return has been agreed , this has not yet proved a practical possibility due to the security situation .
Each incursion spreads renewed panic amongst the waiting population and revives the hatred .
So far there has been no reduction of the potential for conflict in the region .
The Russian ruling power has failed to gain acceptance and the UNHCR remains the only body with any sort of mandate to control the Prigorodny conflict .
Action to prevent the escalation of the conflict is urgently required .
Many times in reports I have indicated the need for the EU to commit humanitarian aid on an ongoing rather than a sporadic basis .
That is why I am calling for the ECHO mandate to be extended to Prigorodny and for the EU to assist the OSZE fact finding mission there in bringing international support into the region in order to resolve the conflict .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the motion for a resolution tabled by Mr Habsburg and Mr Oomen-Ruijten is rather glib .
It is true that a siege always causes regrettable suffering .
It is certainly not for fun that the government of the Russian Federation has now been obliged to impose restrictions on movement in the Northern Caucasus .
The Russian Federation is trying to prevent another war due to terrorist and Mafia-type activity .
Every one would regret having voted in favour of Mr Habsburg 's and Mr Oomen-Ruijten 's motion for a resolution if another war were to break out there because of unconsidered removal of the restrictions on movement .
We would therefore have to say like Cassandra , in the poet Aeschylus ' words : ' whilst you make vows , they prepare to kill ' .
It is therefore up to the European Parliament to trust the Russian government , which is trying , under difficult conditions , to restore peace and public order , which are the main prerequisites which will enable the population to live in that area under normal conditions .
Some seem to be playing the dangerous game of encouraging all sorts of separatism in Russia , for commercial reasons , or in the service of a foreign superpower .
It is not by such means that peace will be restored in the Northern Caucasus .
Democratic Republic of Congo

Mr President , with regard to the arbitrary imprisonment of Mr Arthur Ngoma , Leo Tindemans and I have tabled a motion for a resolution on the political situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo , firstly because we know and respect Mr Ngoma , who worked for a long time at UNESCO , was opposed to the Mobutu dictatorship , and is one of the main political leaders in the former Zaire to have bravely denounced the politics of repression and violence put in place by the new leadership .

However , as well as the individual case of Mr Ngoma and also of Mr Nsala , Secretary General of the Human Rights Centre , we and the other signatories of this document , wish to draw the attention of this House and of the leaders of public opinion in our various countries to the real character of the regime which is being set up under the deceptive name of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
It would certainly have been unrealistic to think that a country , which for very many years , was subjected to an arbitrary and corrupt leadership , would be able , in a few months , to transform itself into a country where the principles of democracy , the values of humanism and respect for human rights would be honoured .
Nevertheless , many Congolese and international observers believed in Mr Kabila 's good faith and good will , when after seizing power , he announced a calendar of reforms which would lead the country towards legislative and presidential elections in April 1999 .
Now , not only have the first three intended reforms not taken place , but the leadership is becoming more and more harsh : political parties have been banned , more and more arbitrary arrests are taking place , many political opponents , journalists and human rights activists are detained under inhuman conditions , and torture is a regular occurrence .
Under these circumstances , the European Union cannot remain indifferent .
It must show its indignation ; it must demand the immediate release of all political prisoners ; it must exert pressure ( and has the means to do so ) to make President Kabila carry out his commitments , re-establish basic freedoms and start a process of democratization with no return .
Many countries , including France , but not only France ...
( The president cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I do not wish to speak in this debate to disagree in any way with the indignation at the violation of the most basic human rights perpetrated in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
This group , which is furthermore one of the initiators of the resolution on which we shall presently vote , unreservedly condemns the very serious acts of intimidation targeting all those who dare to express the least criticism of the regime set up in Kinshasa .
On this subject , I am in total agreement with Bernard Stasi 's opinion .
As for myself , I should like to draw the attention of the Presidency of the EU , and of the Commission , to the fate of two of our nationals , Jean-Marie Bergesio , a French civil engineering contractor and Antoine Declercq , one of his employees , who is Belgian .
Both were arrested on 10 September 1997 , and since then have been detained by the security services of the Democratic Republic of Congo , without any reason being given for their arrest .
In addition , they have been systematically refused the services of a lawyer .
I therefore ask the Presidency of the EU to show the greatest determination and firmness , and to obtain clear answers from the authorities of that country on the situation of these two Europeans , and what they are really accused of , their only crime , Mr President , having been to witness the massacre of Hutu refugees in Eastern Zaire .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two fundamental requirements in our approach to the problems raised by recent developments in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
First , it is absolutely necessary to subordinate any international Community aid to this state to the progress actually made in respect for human rights and the real activation of a democratic process in that country .
Second , it is necessary to maintain this democratic process firmly and in particular help the NGOs working for human rights in the Democratic Republic of Congo .

It is pointless to mince words : we recognize the indubitable difficulties Mr Kabila 's government faces , but this cannot constitute , by any title or in homage to any authority including any external to the European Union , a reason for lowering our guard .
Indigenous peoples of Australia
Mr President , this resolution does not just concern Australia but concerns the worldwide problem of the land rights of indigenous people .
The relationship of the indigenous peoples worldwide to the land is perhaps a more accurate description , because the tradition in the part of the world to which we refer is that indigenous people have a collective relationship to the land rather than individual tenure , which is typical of the Western world .
We had experience of that in Scotland when the clan system was replaced by individual landownership .
We have seen it in the Wild West in the United States .
You can see echoes of it in the Sami people in the north of Scandinavia .
In Australia the aborigines say that the land does not belong to them or to the whites but that they belong to the land .
You have to be aware that when they say this they are talking about traditional migratory patterns in which the sacred places which give them identity belong .
Let me end with a quotation from the Australian Senate .
Three months ago it said that the Australian Government should proceed no further with the Jabiluka uranium proposal .
I wish to support that proposition .
Mr President , this is my first speech from the Green Group in the European Parliament , and I hope you will be gentle with me .
It is also very appropriate that it is about Australia , because I am a past chairman of the European Parliament 's delegation for relations with Australia and New Zealand , and I have just returned from Australia , where the issue of aboriginal land and native title is dividing the country down the middle .
There will be an election later this year on this very precise issue , which this resolution today highlights in terms of uranium mining , but which actually concerns the whole country in relation to aboriginal access to their native land .
So this is a very timely resolution .
I hope we adopt it overwhelmingly and thereby send a message to the Australian Government .
The Deputy Prime Minister of Australia will be glad to know it denounced me twice in the Australian Parliament during the ten days of my visit to Australia when I spoke in support of aboriginal land rights right across Australia .
I want this Parliament to be on record that Europe is watching Australia very carefully on this issue , and I hope we can return to it in months to come .
Mr President , in many places in the world we are seeing violations of the human rights of indigenous populations .
It is no coincidence that not long ago , we were talking about indigenous people in Chiapas , that we are now talking about Australia , and that Tibet is on the agenda , notwithstanding all the beautiful declarations which have been integrated into the Union system .
In the case of Australia it is a concrete point we want to raise , namely the fact that the Australian government has decided to start developing the uranium project in Jabiluka , a project situated in a region which is considered a cultural heritage site , and which is recognized by Australian law according as the region belonging to the aborigines .
Besides , and I think it is very important to draw attention to this , the Australian Senate has called on the government to put a stop to this project .
I think it is vital that we have a clear vote here today to ask the government to respect the land rights of the aborigines , and call on the Member States to check from which countries they import uranium in case the rights of the indigenous people are affected .
Executions
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , South Korea is going through a difficult time .
The financial crisis impacts on all aspects of life .
A major political U-turn has brought to power a former dissident .
The mass execution of 23 prisoners which took place at the end of December , was hardly good news . Fifty other prisoners have been sentenced to death .
It goes without saying that to my group the death penalty can never ever be justified .
At a time when so much is in flux in Korea this is the wrong message to the people of this country and to the people of other countries .
Democratization , openness and humane penalties are the answer to this situation in which a nation has been led into uncertainty on a major scale .
Humane penalties instead of the death penalty is one of the most important symbols of the state of law and of true democracy .
Several countries are following this route , and we are calling on the South Korean government to do the same .
Mr President , Mr Bertens has said it with regard to South Korea , but we also have the case of the United States , one of the States in particular , Texas , in which more than half of all American death sentences are carried out .
Like Mr Bertens , I should to remind the house of the slogan of a campaign which my party , the Radical Party , is running , which is , as we cannot save them one by one , we must try to save them all .
That is why we are working , within the framework of the campaign , to set up a universal moratorium on executions .
May I take advantage of the presence of Commissioner Van den Broek to ask him whether in the absence of any initiatives by the Member States , the Commission could not , to a certain extent , become a co-ordinator of those in many Member States in favour of an initiative next autumn , at the United Nations General Assembly , for a resolution , and therefore a vote in favour of instituting a universal moratorium on capital punishment .
Mr President , I think it is a terrible shame that a so-called civilized country like the United States has to be criticized in this Parliament .
It considers itself the moral police force of the world and yet it carries out the most appalling crime , basically a crime against humanity , in imposing the death sentence .
I agree totally with the last speaker about the fact that a woman is being sentenced to death on 3 February .
I call on the Americans and on the Texas authorities to commute her sentence and to put a stay on her execution .
It is unacceptable that such a punishment is carried out in a country that considers itself advanced .
It is quite clear that this form of punishment is not a deterrent to crime .
In fact if you look at the rising crime figures in the United States it is clear that such an abhorrent punishment does not work and it is about time the Americans actually realised that they are way behind the rest of the international community and cannot point the finger at other , what I would call more primitive countries that we criticize with regard to the death penalty .
Until they actually realise that they are totally in the wrong here they cannot point the finger at anyone else .
We have to do everything to ensure that this woman 's sentence is commuted and that there is a stay of her execution .
Tibet
Mr President , on this point , I should first of all like to say to the Commission that our dispute here is getting out of hand .
It is obviously not Commissioner van den Broek who is implicated but Sir Leon Brittan .
Over the last three years , this House has accumulated a number of very specific resolutions on the question of Tibet and the People 's Republic of China .
We have often received good answers from Sir Leon , but they have not led to any action or follow-up ; we have not received a reply with regard to the Panchen Lama ; we have not had a reply concerning Mr Hada ; we have had not reply concerning Mr Wang Dan ; we have not had a reply concerning the very important matter of opening a dialogue with the Dalai Lama .
It is therefore about time that the Commission made full use of its powers .
If Sir Leon Brittan gave to these matters just 1 % of the inventiveness and creativity he devotes to economic and commercial matters , I am sure that he would get results .
I therefore think that it is now urgent for the Commission and Sir Leon in particular to start to give us specific answers to all the questions asked repeatedly by Parliament over the last two years .
One of the central demands of the joint resolution is before this Parliament is that a EU envoy should be appointed for Tibet .
There are two very good reasons for this .
Firstly , the Dalai Lama himself is requesting this , and secondly , and it is important for the colleagues to realize this , the United States have a special envoy for Tibet . , He could make a contribution to the normalization of relations , amongst other things , and the Dalai Lama has indicated that he is greatly in favour of this normalization of relations .
We also know that , should an envoy be active in the country , many embargoed dossiers will finally be released .
You therefore get an instrument for a permanent presence .
Finally , I have to agree fully with colleague Dupuis when he points to a number of inconsistencies caused by of Parliament , for example the releasing of funds for the Panam project , whilst it was known that on that front the relationship with the Tibetan people was not being correctly observed .
Mr President , as has been said , the United States Congress and Government have appointed a special representative for Tibet .
I think that is an important political event and I believe that the European Union should also appoint such a figure .
In my view that is the core of this resolution .
The time has come to open direct negotiations between China and the Dalai Lama .
Faced with the tragedy of the Tibetan people , the Dalai Lama is not asking for independence , as he has repeated many times , in particular in his speech on the anniversary of the Chinese occupation , but a wide autonomy within the Chinese nation .
I think this position is enlightened and courageous and leaves China no excuse .
Moreover , the changed international situation has eliminated any real or supposed threat to the frontiers of that country .
So , in my view , it is in the interests of a China which wants to become part of the international scene to confront and resolve problems which create obstacles to this involvement .
Taiwan , Tibet , human rights generally , are now the international community 's main criticisms of China .
I appreciate the tone of the document which has been prepared and which , for the first time , associates a concrete proposal with denunciation and criticism .
It is a step forward for Parliament which is helping it to be more effective politically .
Naturally this attitude of Parliament - less propaganda and more politically effectiveness - increases the responsibility of European Union bodies , in particular the Commission and the Council .
Actually , with this initiative on Tibet , we are asking both the Commission and the Council - as colleagues have mentioned - to take a more effective attitude .
We are not happy that the general statements of both the Commission and the Council or their spokespersons are critical and , naturally , speak of respect for human rights , while in reality things go on as they have done up to now .
Mr President , I am very grateful to Mrs Aglietta for incorporating the idea of a special EU representative for Tibet in her resolution and for maintaining it in the joint resolution .
I made the same proposal last year during question time under the Luxemburg Presidency of the Council and saw how strongly Mr Wohlfahrt responded to the idea at the time .
He promised to push the issue in the Council accordingly .
We should hold discussions with the British Presidency without delay to ensure that these words become deeds .
It is my belief that we need a special representative of this kind , just as the United States do .
We often have grounds here to criticise American foreign policy , but in this case American foreign policy has set a very important example .
In the case of Tibet we are dealing with a very serious problem of human rights and a very serious problem of a people 's right to self-determination .
The Chinese think in very long time-frames and we should not therefore react with short term displays of concern , but rather with a long term strategy , and for this we need a special representative .
Mr President , the elections which took place in Kenya were hardly faultless .
They have never been thus in Kenya since the country 's independence .
We have not been able to observe any improvement .
The most remarkable thing about these elections was the enormous enthusiasm amongst the people .
In Kenya , too , the following should really apply : " First feed me , and then you can preach to me ' .
Arap Moï has managed to lower the income per capita , and yet the enthusiasm for democracy has not diminished .
I think the European Commission should take advantage of this .
The most urgent issue in Kenya at the moment is how to combat corruption .
The Commission will have to support the newspapers which expose this , in all sorts of ways .
It will especially have to support non-governmental organizations who wish to promote democracy on all sorts of levels .
These are small things which in my view can have great results .
Mr President , within the framework of the so-called urgent procedure , this House is often called upon to deplore , regret and condemn , and although one swallow does not make a summer , we are also called upon to note the positive conditions under which elections have just taken place in Kenya , in a country everyone agreed was on the verge of a social revolution several weeks ago , and which is certainly not out of the wood .
Observers agree , despite a few irregularities , that the elections were free and honest .
Whatever one may think of President Arap Moi , of the long time he has spent in politics , of his idea of a dialogue , or of his regional role in certain recent problems , he has been elected .
It is not up to the European Parliament to put itself in the place of an opposition which is incapable of getting together to offer alternative policies .
That is why the Group of the Radical Alliance will confine itself to encouraging the Kenyan authorities to combat corruption and consolidate human rights , particularly the freedoms of association , demonstration and expression , which are often flouted , and which we ask the Commission to monitor .
That is the purpose of this motion for a resolution .
Mr President , the first thing I would like to say is that President Moi must deliver on his preelection promises for constitutional reform .
We know now that the election results were so close that the opposition must be given a role in government to reflect the massive popular support they now hold .
They must also obviously be allowed fair access to the media .
I want to join with those who have condemned the allegations of rigging in the recent electoral process .
I would like to repeat the call made by the presidency on 6 January asking for a public investigation into alleged electoral irregularities .
Massive amounts of money have apparently been spent on corrupt electioneering .
This will have a detrimental effect on the delicate economy there and push up inflation .
This is very bad news for the local people coming as it does after last year 's floods , the problems of the tourist industry which is affected by ethnic clashes , and the recent weak commodity prices .
President Moi will have to get the message , given that the IMF and the World Bank have already suspended aid .
He must see the clear link between the necessary loan and aid packages , which are vital to the country 's economic well-being , and the democratic and constitutional reforms which we all expect of him .
Mr President , at the end of December , President Daniel was re-elected President of Kenya .
With a little more than 40 % of the vote , he improved his 1992 score by 4 per cent .
The fourteen opposition candidates shared the remaining 60 % , but their divisions , maintained by constant disagreements , has brought them in disorder into a Parliament where Mr Arap Moi 's party has retained the absolute majority by two seats .
We expected the elections to be contested , and we have discussed the problem of Kenya often enough in this chamber not to be surprised today at some confusion in the announcement of the results .
Having said that , I wish to say that the UPE group will support the joint motion of the Radicals and Liberals for two reasons .
The first is that I note , first of all , the ' satisfactory ' stamp given to these elections by national observers , and by the President of Uganda , who said , and I hope he was joking , that if the President of Kenya had cheated , he was not very good at it as he only achieved a majority of two seats .
Paragraph 7 of the resolution partially reflects my first reason .
I therefore suppose that this House will agree to show indulgence to Kenya and for many of us , Uganda 's approval will make it possible to withdraw the particular vigilance to which others countries have not been subjected .
The second reason is that , as other elections will be held in Africa in 1998 , this kind of moderation with regard to countries moving from a single party to a multipartite system should be extended to other countries and Frenchspeaking countries should not treated more harshly by this House than English-speaking countries .
Mr President , I thank the honourable delegates for their valuable speeches .
I would to like to start with a response to the debate about human cloning .
It is heartening to note that almost without exception everyone in this Parliament dissociates himself from this practice and also cautions us the developments in this area .
The European Commission has given its opinion on this before and has shown its determination to make a contribution to the prevention of any development in this field .
It considers the cloning of humans as degrading , and contrary to human uniqueness .
From the debate this afternoon this also emerged very clearly to be the opinion of this Parliament .
In the research framework programmes , the fourth or fifth , you will find not a single programme which encourages these type of activities , let alone finances them .
We dissociate ourselves very distinctly from this .
The group of advisors on the ethical implications of biotechnology has given its opinion on human cloning , and rejects it .
The Commission is aware that in the context of the research programmes it has no authority on the specific area of ethics , but when it concerns ethical issues , I think the European Commission should at least give its opinion , and that is what we are doing now .
The European Council in Amsterdam in June last year was unambiguous about this , and let it be known that it wishes to dissociate itself from human cloning .
If one observes what is happening internationally on this front in terms of discussions , then we can note we satisfaction that even the G8 Summit in Denver in the middle of last year declared itself against human cloning .
During the debate this afternoon the additional protocol at a convention of the Council of Europe on human rights and biotechnology was mentioned .
This charter has meanwhile been signed by nine Member States .
It appears that the United Nations would be the most suitable forum for this .
The Commission will in any case attempt to stimulate development in this direction .
It will attempt to make a contribution .
The situation in Ingushetia can be called downright worrying .
We are following the developments via our delegation in Moscow and via our contacts with the United Nations , the OSCE and other international organizations which are working in this turbulent region .
You know that over the past few years ECHO has financed humanitarian aid to Ingushetia ; in 1997 Médecins sans frontières carried out a programme amounting to ECU 200 000 , primarily for homeless communities .
We will obviously continue with these programmes and are in regular contact with the High Commissioner for Refugees about the situation on the spot .
I can only report that during the recent past carrying out these humanitarian projects has not become any easier because of the frequently risky conditions for humanitarian aid workers .
The human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo continues to be closely watched by the European Commission .
It is a positive sign that the government of Congo has given the investigation committee of the United Nations the go-ahead to do its work , and has set up a constitutional committee .
In support of this positive development , the European Commission has decided to remove restrictions on certain actions for the reconstruction of the country , to the direct benefit of the people there .
But on the basis of the contract entered into with the Commission , these actions will be carried out by non-governmental organizations or businesses .
As far as the aborigines in Australia are concerned , the Commission assumes that stringent rules and monitoring standards , as argued for , by the Australian Environment Minister senator Robert Hill will be attached to the eventual implementation of the Jabiluka project , about which Mrs Aelvoet also spoke .
This concern for the health of the local aboriginal community and concern for the environment is extremely important .
As you know the Commission shares the European Parliament 's considerations regarding the death penalty which was also discussed this afternoon .
I am talking about Australia now .
I am talking about the unfortunate executions which happened in Korea recently , and with which the practice of the past two years not carry out death sentences , was altered again .
In its contacts with Korea the Commission will explain clearly its concern about this change in the republic of South Korea 's policy .
Now to China and Tibet .
I will limit myself to the following comments , now that the President-in-Office of the Council has clearly indicated how much importance he attaches to an intensification of the dialogue with China , in particular on issues such as human rights .
It is encouraging that in the meetings which took place during the second half of last year , both on ministerial level and on the level of political directors , progress was made on a number of issues .
We now know that China is preparing ratification of the UN social and economic rights covenant , but that it is also prepared to consider whether to proceed to signing the well-known UN covenant on civil and political rights .
In addition there is also a promise from China that the UN Commissioner for Human Rights , Mrs Robinson , can look forward to an invitation to visit China .
As far as Tibet is concerned , a positive signal has been given with regard to the request from the European Union to send a delegation of ambassadors to the country in the spring of 1998 .
They are all steps forward which indicate that dialogue with China on human rights is not blocked .
The European Union , supported by the European Commission , definitely intends to continue this way with China .
To conclude with the situation in Kenya : the large turn-out at the most recent elections in Kenya , and the fact that the observers found that the will of the Kenyan people was expressed in a reasonably reliable way are a reason for optimism .
At the same time it has not escaped anyone 's attention that there were some irregularities during these elections .
But according to the observers this did not make it a less representative election .
This in itself is positive .
We wish to underline that constitutional reform in Kenya is an important part of this , and this should be initiated as soon as possible .
It is important that all groups in society are genuinely represented in this process , and that the necessary consultation takes place with all these groups , and that openness is actively pursued .
The importance of human rights in our relations with Kenya is entirely clear to that country 's authorities , and has been raised more than once .
We also agree with the points made during the debate this afternoon regarding the need to tackle vigorously the relatively widespread corruption in Kenya .
This is also very important in connection with the confidence which must be inspired within the international financial organizations , and for that matter , also within the European Union when it concerns the support which was requested to initiate and develop the economy .
It is , of course , extremely distressing that in a country like Kenya the present income per capita is in fact lower than ten years ago .
That says something about the situation there .
These were the rather patchy comments I wished to make about these important topics .
Also in view the extremely limited time the honourable delegates had at their disposal , I do not wish to abuse your indulgence any further .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
Mr President , in the European Union another attempt on life has been made .
A European citizen , committed to his people and democratically elected to defend peace , liberty , the right of law and tolerance has been killed by enemies of Basque society for which they propose the exact opposite : death , terror , extortion and blackmail .
José Ignacio Iruretagoyena , married , father of two very young children , councillor on Zarautz Town Council Government , has been cruelly murdered , victim of a terrorist attack from the criminal group ETA .
Firstly our condolences go to his widow , his orphans and all the families who have been suffering death and oppression from the terrorist group ETA .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is a problem which not only affects the Basques or even all Spaniards .
This continued violation of fundamental human rights affects the whole of the European Union and therefore this Parliament is raising its voice again to point once more to the seriousness of the terrorist problem and its fully European dimension .
I want to record here the permanent support and solidarity that this assembly has shown in regard to this serious problem .
Recently , this chamber received a visit from the family of councillor Miguel Angel Blanco , whose murder by ETA last July filled the squares and towns throughout Europe with great expressions of horror and support for peace .
We also welcomed the family of José Antonio Ortega Lara , a prison officer , whose kidnapping lasted more than 500 days .
The European Parliament itself has moved to the Basque country to demonstrate there to Basque institutions the European dimension of this very grave problem , the most flagrant violation of human rights which exists today in the Union .
We cannot forget how , in the last six months , we have witnessed no less than the kidnap and liberation of Ortega Lara or the murders of democratically elected councillors Gregorio Ordóez , in San Sebastián ; Miguel Angel Blanco , in Ermua ; José Luis Caso , in Rentería ; José Ignacio Iruretagoyena , in Zarautz ; and the failed attempt against the San Sebastián councillor , Elena Azpiroz .
Tomorrow in Vitoria the Ajuria-Enea Council will meet .
We want to send our unconditional support to its members so that they can find ways which will lead to peace , within the limits offered by the legal system , which terrorists are so much against .
This bloodbath and reign of terror have to end .
Mr President , once again human beings - although it seems unreasonable to call them this - have taken away the life of another human being , as part of their fight against democracy for all .
Democracy is the only political and moral system which can see off terrorists , and they know this very well .
The Basques have killed a Basque ; the Spanish have killed a Spaniard ; Europeans have killed a European .
Yes , unfortunately Europeans , direct descendants of the tyrants who caused anguish to Europe this century , are taking human life or showing no respect for their dignity .
We Spanish socialists , Mr President , share the sense of pain , of repudiation and also of hope which my colleague has expressed .
In this case we share with the family and the fellow countrymen of José Ignacio Iruretagoyena , with the members of the Popular Party who have been attacked themselves , with all the other democratic parties who have felt this death as their own , with the Basque town councils and those in the rest of Spain .
Anyone who has represented his electorate - as I have done - for many years on a town council can easily imagine the force and generosity Iruretagoyena employed to resolve everyone 's problems .
We share these problems with the Basques and the rest of the Spanish people , and we are sure that this resolution will help us to share the values of our European colleagues , as we share with them the values against which ETA and Herri Batasuma fight , that is respect for life and defence of freedom , which make up the soul of Europe .
Mr President , the acts of terrorism in Spain , especially in the Basque Country which I myself know particularly well and which really is one of the most beautiful and best provinces of Spain , have shown that here a terrorist organization is working against its own people and is murdering representatives of that people .
I therefore believe that is important for us as Europeans not just to show our solidarity , but also to discuss the matter and to expect our governments to organise an international campaign , not directed against the Basque people and Spain but , on the contrary , designed to defend these people against further campaigns .
What is taking place there at the moment will - and we should not forget this - also have an effect on us if we do combine our democratic powers in time to square up to this terrorism .
Mr President , firstly , on behalf of my Party , I would like to join in the expressions of solidarity with the family , colleagues and friends of José Ignacio Iruretagoyena .
These words of condolence have become - sadly - commonplace , as a display of solidarity with the victims of terrorist violence in Euskadi and an expression of repulsion at the same .
A violence that you , Mr President , know well through having presided over the Parliamentary delegation which was in Euskadi and where it could verify that terrorist violence is not a local problem but a European problem .
As has been said here , the voice of a people may be drowned out by the noise of weapons .
From this Parliament , as one more representative of the citizen 's voice , we condemn without any reservations whatsoever this attack and we reiterate our absolute rejection of any type of violence .
Once again and for all those who need it , because in doing so we exercise the European right to freedom , to democracy , which we will not renounce under any circumstances .
But our involvement is not limited to condemning attacks in debates like these , it goes beyond demanding what has been agreed in other full sessions .
In this Parliament we will reject dialogue with all those who collaborate , allow , support and carry out criminal acts .
Because any tolerance to these criminal attacks helps them to be repeated .
We support the peace-keeping of Euskadi and we support peace-keeping in Europe .
Because peace-keeping in Euskadi is peace-keeping in Europe .
Mr President , with criminal obstinacy , the ETA continues to assassinate anyone who disagrees with its aims or methods .
Local elected representatives seem to have been their preferred target , in the last few months .
Let this Parliament show not the least indulgence or understanding with regard to ETA assassins and torturers .
There is absolutely nothing to justify the crimes they commit .
However , public opinion and the media , which are sometimes ambiguous , sometimes blinded by emotion , seem from time to time to condemn the close collaboration between the French Police , the Basque Autonomous Police and the Spanish Police .
In this respect , we must be quite clear and make sure the message gets through .
Cooperation to track down and punish crime will continue to increase .
Those whose so-called military action is to shoot an obviously unarmed and unprotected local councillor in the head should look out !
Democracy is of course vulnerable , but in Europe , until now , it has won every battle against the tyranny of small groups who attempt to impose their ideology or their vision of the world by violent means .
This House supports , and will continue to support the Basque people and their elected representatives , and will not make any concessions with the enemies of freedom .
Mr President , a young man , José Ignacio Iruretagoyena , has been murdered by the barbaric behaviour of ETA .
Once again a family has been destroyed and a people struggling for freedom and wanting peace , as are the Basque people , have been attacked while carrying out their public duties .
The Franquist dictatorship could not silence the voice of our people and the people who try to impose their will by means of violence are not going to succeed either , because in history the people 's will , freedom and democracy always triumph over pistols .
And the support of the Basque people , the vast majority of their citizens , for these values is undeniable .
We wish to demonstrate solidarity with the family and friends of Iruretagoyena and also our complete solidarity with the Popular Party , a political family to which the murdered man belonged .
The struggle against violence , the achievement of peace , is everyone 's task .
Therefore we should work , as far as is possible , from an agreement of those who believe in democracy , from this basis of unity .
And although those who kill do not want this and put up obstacles , we must go with the force of our words to convince those who still support violent men that they have to become involved in democracy .
Therefore I ask the assembly to vote " no ' on point five of the resolution , which makes these paths difficult and has a unilateral and partisan vision of the road to peace , because they have cut down a human life - which is terrible - but we must not let them kill the hope of a whole nation .
Let us make peace possible with the weapons we have , without giving up any of them : police operations , democracy and our voice as well .
Mr President , briefly , just to echo on behalf of the Commission , the horror , the outrage and the sympathy which has been expressed to the relatives of the murdered Basque Councillor .
Mr President , it makes on think .
Delegates of the people can also become victims of these kinds of terrorist attacks .
It is a new impulse towards us all , from the Commission , from the Member States , from the European Union institutions to combat the scourge of terrorism with renewed strength and in unity and solidarity .
Thank you , Mr Commissioner .
I should like , as President of this sitting , to abandon my usual neutrality and wholeheartedly approve everything , which has just been said about this dreadful business .
The joint debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Community aid ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on community aid .
Mr President , I would like to thank and congratulate the rapporteurs , both the main rapporteur and the draftsmen of the opinions of the committees involved in this debate , because this is an important discussion dealing with the quality of the European Union 's development cooperation and humanitarian aid .
It is an important debate because Community cooperation plus the cooperation of the Member States of the European Union , now represents over 50 % of world public development aid , in which the funds under common management through the instruments of Community action have an increasing role , even if only in relative terms .
Now , when we deal with the issue of effectiveness and evaluation of cooperation and humanitarian aid , we must take account of certain specific characteristics of Community intervention as compared with that of Member States .
First of all , the fact that , also on the initiative of the European Parliament , primarily through the budget instrument , the Community has carried out an extraordinary diversification in the course of the last few years , both in actions and in partners , both official partners , that is , governments of third countries , and international organizations and agencies , non-governmental organizations , people 's organizations , firms and so on .
Secondly , there is an extremely important diversification of objectives , which should perhaps be reviewed and reorganized but which has also made it possible to intervene on various issues and in various sectors .
In the third place , the fact that the Community , unlike all the other bilateral donors , now operates in all parts of the world , but also - and I want to emphasize this point - the fact that it is often linked to extremely complex decisionmaking procedures , in which the weight of commitology , intervention and pressure is sometimes excessive and sometimes not brought to a positive conclusion by the Member States , plays a role which is not always positive , in fact often contradictory and negative .
Finally , the fact that the Commission , and in particular the Directorates-General involved in the international aid , have rather limited staffs which are also tending to decrease .
In the last few years there has been a process of definition of new legal bases , in particular that for humanitarian aid , which I think resolves many of the comments made by the Court of Auditors regarding the management of humanitarian aid in the period 1992-95 .
There has been and continues to be a process of redefinition of some very important procedures , above all those relating to the ECHO framework contracts and to the new NGO cofinancing conditions , and a process of internal reorganization has started inside the Commission and its departments managing the instruments of external cooperation .
Frankly , we would like to know a little more about that and we would like to be consulted .
Certainly , the effectiveness of public development aid is a complex issue , as has been rightly mentioned in the motion for a resolution , and it is made up of intertwined internal and international conditions and not just of the impact of individual projects and individual instruments .
What we are substantially asking for , and these are the important messages for this debate , is greater integration and coordination between aid managed directly by the Community and Member States ' aid , to strengthen the structures and make them more independent , both internally and externally , and responsible for evaluation and quality control . We want the institutional capacity of the Commission in the partnership with the NGOs strengthened , management capacity is improved in developing countries and , above all , Parliament should be fully consulted and fully associated in the Commission 's internal reorganization process .
As regards the functioning of ECHO - as this is the subject of a specific report - in my opinion we should move in the direction of achieving its potential and not towards a watering-down of the functions for which it was created , and , as regards non-governmental organizations , the use of specific criteria for their needs and for the nature of their action must not only be maintained but eventually strengthened .
Mr President , this is an extremely timely report as we move towards the year 2000 .
A new organization is being put in place to administer aid to the developing countries in the ACP .
I must congratulate Mr Goerens on the vision he has shown in how to improve the effectiveness of Community aid to developing nations .
I say ' timely ' because , if one looks back and sees that between ECU 40 billions and 50 billions have been spent in aid since 1975 , yet many applicant countries are worse off today than they were at the start of Lomé , something must be wrong with the system .
There are many reasons for this : instability of governments , corruption and , in many cases , countries carrying a debt burden that they simply will never recover from .
With many nations cutting bilateral aid and a constant squeeze on EU funding , it is therefore vital that available finance is made better use of .
There is , I believe , a real need for a regional approach to get a better integration of projects to make sure aid is not spread so thinly that it is not being effective .
There are many ways better use can be made of existing funds .
There needs to be a relaxation of the rules to allow EU delegates on the ground to have more say in decision-making powers .
They know the local problems and the solutions without constant referral back to Brussels .
Delegates could organize much better coordination of bilateral aid and Community aid to save duplication .
This would improve the impact - the spending power - and would allow for proper , detailed feasibility studies and impact studies to be done to monitor the situation more closely .
There are many instances where no environmental impact study has been done , with consequential damage to the ecology of the area .
The report also calls for the principle of conditionality to be applied .
I support this .
Democracy , a respect for human rights and minimum standards of efficiency and transparency in financial management should be a prerequisite for financial aid .
Developing nations must trade their way out of financial problems .
Only if we have stable and good governments will outside investors help to create the environment to allow industrial development .
Africa is the next logical continent for such development .
Many developing nations do not have the capacity at local levels to carry out major development programmes .
I see a real opportunity to second personnel from Europe to help with this work .
This is a well-balanced report and has many specific proposals , which I hope the Commission will not only look at , but will act upon .
My group fully supports this report .
Mr President , we are today discussing an excellent report on Community development aid and its effectiveness .
Mr Goerens must be wholeheartedly congratulated on his splendid work .
Our group fully supports the report 's proposals and I wish to just underline the importance of a few points in the resolution .
First , I think it is important that the rapporteur has proposed drawing the Commission 's attention to factors of gender in programmes of cooperation .
The participation of women is key to the success of the development process .
And their involvement means , above everything else , education .
This is in fact the best and most effective sort of development aid we can give .
The connection between education for women and the birth rate is obvious .
Population growth can be slowed down only by educating women in ways of regulating child birth .
With education and some kind of credit aid women could also be encouraged to start their own ventures so they will have greater independence in , and a genuine influence on , the economic development process .
Another vital point in the resolution , I think , is to stress the principles of partnership and involvement in development .
Local workers , organizers and beneficiaries must all get involved if we want results .
This is demonstrated in very many successful cases , for example in the framework of the Phare programme .
It is also right to demand greater democracy where appropriate and a respect for human rights , together with greater openness and efficiency in handling the economy , as conditions of aid .
At least an attempt to improve the situation should be evident .
Despite the problems , however , it is essential to help local organizations to cope in difficult circumstances .
To improve the effectiveness of Community aid a lot can certainly also be done by making the tasks of the different sectors more compatible with each other , given that they all have the same objective anyway .
National and EU initiatives must also be better coordinated .
At their best they can be complementary , rather than overlap , and their aspirations may more easily be realized .
Evalution is naturally the key tool in improved effectiveness .
If the aims and objectives of projects are clear , they can be assessed meaningfully .
Mere assessment is not enough , though , and it is important to have data on results , if they are to have any effect .
Furthermore , it is necessary to exchange experiences more often , and perhaps this should be the concern of the central processing unit mentioned in the motion .
Mr President , as always Mr Goerens has submitted a report which is well thought through and full of ideas .
It is also timely , as a reorganization of development policy is in the pipeline .
But what is the point of such good reports if the framework conditions of the policy aren 't right ?
We are confronted with more and more catastrophes , more and more famines , more and more natural disasters . The issue of development policy is becoming more and more urgent .
Here in the House , however , we have a situation whereby every year in the budget process we have to fight for funding cuts not to be implemented , just to hold on to the previous year 's funding levels .
In addition , every year we are faced with the problem of under-staffing within the Commission .
When I was budget rapporteur two years ago , the Commission promised to recruit more personnel in DG VIII for NGOs .
I believe that the work of the NGOs is of vital importance , particularly for development policy and with regard to efficiency .
They are opinion formers , they know their business , they are based on the ground .
But there aren 't enough staff to be able to work really efficiently .
I have just received a whingeing letter from the pharmaceutical campaign in Germany .
They have had to cut three positions because they have not received funding from the Commission .
It 's the same story for Mozambique , a cultural event this weekend , or next week in Frankfurt .
And it 's no help if personnel are sent abroad , if aid is delivered in the countries themselves .
I believe that the Commission must organise things itself .
It 's European development aid and I hope that this will change over the next few years , that we really will become efficient , irrespective of the political framework .
I hope that the burden of debt will stop pushing the countries of the third world further onto their knees , with an unbridled world finance policy , as we are witnessing in South East Asia , making the global market an ever wilder place while we are forced to watch famines and natural disasters .
Mr President , this will not sound very original , because I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent and very comprehensive work , and say that the Group of the European Radical Alliance absolutely shares his point of view on budgetarization of the EDF , on improving the visibility of European aid and its political advantages , on internal coherence , which is still inadequate , between the instruments and various types of action , and our various areas of intervention , and finally on ensuring that the development aid policy and other European policies are more complementary !
We are in complete agreement with the report and with the motion for a resolution , on all these points .
On the other hand , and I already expressed concern on this during the examination of the report made by Mr McGowan on a similar subject , I do not believe that the priority is to make European aid and national aid more complementary .
What is a priority , what is really urgent , in our opinion , is to put aside neo-colonialism , which is often disguised as bilateral cooperation , and to progress resolutely towards the total inclusion of development policy in the policies of the Community .
A majority of us here are committed to the idea of institutional progress of the EU and even greater integration of the main areas of public action .
The European Union is furthermore still looking for a real foreign policy and cannot speak in a single voice on the main questions of interest to international society .
Now we have before us , in development aid , a vast terrain in which the political project of a Europe based on common humanist values could finally find a practical dimension .
Beyond historical and cultural , almost anecdotal divergences , or short-term false calculations , there is no opposition of interests amongst Europeans on this subject .
I would also like to stress this in my capacity as an elected representative of France , and furthermore to express my delight that the President of this sitting is a former French Cooperation Minister .
I would like to stress this in my capacity as an elected representative of France , because it is necessary to recognise that the communitarization of development aid is a thousand miles from the habits , present practice and even the revised doctrine of France .
However , I think that France , taken here as a simple example , would have everything to gain from putting its experience and cooperation resources into the kitty of European aid , so that they can have a significant dimension .
There are a thousand reasons - humanitarian and financial - in favour of doing so .
But if I could only choose one , I would chose the cynical point of view so often expressed , in order to refute it .
What is the national interest , in terms of political influence or economic returns ?
It is my conviction that , if France 's influence is not quickly supported by the impact of the European Union , it will disappear behind the influence of the United States of America , as several recent problems have shown .
So , even though my point of view may now appear rather utopian , and I am aware of this , I would like to say very resolutely to French leaders : it is in the interests of France to give up its little bilateral policy and to become a part of the greater undertaking of European development aid .
Mr President , in the necessary endeavours to make EU aid more effective the keyword should be optimization , but examples of a lack of effectiveness must not give grounds for reductions in aid .
There are unfortunately many other forces aiming for that .
I applaud many of Mr Goerens ' proposals .
The changeover to sector-specific analysis means a necessary focusing which also shows the priorities in the recipient countries more clearly .
With the intake of new projects we are shooting randomly from the hip .
Furthermore , it is absolutely necessary to have good pilot studies , increased involvement of NGOs and recipient countries and improvements in capacity in the recipient countries .
Nor should the Commission 's problems with undermanning be doubted .
Cohesion in the EU 's policies and coordination between the Member States also promote effectiveness .
Coordination is beneficial , but the word samordning ( coordination ) has the wrong overtones .
EU aid should be a supplement to aid from the Member States , even if it has its own justifications .
The wording of paragraph 5 is therefore unfortunate .
The evaluation requirements are too different and so the Member States should not subject themselves to the EU 's methods , even if a rapprochement makes sense .
I must also oppose the idea of separating the political decision-making from the project management tasks .
The organizational problems have to be solved in another way , as has already been started .
Even though I am definitely not a spokesman for committees , I am convinced that the Council 's management committees have hardly anything to do with delays in implementation .
On the contrary , these management committees are a quality check .
It is hardly likely that there would have been improvements on the current scale with regard to the integration of gender or environmental aspects , if it had not been thanks to constant pressure from the Member States on these committees and from this Parliament .
Furthermore , the reference to food aid in paragraph 7 is unfortunate because the assessment of this was highly critical and will lead to this kind of aid being restricted .
Mr President , this is a very wide-ranging report and there is much in it with which to agree , including the need for a comparative evaluation between EU development projects and those of individual Member States , our long-running demands for budgetization of the EDF , and the need to publicize the very many positive achievements of European aid programmes .
One omission , which Mr Vecchi referred to , is the expensive , wasteful , secretive and time-consuming operation of comitology procedures , which most certainly diminish rather than enhance the quality of our aid .
However , let me concentrate on two points in the report .
First , let us understand the inconsistencies within European development programmes because of the geographical distribution of responsibilities within the Commission .
Whether a project is in the Horn of Africa , the mountains of Nepal or the Brazilian rainforest , all our aid should observe a common , rights-based approach consistent with acknowledged human rights standards .
Such principles include due diligence , non-discrimination , advisability , participation and accountability .
When things go wrong , there is a need for redress .
I ask the Commissioner to consider how far existing arrangements enable him to be confident that such standards are upheld in all cases .
Second , I agree with my many colleagues who have pointed to the chronic problem of under-staffing within the Commission .
This causes its staff to engage in the quaintly titled ' stuffing ' with its concentration on large projects to reach budget targets with too little regard for quality .
Last year a third of senior management posts in DG IB , dealing with Asia and Latin America , remained vacant ; 40 % of staff in DG I , IA and IB are on short-term contracts , whilst a large number of core tasks are carried out by external consultants .
Britain and Germany employ more than double the staff numbers , pound for pound , mark for mark , in managing their aid programmes .
Until Member States jointly agree a solution to the staffing problem in the Commission , resolutions in favour of aid quality will go little further than the paper on which they are written .
Mr President , the Goerens report primarily concerns measures the European Union can take to improve the effectiveness of development aid .
We can agree with the proposed measures in itself , but the European Commission 's Green Paper lays the cause of the poor effectiveness first and foremost at the door of the developing countries themselves .
If the Commission 's analysis is right , the feasibility studies and impact evaluations within the Union will not improve the effectiveness of aid , but measures will have to be taken first of all in the developing countries themselves .
To my mind , this concept is not conveyed clearly enough in the Goerens report .
I support the plea in the Fabra Vallés report for improved harmony between European humanitarian aid and that of the Member States .
The European Commission can play a coordinating role in this .
But a European charter with general principles for development cooperation policy is something I can do without .
Especially where more structural development aid is concerned , preference should be given to the aid programmes from the Member States .
Many European countries have special relations with certain developing countries .
The Union should respect these special links .
In this context it is remarkable that the Member States are unilaterally blamed for this poor cooperation .
They are alleged to make insufficient use of the expertise of the Commission services .
This may be so , but can we not reverse the issue with equal justification , Has the Commission made sufficient use of the knowledge and experience of the Member States ?
It seems to me , as a result of their long-standing relations with certain developing countries , the Member States have acquired a wealth of experience , from which an office like ECHO , which with its six years is only just beginning to find its feet , has a lot to learn .
Mr President , I am speaking only to the Fabra Vallés report as a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I would like first of all to remind Parliament that this report is about ensuring that European Union money is spent in the best possible way .
The Committee on Budgetary Control is not trying at all to usurp the role of the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
After all , the report is the Committee on Budgetary Control 's response to the special report by the Court of Auditors .
Some would say that this is just the committee siding with the Court against the Commission .
It is no such thing .
It is a serious attempt to get some common sense into what is a very complicated system .
The system has many good points which we should , and do , praise in the explanatory statement .
But it still has failings as far as our committee is concerned .
The Fabra Vallés report is an attempt to bring closer together the expertise , the experience and the best practices , not only of the European Union but also of the Member States to replace the present sixteen different and uncoordinated systems .
Let us not forget that we are talking about humanitarian aid , not development aid in total .
When we talk of humanitarian aid , I am reminded of when I was in Addis Ababa before the fall of Mengistu regime .
It was a time when Ethiopia was the centre of world attention for a variety of reasons .
One senior Ethiopian official said to me : ' The trouble with you Europeans is that your own vested interest seems to be your priority .
You do not consult with us as to what we really want .
You try to ensure that what you want to give us are the things we need ' .
And he gave me an example . ' When we needed transport to move water and food around , the Member States of the Union were very good .
The Germans gave us lorries , they gave us Mercedes Benz .
The French gave us lorries , they gave us Renaults .
The Italians gave us lorries , they gave us Fiats .
And the British gave us lorries , they gave us Leylands .
What they did not give us was any training for our motor mechanics or spare parts .
We had a fleet of lorries all with different needs and a lot of them were no use to us ' .
He also said : ' The day that Bob Geldorf came riding into Addis Abbaba on top of a lorry bringing in his food aid convoy , my heart sank .
I looked at the lorry he was sitting on and I thought : that is another one we do not have ' .
That true anecdote says a lot about the lack of coordination and cooperation between the Member States and the Union .
That is what the Fabra Vallés report recognizes .
It is understandable why the Member States do this .
They do have vested interests .
But at the end of the day that is not the best for humanitarian aid .
I know it will take a mighty effort to move things along but this is what the report is trying to do .
It is not an attack on the Commission per se - let us get that straight .
As much as anything , it is about getting the Member States to realize that subsidiarity is not always about moving things down a level , it is about doing things at the right level .
When it comes to humanitarian aid , subsidiarity may well mean bringing it up a level and having it coordinated at Community level rather than Member States trying to do it in a devolved way .
My worry is that when we have voted on this , it will remain on a shelf somewhere doing nothing .
That is why I make a plea to the Commission to act upon this report , especially on paragraphs 4 and 7 where we ask for specific action from the Commission .
That is about making a political statement to get real action : not just to bring another regulation forward , but to start doing something .
If we can get our act together between the Member States and the Commission , just imagine what we could do with all the money .
It would be far better spent .
Mr President , in this debate on the effectiveness of European Union aid to developing countries and on the much-needed extra aid to developing countries with heavy debts , we have to establish that these themes are very closely related .
After all , poor countries which are weighed down by unbearably high debts , and as a result have to hand over far too much of their yearly budget to interest payments , have far too little money to implement their own policy , and are therefore becoming poorer and poorer , become more dependent on aid , from the Union amongst others .
It is therefore a very good thing that the Union is cooperating in a World Bank and IMF initiative to relieve deb .
This was the first point I wanted to make .
It seems to me important in this context that agreements are made with the countries to prevent them from getting into debt again , or to prevent them from running up new debts in the expectation that , sooner or later , these will be written off .
I would like to know from the Commission whether these guarantees will be given .
Mr President , my comment is particularly aimed at the Goerens report on the effectiveness of aid .
In my belief you cannot paint a black and white picture here .
The reality is that in some cases , aid has had a positive effect , in others it did not , and this is by no means always to do with the quality of the aid ; it can also be to do with other things , such as natural disasters , bad management , political destabilization or wars .
That does not alter the fact that it is always good to maximize the effectiveness of aid , and that is why we think the following five points are important .
Aid should not be parachuted in .
It should fit in , as one of the previous speakers has said , with the nature and circumstances of the country concerned , and there must be maximum involvement on the part of the population .
Otherwise so-called white elephants are created .
These are projects which are put down somewhere and are never used again .
Donors must coordinate the aid programmes effectively , so that everyone supports each other , and is not working at cross purposes .
The multitude of NGO programmes from the various western countries , from the World Bank , the IMF , and the UN sometimes create such a chaotic picture of each country that it is no wonder that joint implementation is not effective ; and harmonization at EC level is extremely important .
Sound and democratic management with respect for minorities and human rights is also a necessary condition to increase the effectiveness of aid .
If this is not achieved , we must have the courage to suspend the aid .
This obviously does not mean that no more humanitarian aid can be given , but that genuine development aid is simply no longer an option .
Aid must stimulate people to take matters in hand themselves , and should not become a habit .
In a number of countries too much aid has been disastrous .
Think of a country like Zambia which was dependent on development aid for three quarters of its income .
Finally , when receiving aid , a country should be open to the principles of the social market economy ; not to force an ideology on a country , but to help a it chose a positive path in a globalizing world .
Mr President , these are a number of elements to strengthen effectiveness ; whether they are laid down in a charter or in other rules is not all that important to us .
Yet we think it is important that these kind of principles are transferred into policy .
We would like to express our thanks for the Goerens report and we would like to wish Commissioner Pinheiro luck with the implementation of the policy , and I wonder if could ask Mr van den Broek to convey these messages to Mr Pinheiro .

Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a working document recently distributed by our Budget Committee on SEM 2000 , our colleague Mr Colom i Naval states that direct financing by the European Commission should represent an example of transparency , good practice and efficiency .
Unfortunately , this is not often the case .
I should like to point out , in reference to Mrs Fabra Vallés ' report - which I think is very good - that this is a comment which we always make in our reports on foreign affairs aid programmes .
Reading the Fabra Vallés report , one could draw exactly the same conclusions as Mrs Hoff writing about the problems facing the Tacis programme : poor co-ordination and muddled division of responsibility between the Commission and the foreign aid organizations , consultants , contractors and Ukrainian partner organizations .
All this applies to a large extent to the criticisms made by the Court of Auditors in relation to the ECHO programme and the Union 's aid programme , if we just leave out the work Ukrainian .
I find this particularly regrettable as it is a problem which we are constantly bringing to the attention of to the Commission .
There is really no reason why we should have to read exactly the same thing in the Frankfurter Allgemeiner of 14th January , in relation to the evaluation of the EU aid programme in Bosnia , knowing that a large part of our funds have gone to ex-Yugoslavia . I quote : the evaluation of the EU aid programme ranged from not good , through terrible to dangerous .
This is the assessment of our aid work , so generous in financial terms , which the European public is communicating to our fellow citizens .
Therefore , I should like to request most energetically that Point 16 of the report , the demand that we should at long last create a central unit to take overall control of the evaluation of the development and aid programme , including ECHO , MEDA , Phare and TACI , that this matter be addressed by the Commission once and for all and in a determined manner .
This means looking much more closely at Point 14 in which Mrs Fabra Vallés states that we must finally stop recruiting personnel freely when we know that in some cases there are very close relationships between the services in question and certain aid organizations .
You are aware that every third ECU spent through non-governmental organizations is administered by French aid organizations .
When these things are viewed in this light , we would also be making a contribution to transparency and the successful implementation of this aid programme if we were to fall in line with our esteemed rapporteur on this point .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate rapporteur Fabra Vallés and Goerens on their reports which are before us .
Would you allow me to start by responding to the Fabra Vallés report , followed by the Goerens report .
I do not only want to thank the rapporteur and the draughtsman for the opinion , Mrs Carlotti , for this report , but I would also like to express my appreciation for the constructive contribution from the members of the relevant Parliamentary Committees concerning the recommendations from the Court of Auditors in this report on humanitarian aid for the period 1992-1995 .
The various constructive exchanges have enriched the discussion by introducing ideas towards the future of humanitarian aid .
The Commission shares most of the findings as expressed in draft resolution , and in particular the necessity to improve the coordination between the various agents in the field of humanitarian aid , including the Member States .
Also because it is important to provide the experts in this field with their own framework on account of their important coordinating and monitoring role .
With this in mind the Commission is in the process developing a frame of reference in the shape of a handbook .
The desirability of providing humanitarian aid with a legal basis in primary law .
The Commission regrets that the Treaty of Amsterdam has not been able to include these specific measures in the very important domains of the Union 's foreign relations .
Then the necessity to develop , particularly in the event of major humanitarian crises , strategic relations with the other agents in the field of humanitarian aid , both governmental and non-governmental organizations , and United Nations agencies .
I would like to point out to you that at the moment the Commission is working on a definition of a new effective partnership to optimize the results from humanitarian operations .
Moreover , the Commission is researching the possibilities of how to improve the evaluation of the effects of humanitarian actions .
But I should also like to respond to two recommendations in the draft resolution , in which the Commission does not share the opinion of the European Parliament .
We do not think it is necessary to develop a humanitarian charter in order to define the directions and principles of the Union 's humanitarian policy .
The Council 's regulation of 29 June 1996 , but also the Commission 's statement on the link between humanitarian aid , rehabilitation and development rectifies this deficiency , we believe , and is also a clear legal framework .
I also believe that Mrs Carlotti , the draughtsman for the opinion of the Committee on Development , also shares the Commission 's opinion on this issue .
When , for that matter , the Court of Auditors drafted its report , this was not yet the case , that is to say , the Commission had not made its statement about the link between humanitarian aid , rehabilitation and development .
Which is why the report cannot discuss it .
Concerning the creation of a central unit within the Commission entrusted with the evaluation of the external support programmes , ECHO , MEDA , Phare and Tacis , I would like to point out that on 15 October last year the Commission decided to establish a new structure for the management and evaluation of these programmes .
The involvement of the humanitarian bureau in this structure will be limited because of the specific nature of humanitarian aid and because of the urgent circumstances and the special procedures necessary for the implementation of these projects .
To conclude , the Commission will keep the European Parliament informed of the debate to be started soon on humanitarian aid towards the year 2000 , so that your institution will remain well-informed on the topics of general interest which require special attention , such as the security of humanitarian personnel , or humanitarian ethics .
It goes without saying that the Commission will continue to inform this Parliament on the activities undertaken , both in relation to the operations and responsible agents , and in relation to the evaluation of the results .
In this respect the Commission thinks it will soon be able to the present the report for 1997 to the relevant Parliamentary Committee , both to take stock and to think about what the general focus for the coming year should be .
I would like to add a couple of remarks to this .
Firstly , various honourable delegates have talked about the staffing situation within the Commission , and particularly those who are responsible for setting up and implementing aid programmes .
This is a discussion which recurs every year , and every year in the reports of the Court of Auditors we can read the comment that if nothing is done about this staffing situation , it will no doubt feel obliged to repeat the same comment again .
It is true .
If one compares the staff resources available in some of the Member States , as well as in other organizations responsible for foreign aid , then it shows the Commission in a disadvantaged position by a factor of 3 or 4 to 1 .
Germany , for example has 5.7 members of staff for every expenditure of 10 million dollars , whereas we have 2.7 .
We can complain about this .
We can then say that the whole system of recruiting experts for three year contracts naturally promotes fast turnover .
We are not authorized to extend these contracts , so in other words , know-how also flushes through quickly .
At the same time a restriction is imposed on us when it concerns expanding the permanent pool of staff within the Commission .
I would like to say , make the best of it .
Let us therefore try to carry out the work as well as possible with the staff resources we have , and not moan too much about having too few staff .
There is not an awful lot that can be done about that .
But one can be critical about the recruitment of staff and its quality .
My second remark , before I respond to the report by Mr Goerens , is to do with the so-called programme approach which has also been argued for .
The Commission in fact shares the opinion that it would be opportune to opt for a more global approach , and particularly in cases in which there are crises that , because of their significance and complexity , are of a longer duration , and where the issue is not so much an ad-hoc intervention , but more a structural intervention .
Nonetheless , the Commission believes that the individual project approach , in particular in the context of crises resulting from natural disasters and the like , or sudden epidemics , continues to be preferable .
So in other words , a more global approach is not ruled out , but in the majority of cases , preference will have to be given to a per-project approach , and less to a , shall we say , programmatic approach .
I noted another comment about a complaint that certain non-governmental organizations from a certain Member State are given less opportunity than others to participate in the implementation of programmes .
Let me say briefly and to the point : I have this experience myself with these kind of comments when they are made about the Tacis and Phare aid programmes .
I can only say that the efficiency and quality of the implementation must be the deciding factor when aid projects are allocated .
On that matter , I think that it should also remain the starting point , if all are to benefit .
If there are Member States or companies who are less familiar with the region of the countries where implementation is being carried out , and because of this circumstance , qualify less highly , for instance , when submitting a tender for projects , then something can be done about this disadvantage by means of workshops or information given by the Commission .
But I am always ready to have an open discussion , and I am not very convinced that the complaints uttered on this point are always equally justified and well-founded .
Mr Goeren 's draft resolution and report .
The Commission is pleased with the draft resolution , in which the necessity to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of our aid programmes is constantly underlined .
This necessity has long been recognized by us , and many studies have been done to determine the effectiveness of aid .
These show clearly that aid is efficient when it is intended to support a sound development policy , and to replace such a policy .
This remark was also made in the debate tonight , and quite rightly .
Aid cannot take the place of sound economic management , cannot take the place of respecting human rights , and a free democracy .
Aid flows can only be effective if our partner countries ensure that there is the right economic , social and political framework for development .
Over the years we have made steady progress integrating this principle into our programming procedures .
In Lomé III , the concentration of programmable aid was already introduced in a limited number of areas or sectors .
This principle has been carried out more and more during the past decades .
During the past years , the procedures for drawing up and evaluating activities financed by us have become more elaborate , but also more systematic .
The draft resolution before you refers , quite rightly to my mind , to the use of a logical framework during all phases of the project cycle .
The draft resolution also emphasizes certain themes which are going to play an increasingly important role in aid policy , and in the methodology of drawing up of projects .
Within the Directorate General VIII , a quality support group has been set up which sees to it that the funding proposals submitted are consistent with such a policy .
The draft resolution notes that the Commission 's activities are limited to a large extent by staff shortages .
There it is again .
Europe can have its own voice , play an important role in the international debate on the effectiveness of aid . But then we must enough staff at our disposal to give this role some substance .
I commented on this earlier , but also pointed out its limitations .
After the discussions with the Member States in 1995 comprehensive evaluations of all our cooperation activities with the poorer world were carried out .
In most cases the preparatory phase has been completed and the fieldwork is ready to be launched .
The results will probably be available at the end of the year .
As I mentioned earlier during discussion of the Fabra Vallés report , in the near future the new structure for the external aid programmes will also play an essential part in this process .
This was also raised in the Fabra Vallés report , but I would like to underline once more the importance of intensive coordination between all donors , but above all between the Member States and the Commission .
I fear that this coordination , and I say this with reference to the comments made by Mr Blokland , is only too often one-way traffic , whereby the flow of information travels exclusively from the Commission to the Member States .
Within the European Union we should be able to improve mutual cooperation , not only to show a more distinct political profile to our partner countries , but also to increase the success rate of our aid .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to respond briefly to a comment made about aid to the former Yugoslavia in particular .
This is indeed a separate story .
I will not go into any detail , but in view of the fact that the Frankfurter Allgemeine has in its possession an internal evaluation report submitted by my services , as well as a report which we had contracted out to the consultancy Bereschot , I would like to say that during the past six months , and also as result of the discussions which we have had with Parliament and other donors , we have been working to see how we can make the aid , in particular to Yugoslavia , the redevelopment aid , better and more efficient .
I shall gladly take responsibility for the delays which have occurred as result of the way we organize our work .
I hope you will understand that , in Bosnia , we are largely dependent on the cooperation of the authorities .
Which reminds me .
The months we have had to wait for approval , authorization , signatures of memoranda of understanding with the authorities , are countless .
Nevertheless , we are strengthening our delegation in Sarajevo , have gone over our organization in Brussels with a fine tooth comb once again , and have a proposal which will be sent to the Council next week , for which we will request your cooperation soon , to make the regulations referring to reconstruction aid to Yugoslavia more flexible , which will give us more scope to work faster .
Because there is one thing you should not forget . We work on the basis of legal regulations which in fact have been aid down by the Council , and which contain a host of elements intended to guarantee complete transparency on the one hand , but at the same time mean extremely time consuming procedures .
This is another element in the delay in the implementation of aid .
To conclude , I will promise Mrs Maij that I will wish Mr Pinheiro all necessary success with his programmes , in particular for the ACP countries .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.15 p.m. ) .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the Agenda .
Yesterday the Agenda stated quite clearly that after Urgencies , voting starts at 5.30 p.m.
As Members are now going to be electronically tagged as from February , I would very much suggest that this House tries to bring some discipline into voting time .
A lot of Members had to leave yesterday at 6 p.m. when voting should have finished .
Therefore I would ask that in future we start to try to keep some discipline about time .
Thank you very much , Mr Sturdy , but your comments do not refer to the Minutes .
However , we will take note of the comments and forward them to the Committee .
Mr President , my name does not appear on the list of Members present yesterday , although I do appear on every list of recorded votes .
I would be grateful if that could be put right .
Thank you , Mrs Hardstaff .
You are right .
The corresponding Minutes will be put right .
Mr President , that also applies to me .
My name is not shown , although I took part in every vote and attended the Conference of Presidents .
Thank you very much , Mr Pasty .
I repeat what I have already said to Mrs Hardstaff .
You are right , and the Minutes will be put right .
( The Minutes were approved )
Votes
Mr President , this motion corresponds to the fundamental view which this Chamber and above all the committee have always had , and I shall therefore support this motion .
Mr President , it is by no means clear to me what this means .
What has transit through Ireland got to do with Switzerland , for instance ?
It strikes me as superfluous .
Mr Wijsenbeek is opposed to the oral amendment .
Are there 12 members of Parliament who are opposed to this oral amendment ?
( Since there are not 12 members of Parliament who are opposed to the oral amendment , the President puts it to the vote )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , please excuse me for speaking very briefly about what I find in the Minutes .
It has unfortunately been somewhat misrepresented .
It says here that I started a competition for the most stupid pub language .
Obviously , this did not refer to the German Members and not to all PPE Members .
I must say , to save my honour , that it referred to only two Members , who tried to practise mediaeval politics in modern Europe , like robber barons .
Second point : this megatunnel , about which I spoke , is unfortunately not 20 km long but 50 km .
That is just the problem , that this tragic tube is so long and impracticable .
Excuse me for interfering , but it was important to me .
I sincerely hope agreement can be reached on Alpine transit .
We have to admit that our Swiss neighbours have expressed concern for environment , which is now widely shared in all the Alpine areas involved .
We could do nothing worse than to cast all the polluting traffic back at our neighbours by increasingly adopting unilateral measures .
The long-term solution is combined transport , not only through the Swiss tunnels , but also through the Brenner Pass and the Fréjus Tunnel between France and Italy .
Priority funding within the framework of the main European networks and a construction timetable are essential .
Adopting these would improve the relationship between Switzerland and the European Community , by means of the joint definition of a solution , which would respect the interests of the populations involved and of the Alps , which form a part of the European heritage .
The current negotiations between the EU and Switzerland give cause for concern .
I think the EU should show more respect for Switzerland 's position , especially with regard to the protection of the Alpine environment .
Against the background of the European Commission 's Green Paper on the effect of traffic on the environment and the White Paper on the future development of a common transport policy , people have repeatedly explained the necessity of making the EU 's transport policy environmentally suitable .
It is now time for the Commission to turn these fine words into practical policies. the EU should therefore adopt the position of making an especially large effort to reduce air pollution by switching transit traffic through the Alps to the railways .
The EU should also support the Swiss proposal for performance-related tolls for heavy traffic and a special transit toll for traffic through the Alps , so that the objective of switching shipments to the railways can really be achieved .
An expansion of motorways in the Alpine region would therefore not be necessary .
Instead there should be an immediate expansion of the railways .
Goerens report ( A4-0388 / 97 )
Mr Goerens ' report is good .
I approve of its main outline .
I agree with the idea of involving beneficiaries and NGOs in the programmes .
A measure of that sort contributes towards greater transparency and will improve the management of the funds allocated to humanitarian aid .
In that respect , I support the creation of a central unit to evaluate development aid programmes .
I consider that the unit should work in close cooperation with the NGOs on the pertinence of the actions undertaken .
Internal management of projects is also desirable in order to prevent the inertia inherent in any division of tasks .
With regard to Mr Goerens ' proposal and the content , I should like to raise an objection and a question .
In fact , I question the concept of ' economic and social value ' .
What is the reality behind this ?
It seems to me important that NGOs should be involved in the creation of coherent indicators , legitimized by themselves .
We shall be able to see more clearly and the quality of future decisions will be improved .
This reflection on the efficiency of community aid is helpful , but we must take care not to adopt a long and complicated approach .
Let us never forget that our final aim is to create balanced forms of development suitable for each country and each area .
Humanitarian aid must make it possible to look forward to the time when people no longer need it .
We will have succeeded when it is no longer needed , that is , when humanitarian aid has disappeared .
The European Union and its Member States are the largest providers of Third World aid .
Our contributions far exceed those of the USA or Japan .
Obviously it is of great importance to those we help and to ourselves to obtain the best possible benefit from this huge effort .
Despite high levels of unemployment and unacceptable levels of poverty in our own countries there is widespread support for aid to developing countries .
This is a welcome reflection of the generosity of the ordinary people of Europe .
Direct aid to governments of the Third World is often wasted through inefficiency and sometimes corruption .
This method of helping the people of the countries concerned often fails and merely enriches a few government leaders .
It is the least effective method of aid distribution and should be avoided whenever possible .
We have seen some very successful European Programmes of aid and we must build on these successes .
We must also make sure that we can verify that the aid has reached its intended targets .
Europe has been very successful in its food aid programme .
Millions of lives have been saved through these efforts and with the high level of expertise that now exists in this area , I am sure that we can build on these successes .
Emergency aid must be given when and where it is needed , without any conditions .
However , as regards general development and structural aid , I believe we must insist on the countries concerned agreeing to respect the human rights of all their citizens , including minorities , and promote democracy .
We cannot allow corrupt and cruel dictatorships to divert aid from the needy into their own pockets .
Our efforts have not all been successful .
Imports into Europe from developing countries have declined substantially over the past 20 years or so .
This phenomenon must be looked at in detail because it is only through trade that poor countries can hope to develop and provide for the needs of their citizens .
Non-governmental organizations are at the heart of development policy generally .
NGOs have a very high rate of effectiveness reflecting expertise gained in the field .
Given the continuing problem with trade flows with developing countries , I believe we should ask the NGOs to examine this area and suggest solutions acceptable to all concerned .
I welcome the Commission 's Green Paper on development aid .
It clearly identifies the successes and failures of our policies .
I would like to commend the Commission for this huge contribution to the development of the Third World .
It has achieved excellent results with limited staff resources .
Its efforts are appreciated throughout the Third World .
I am very sceptical towards the idea that the EU should administer the Member State 's aid activities .
Experience so far shows that EU aid goes mainly to former colonies of some of the Member States , which means that certain countries which need help are put into another queue .
That is regrettable .
It is however , important to have improved coordination between the EU countries , because that can give better results for the countries / areas which need assistance .
Improved coordination , without being EU regulated , could also help to reduce the administration costs of the aid providers .
As far as the problems pointed out by the Court of Auditors in its report are concerned , it is true that there are problems with irregularities .
We should of course try to avoid these , but we must also have understanding for the fact that it is easy to get irregularities in ' turbulent ' areas where the social system has more or less collapsed .
The aid which the EU currently administers needs to be concentrated more on preventative measures to avoid catastrophes .
Finally , I am opposed to the rapporteur 's argument that ' improved coordination would help to ensure wider recognition of the considerable efforts being made in the development aid field by the Union and the Member States / ... / . This fact generally escapes the attention of public opinion . '
I do not think that we should try to make political points through aid for people who need help . ' Working without being seen ' might be a better watchword .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have just been informed that today it is also Mr Telkämper 's birthday , for which I wish to congratulate him as I have already congratulated Mrs Fontaine .
Many happy returns , Mr Telkämper .
Debt relief for heavily indebted ACP countries
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0382 / 97 ) by Mr Torres Couto , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the communication from the Commission on support for structural adjustment and debt relief in heavily indebted ACP countries - a Community response to the HIPC debt initiative , together with a proposal for a Council decision concerning Exceptional Assistance for the Heavily Indebted ACP countries ( COM ( 97 ) 0129 - C4-0243 / 97 )
I give the floor to Mr Vecchi who is deputizing for Mr Torres Couto as rapporteur .

Mr President , with today 's discussion , the European Parliament intends to express its own satisfaction with the fact that , for the first time , the Commission has been able to launch an initiative to begin concrete intervention into the problem of the multilateral foreign debt of the poorest and mostheavily indebted ACP countries .
I would like to recall the fact that we are talking about a request which both the European Parliament and the joint ACP-EU assembly made many years ago now , which until today had not met with the support of the Council or the governments of the Member States of the Union .
It is well-known by everybody that , by the end of the 1970s , the weight of the foreign debt was already having a major effect on the life of very many countries in the southern hemisphere and was actually hindering , and in the majority of cases preventing , the development of the poorest parts of the planet .
The cost of servicing the debt was and still is , for many countries , the principal expense for the public purse , in hard currency , and this has produced a situation which is the cause of a huge " negative net transfer ' of financial resources from the South to the North , that is from the poorer to the richer countries .
Certainly , the debts should be honoured , in principle .
Of course many of the causes of the failure of the southern countries to develop lie with the maladministration which has characterized many governments and power groups in countries in the third and fourth worlds .
However , it is also necessary to recall the fact that these governments have often enjoyed the support of governments and political and economic groups in the more developed countries , and that the management of international credit has not always been characterized by honesty and fairness .
In reality , in many cases , the sums repaid by the countries in the southern hemisphere , in the form of interest payments , are by now much greater than those originally received in the form of loans .
Furthermore , many of the international factors which have made a major contribution to increasing the debt and the burdens of its management , have certainly not been caused by the countries in the southern hemisphere .
I recall these elements in order to stress the fact that the initiatives to reduce the weight of the debt are not a free handout , but a compelling necessity which , from many points of view , is intended to reestablish conditions of greater equality .
It is a matter then of accepting the fact that , under the present conditions , the poorest countries will never be able to pay off their own foreign debt and that , anyway , its persistence or , really , its automatic increase will never make it possible either to tackle seriously the roots of underdevelopment , or less still , to reinstate these countries in the international marketplace and in the dynamics of commercial and economic relations which , furthermore , the European countries have a great interest in doing .
With today 's vote , Parliament will be opening the way for the Union to join the international initiative , promoted by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , directed at supporting the structural adjustment and the policies of amortization of the debt , both because it is a positive initiative as a whole - even if it is certainly insufficient - and because we believe that the Union should play an important political role in it .
It is a good opportunity to demonstrate that this more human and rational approach , which must take account of the priority objectives of the struggle against poverty and human and sustainable development , which we always hammer into our Community documents , can become a point of reference for the major international financial institutions .
It is a matter then , even with this instrument , of building a strategy of political dialogue and concrete collaboration , which might see the European Union , together with the partners in the southern hemisphere , and in particular the ACP countries , committed to the relaunch of effective policies of cooperation for development .
The exposure to the Community itself , of the 11 ACP countries for whom the Community initiative provides , is for a relatively small sum .
The initiative provides for the possibility of the flexible use of various forms of remission , amortization and reduction of the debt .
Parliament asks the Commission to keep it constantly informed and consulted on future developments in Community action , to which we give our support , which will be conditional upon the aims of democratic reform , development , and justice in which Europe must be the leading player .
This initiative will have to be the first important step in tackling , in a more comprehensive way , the problems associated with the foreign debt , including the multilateral debt , of the poorest countries on a worldwide level , as a condition for the restoration of the minimum conditions of solvency and economic and financial practicability for many countries in the world .
In this framework , the role of the Union and its Member States , both directly and in international initiatives , is obviously decisive .
Mr President , the report by the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on support for structural adjustment and debt relief in heavily indebted ACP states has received the assent of the Committee on Budgets for obvious reasons .
It is the most basic common sense , within the framework of cooperation with these countries , to give them the means to start off on the right foot so that all the work they have done - at least as far as some are concerned - is not cancelled out by excessive debts .
The support we give them by means of this report is therefore intended to provide a lasting answer to their problems , and the European Union , the largest donor to these countries , can act in three ways : by providing additional support for structural adjustment , case by case ; by envisaging aid , case by case , to reduce the trade debt and by increasing support for debt management ; by taking appropriate measures to reduce the present net amount of the debt of eligible countries to the European Community .
In practice , Article 3 states that the aid in the form of non-refundable aid referred to in Article 1 , will be taken out of a single interest-bearing account , which will be opened for the purpose at the European Investment Bank and which from now on will be called the ' debt relief account ' .
We would like the Commission to show the amount of the interest earned by that account at the EIB in the financial information on the European Development Fund every year .
Mr President , this initiative - which this House will undoubtedly approve - should allow us to make a first consideration : how community budget needs to be calculated in the European Development Fund .
We would insist on this in the proposal for the Union to make its foreign affairs policy more and more united .
Direct budgetary control of these funds would make the European Union 's actions even more efficient .
What doubt can there be about the demand for a sustained or efficient development , in many cases , the cancellation of a debt when it becomes impossible for a country to repay this debt and the interest payments without putting its future economic development at risk .
To insist on forcing certain countries to make impossible repayments renders development aid , as well as economic reforms , unviable .
The high level of debt in some countries has , moreover , a deterrent effect on investment , leads to the flight of capital , makes its production become excessively export-orientated causing imbalances , the abandonment of rural areas and even domestic shortages .
It also has a knock-on effect on the very political stability of these Third World countries . Let us not talk now about those democracies which are just emerging from what was previously an authoritarian regime .
Therefore , I think that - as the Committee proposes - maintaining aid to countries like Burundi , Ethiopia , Guinea Bissau , Madagascar , Mozambique , Nigeria , Uganda , São Tomé e Principe , the former Zaire , Zambia and Uganda is something that this House should support .
We cannot demand from these Third World countries that they put the repayment of their debt before their own economic growth .
We have to make sure the debt repayment is compatible with the autonomous development of these countries if we do not want to take with one hand and give with the other , on the basis of increasing humanitarian and development aid .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Union for Europe Group , on whose behalf I am speaking , accepts the EU 's participation in the initiative on the debt of the poorest countries launched in 1996 , during the G7-Lyons Summit .
In fact , despite the measures taken to reduce the debt already applied to some of those countries , some of them , mostly situated in Africa , are faced with a level of total indebtedness that runs the risk of discouraging efforts aimed at adaptation and structural reforms , which are absolutely essential for their development .
And so the European Union has to contribute towards this concerted effort made by the main international donors , with the aim of reducing the debt , a particularly keen problem for our ACP partners .
We too , as rapporteur , declare our obvious support for the Community response .
As rapporteur , I think it essential to reinforce the EU 's commitment to the process of structural adaptation implemented in the ACP countries .
As rapporteur , I think it will be necessary to accentuate the fundamental problem of economic and social development and to take the indicators of human development into account .
Finally , as rapporteur , we believe it important that the Council adopts the draft decision as soon as possible and that the Member States of the Union contribute rapidly with their financial participation to the institutions responsible for taking this initiative forward .
Mr President , the debt contracted by the ACP countries towards the member countries of the European Union , as well as towards the European Union itself , represents in many ways a stereotypical case of the heterogenesis of ends , the mechanism of which the Austrian economist Von Mises showed us so well .
Not only has the level of total debt gone on growing , not only does the weight of interest often exceed the sum of money originally paid out , and not only is it that such burdens finish up hindering the development which they profess to want to foster , but other economic disadvantages have been added to these .
Often it is not the population which is implicated but only the government , and it is the pursuit of the ends desired by the latter , and not by the former , which has been put first .
Often , the intention is even to foster purely and simply the interests of the ruling political class .
This is why we find the ambiguous phenomena of mutual interest between the European political class and the political class of the ACP countries , phenomena which are always to the detriment of the people whom rather they profess to want to favour .
This is why we also find the phenomena of very deep mistrust towards the European countries held by the people of the developing countries , which should be , by consequence , more closely associated with their European brothers .
Finally , this is why we find a sort of renewed economic and financial dependence on the part of the developing countries upon the countries of Europe , a dependence which is frankly neo-colonialist in flavour .
The reduction of the debt is therefore imperative , but with certain conditions .
The first is that this should not break the basic rule expressed in the Latin maxim pacta sunt servanda ; the reduction of the debt must serve , in short , to allow the developing countries to be released from their commitments as far as is realistically possible .
The second is that the developing countries should display genuine good intentions , through good management of the finance and structural reforms of their economies .
Only by this will we contribute to helping the developing countries to really leave behind what will otherwise still remain a minority status .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us begin by supporting the claim with which the rapporteur opens the proposed resolution requiring Parliament to be formally consulted on this Commission communication , not only because it relates to Community policy within the scope of the Lomé Convention , but because a Joint Parliamentary Assembly exists between the EU and the ACP countries .
Raising this initial question , another one would then arise from the heading of the communication , but we 'll leave that until the end of the speech as it seems important to us to begin by describing the situation this communication is seeking to answer .
There was a time when the image of the time-bomb to wipe out the debt of the so-called " Third World ' was used , and the fact is that there has been a need to make safety mechanisms operate for the explosive situation not to develop into an uncontrollable tragedy from the social point of view .
This is more a time when the safety valves or lifebuoys will have to operate as written in the explanatory statement , and the Community response will seek to do just that , after bilateral rescheduling has exhausted its virtues as a remedy , also strengthening the dependence relations resolving real problems of indebtedness to a far greater extent .
An analysis of the situation would seem to be more of a diagnosis as the details available and the same explanatory statement leave several signs of this imbalance the world is suffering .
Only in this way can we describe the increasing gulf between the rich and the poor countries , and between the poor and the even poorer countries , between indebted and heavily indebted countries , countries impoverished and indebted through and through , owing to the deterioration in trade relations , the promotion and stimulation of indebtedness by creditors with a surplus or unrestrained production of surplus liquidity .
The additional diagnoses provide real revelations .
Although the numbers require updating , it is significant that the latest ones referred to indicate the addition of six new countries to what is sadly known as the " heavily indebted club ' and that only one of the previous countries has succeeded in getting out of this undesirable category .
The situation has got dangerously worse in some regions , particularly in Africa , reaching technical levels that raise the pressing question of tolerability .
On that account , the Commission 's proposal only relates to those countries whose debt vis-à-vis the Community is considered intolerably high .
There are eleven of them , and it is very painful for a Portuguese , and certainly for the rapporteur , that the official language of three of these countries is Portuguese .
But the diagnosis , if static , if it continues for the situation , is always unsatisfactory , and particularly when it fails to identify the causes clearly , and on that account cannot be used to attack the roots of the evil .
This analogy with a clinical picture will be relevant , because while the prescriptions and treatment required by the Commission are aimed at sufferers in the terminal stages , as emergency aid called " exceptional assistance ' for those on the brink of starvation so that they do not die of hunger but continue to live in hunger , there is another image in this part-session week , which is also similar to a drug addict who has got into debt and is desperate because he has no drugs or money : " I 'll sell you my product on credit , even if you do not want to buy it , and now you have no money to pay me and so I have been increasing my prices as you grow dependent on them .
You are in need but do not kill yourself , do not kill anyone , do not steal , I ask you for part of the debt and I lend you more money so you can buy more doses at the price I have fixed for the time being , and then I 'll put it up later ' .
It should be very clear that there is no question of wiping out the debt .
It is just a question of reducing it , and so we should congratulate the Commission , and also the MEP who is trying to improve the proposal , when Council failed to give it great priority in the explanation of reasons , although it paid some attention to it .
And this Friday of the part-session of the European Parliament is not seen as a time for an exercise in catharsis .
This prospect does not lead us to stop talking for so long , as we have time to do so this time .
But it means that one fundamental question almost loses significance in this context , which is that , as the Commission makes its proposal and the rapporteur gives his opinion , the cause of the situation is not called into question in the slightest .
However , the entire economic strategy will continue and should continue to be established on the same requirements or even reinforce them .
The entire economic recovery , the entire economic growth of those countries ( we cannot even talk of economic development ) passes through the receipts of the World Bank and the IMF , which has been tested on many occasions already , with the results we are now faced with that have led to the proposal to increase the doses .
For that reason , we have waited until the end to talk about the communication heading . This heading does not give priority to the Community response to the initiative relating to the debt held by these countries , which is made into a sub-heading .
It gives priority to support and structural adaptation , and only afterwards to the reduction of the debt held by the highly indebted ACP States .
In order : first the treatment , then the diagnosis and finally the patient .
We all know that the time is not one for solidarity and cooperation .
However , nothing is even said about this .
But we just stay here , not making progress .
And perhaps we should consider ourselves lucky that we have been able to talk about a subject for so long with an approach of wanting to finish with it , but which reality and the levels of intolerability make it necessary to make public and to be faced , although the Commission and Parliament have a way of escaping it , which is possibly inconvenient for Council .
There is a Portuguese saying , " Great remedies for great ills ' .
The level of awareness of the seriousness of the ills has not yet achieved great remedies .
We would point out once again and to conclude the positive aspect of having to face a situation , although within its limits of tolerability , and only in the search for remedies and continuity and reinforcement of what we consider to be its causes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report discusses the issue of the debt burden of various countries in the southern hemisphere and as we all know , it is a heavy burden on the positive and dynamic development of these countries .
The European Parliament , as well as the equally represented Assembly of the ACP-European Union has often declared itself in favour of initiatives .
In this concrete case it is the European Union itself which is coming up with a very interesting proposal , namely to give the eleven ACP countries which are weighed down by heavy debts a contribution at the expense of the European Union .
We fully endorse the European Union taking such an initiative , especially as we know that the door is shut on many things in a number of ACP countries , because they are tripped up over and over again by heavy debt payments .
We are pleased with the fact that this report fully supports the initiative of the Commission , and we also think it is important that a number of amendments have been incorporated into the report with regard to the original Commission proposal , by emphasizing , for instance , that it is crucial that a manageable level of debt is set which includes social indicators .
The rapporteur can rely on the commitment of the Green Group towards this dossier .
Mr President , I wish to apologize on behalf of my group for the absence of Mr Scarbonchi , who must have unexpectedly been unable to attend .
Mr President , the HIPC initiative on debt relief in developing countries marks a new approach on the part of the IMF and the World Bank .
People have recognized that debt problems are a serious impediment to healthy development in the most indebted countries .
I can only give my unreserved support to that .
It is important that the EU takes an active part in the work to remedy the debt problems , both because debt impedes growth in developing countries , and because it sends a political signal to the Member States and other creditors that Europe is taking the problems of developing countries seriously .
Therefore debt relief should also be followed up by other forms of help to fight poverty .
Against this background the outcome of the Council 's discussion is disappointing .
Instead of allocating extra money for debt relief , people have only been able to agree to use funds from the existing budget .
That means that there are only funds for the first five of the eleven ACP countries which need debt relief .
We therefore need to find new funds when the remaining six countries are approved for debt relief .
I agree with paragraphs 6 and 7 in Mr Torres Couto 's report because they urge us not to demand strict adherence to the criteria for approval for HIPC .
Of course there have to be structural adjustments in developing countries , possibly with the inclusion of environmental and political considerations .
But if debt relief is made dependent on successful three-year reform programmes , it will exclude the weakest countries .
It is precisely in these countries that a lightening of the debt burden will make structural programmes easier to implement .
I believe that structural programmes should go hand in hand with a relief of debt and not just be a condition for it .
Both structural reforms and debt relief are preconditions for what really matters : relieving the poverty and the poor economic outlook .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , anyone who reads the Torres Couto report must come to the conclusion , at least in parts , that the rapporteur 's view of the problem is starry-eyed and too much that of the developing countries .
For years , if not decades , the question of the indebtedness of poor countries has been a problem of our cooperation .
On the one hand , it is a great help for many countries to have access to credit .
On the other hand , precisely in these countries , unforeseeable developments are often the reason for them to walk smack into debt traps .
But we must not overlook that in this field too , unfortunately , the east-west conflict has left its traces behind .
The Commission 's proposal to set up a fund for relieving the debts of poor countries is to be welcomed .
But the assessment should not be only according to the current debt status , but also the effort for a good administration must always be taken into account .
It should be pointed out that countries with great mineral wealth , such as the former Zaire , get the same support as Ethiopia , among others .
Admittedly we want to give President Kabila in the Democratic Republic of the Congo a probationary period , but the question for us is whether it is being taken into account that only a clear change from a dictatorship to a democracy can be a reason for a generous remission of debt .
It must also be emphasized that debts cannot be reduced unconditionally , because as well as the question of a somewhat democratic form of government there are the questions of corruption and excessive expenditure on armaments .
In Mr Torres Couto 's report , the amendments concerning the involvement of the European Parliament must be particularly emphasized .
Admittedly the proposal concerns the money of the Development Fund , but unfortunately it is not subject to the budgetary control of the European Parliament .
Yet the participation of Parliament is an absolute requirement to ensure democratic control .
We will also get into difficulties if democratization plays an important part in the arguments with the developing countries , but on the European side Parliament is not involved .
The draft decision aims in the right direction , if the Commission 's standards are not relaxed too much .
I hope that the basic ideas of the statement are put into effect quickly and successfully , to the benefit of the people in the affected developing countries .
Mr President , I can agree with the good intentions of the Torres Couto report , but I would like make a few comments .
Firstly , I wonder whether this approach , which to some extent resembles what we in the Netherlands call never say die ' , will genuinely get us out of this vicious circle of debt .
We are talking about 5 % of the total debt .
It is true , it is a great deal of money , but I find it a bit neocolonial to link debt relief to sound environmental policy .
You cannot demand this from these countries ; not yet , in any case .
Then there is the reference to the 7 % of the gross national product which has been promised for more than twenty years .
We all know that most of the countries , willingly or unwillingly , will never achieve this .
I am not all happy with the idea that countries which have arrears are ineligible for relief .
To my mind it would be better if , slowly but gradually , we worked towards writing off the debts , but then we should be allowed to make some demands .
We will have to open our markets to their products , retain minimum expenditure by these countries on arms , and let experts who are trained in the West return to these countries .
Only then will they have a genuine opportunity to develop .
Mr President , developing world debt is now at two thousand billion American dollars .
The report now being discussed concerns eleven countries with the lowest national product in the world , the indebted and poverty-stricken HIPC countries .
These countries are in debt to the tune of 5.6 billion American dollars and the costs of this initiative to the EU come to some ECU 150 million .
The Commission in its communication is right when it recommends the partial relief of loans .
The poor developing countries are in a grave state .
They have to pay off their loans in the shape of cheap produce , apart from in cash .
The price goes down the more pressed the seller is to sell .
The poor countries are in urgent need of help .
This makes their position all the more difficult .
Investments cannot be made , though the minimal amount of investment could make all the difference .
This impasse hampers even further the development of these countries .
Dire poverty paralyses all development .
And the social structure cannot develop either because there are not enough resources for education and standards are steadily declining .
The situation also jeopardizes the progress of democracy and peace .
It can spark off unrest and weaken opportunities for democratic development when people realize that more of their money is going to lenders in the rich countries than to the sick in their own country .
The situation for agriculture in the poor countries is also bad .
Agriculture has to focus on exports and nonfoodstuffs while the nation suffers from undernourishment .
For this reason I strongly support the ideas contained in the Commission 's communication .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Torres Couto , and Mr Vecchi for their speeches , and thank Parliament for its interest and support for the Commission 's proposal for Community involvement in the initiative on the debt of heavily indebted countries .
This initiative means an important advance in how the international community has taken on board - until now - the debt problems of the poorest countries .
For the first time there is a framework which allows coordinated global action to take place , on the part of all borrowers , to help heavily indebted , poor countries who are struggling to put into action economic reform programmes .
This framework includes not only debt reduction , in the case of bilateral commercial debt , but also individually adopted measures in each case which are intended to reduce the multilateral debt load in these countries .
The European Community is offering grants to the heavily indebted , poor countries in the form of non-repayable aid packages .
And although the amounts are small , the Community can in no way remain on the fringe of these initiatives .
It is clear that the political importance of Community involvement in this debt initiative is very much greater than its contribution in terms of absolute figures .
The proposal from the Commission has been discussed in depth with the Member States who have shown their full support for the Community 's involvement in this initiative .
However , in the debates we have looked for an alternative solution to financing debt reduction on a Community scale , responding to concerns from Member States who do not wish to place additional burdens on national budgets , but guaranteeing , at the same time , that the resources given to the initiative are additional .
I am pleased to announce that an agreement has been reached at this time .
Consequently we hope that the Council will adopt its conclusions shortly .
This agreement has favourable elements .
The Council has committed itself to a full Community involvement in this initiative .
In the case of countries who would fulfil conditions to benefit from this initiative in 1997 - or fulfil them in 1998 - financing debt reduction , on behalf of the Community , will be guaranteed by earmarking annual income stemming from the interest payments of the EDF funds .
Such financing adheres to the principle of providing extra resources and guarantees that the Community will give aid above the present aid levels intended for those countries .
Throughout 1998 , and on the basis of the Committee 's report , the Council will reconsider the later financial needs and will make a decision with reference to the future involvement of financing by the Community in this initiative , including the possibility of financial measures through amortization of previous loans from the European Development Fund .
Mr President , our two institutions , Parliament and Commission , support Community involvement in this initiative but the parliamentary proposal to resolve this requires a more flexible approach , intending to include a wider group of countries , and to guarantee the quickest and most effective reduction of debt .
In its contacts with the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and its creditor governments , the Commission has always fought for this initiative , based on wide criteria , to be applied . This initiative should have appropriate and suitable support for the heavily indebted poor countries who are struggling to apply economic reform , hoping to stimulate economic growth and reduce poverty .
Consequently , it is encouraging to observe that this initiative has continued to evolve and that its targeting has improved .
The initiative may not be perfect , perhaps , but it is founded on a wide , international consensus of helping a group of countries whose development efforts continue to be hampered by their heavy debt .
Moreover , this initiative should be seen as part of an international collaboration intended to help poor , heavily indebted countries .
As a result , the reduction of debt should be accompanied by a level of development aid which will be continuous and adequate .
Thank you very much , Mr Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution . )
Mr President , yesterday we were debating the effectiveness of development aid in this House .
Aid is not only ineffective because the macro-economic conditions are unfavourable in many developing countries .
One of the reasons for this is the enormous debt burden the developing countries are suffering .
In the excellent Torres Couto report , which I have been able to agree with wholeheartedly , the responsibility is quite rightly placed not only at the door of the developing countries .
The lenders have a responsibility in so far as they have too easily granted credit to corrupt dictators or given loans to economically dubious projects .
Although it was generally acknowledged that the developing countries could never pay off these debts , writing them off or rescheduling them was never a matter for discussion , in particular as far the multinational debts were concerned .
Fortunately , thanks to the initiative of the World Bank and the IMF , this has changed ; and thanks to the proposal of the Commission and the European Union , this initiative is being implemented .
I also agree with the rapporteur that not only macro-economic indicators must be used to calculate the concept ' tolerable debt ' , but that social indicators must be included .
The rich nations cannot go on giving development aid to poor nations with one hand , whilst cashing in the interest on these countries ' enormous debts .
Moreover , for many countries , writing off debt can signal the beginning of an economic recovery .
It is good that the EU is taking the problems of developing countries seriously and is helping to reduce their debt burden .
However , that is not enough for a stable development in poor countries .
There are only enough funds for debt relief in five of the eleven countries .
However , debt relief is not enough .
The aim should be to remove the whole debt so that these countries are able to get out of the vicious circle in which they find themselves .
Debt relief should also go hand in hand with political structural programmes for growth , employment and long-term sustainable development through mature trade relations .
However , I still voted yes to the report .
Mr President , as my own government is taking a leading role in aiming to cut the debt burden of the world 's poorest countries as a positive way to start the next millennium , I am happy to support this report here today .
In Britain Chancellor Gordon Brown and Clare Short , as the first Cabinet level minister for our newly created Department for International Development , have met with church leaders and others to discuss debt relief issues .
I hope that my many colleagues in this House with influence over their respective churches will ask them to lobby their national governments as not all have so far followed the British in our enthusiasm for this important work .
The report is correct to link the need for sustainable economic reform by poorer countries with debt relief by the more developed countries .
Both north and south can work in partnership here so that for example environmental and poverty reduction work by indebted countries go hand in hand with debt relief .
The many constituents who have raised this important subject with me will be glad to see that Mr Torres Couto and Parliament are adding their voices to the campaign for debt relief .
Fisheries relations with Latvia
The next item is the debate on the report ( A4-0397 / 97 ) by Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of Protocol I to the Agreement on fisheries relations between the European Community and the Republic of Latvia laying down the conditions relating to joint enterprises provided for in the said agreement ( COM ( 97 ) 0323 - C4-0364 / 97-97 / 0177 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , in the same spirit that you are congratulating people on their birthdays , I would like to congratulate the people of Latvia for the achievements they have managed to chalk up on behalf of freedom in Europe .
We should congratulate them , the Estonians and the Lithuanians .
In their own ways , they have helped to keep the flame of freedom and democracy burning in an area of Europe where there have been many difficulties .
It is important that we approach the Latvian agreement in that spirit .
We all want to encourage the people of the Baltic Republics to think in terms of their European identity and in terms of preparing for European Union membership .
This is particularly important when the signals coming from the Commission in recent weeks were somewhat mixed .
The idea that one of the three would be in the first wave of accession discussions while the other two could wait behind was met with some consternation in the capitals of the neighbouring republics .
They could not quite see the logic , nor could I.
What is encouraging is that subsequently the idea of something more of a regatta approach prevailed in the Council of Ministers .
It is very important in that context that we welcome all the moves proposed , including this fisheries agreement , to bring in all the countries of Eastern Europe from Estonia , through Latvia and Lithuania right down to Slovakia and Bulgaria and so on ; that we do not say that there are two classes of potential Member States out there but welcome them all to be in dialogue with us .
The background to this report is that there were agreements in 1993 with the three Baltic Republics . There were separate agreements with Finland and Sweden , which , at that stage , were not members of the European Union .
We are delighted that Sweden and Finland voted to join the EU and are now fully integrated .
But obviously a renegotiation had to take place in which the European Union negotiated on behalf of the original members but also on behalf of Sweden and Finland , which are neighbours of Latvia across the Baltic Sea .
This was duly renegotiated in 1996 and as far as Lithuania was concerned , it immediately proceeded to adopt a protocol which has come into force .
Now it is Latvia 's turn .
The Lithuanians have shown the way and the Latvians are next in line .
Latvia has a relatively small fleet .
186 vessels in the in-shore fleet at the last count and 15 longdistance vessels which fish mainly off Mauritania .
We are not talking about a huge fleet and it is important to emphasize that no net addition is being proposed to the fleet of Latvia in this agreement .
The important point is that the proposal will involve joint enterprises between the European Community and Latvia and also that there will be a grant of ECU 2.5 million to assist in the modernization process .
It is perhaps surprising , but worth noting , that the Latvians have not fished their full quota within their own waters .
So , there are some fish available there without doing damage to the overall conservation goals which we all hold dear .
There are provisions in the agreement for a joint committee - which is a very positive signal to send - to talk about the transfer of EC vessels , the modernization of the Latvian fleet and so on .
I should like to emphasize two objectives which could be given more commitment .
One is that there should be an annual report to this Parliament .
We have a special interest in the pre-accession phase in those countries .
Secondly , more resources should be devoted to research .
These are not controversial points and I hope that in his reply the Commissioner will confirm that is in line with the Commission 's thinking .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur Mr Macartney on his excellent report , setting out very clearly the issues involved in this fishing agreement with Latvia .
I should also like to concur with his remarks this morning concerning all the Baltic countries and their common progress towards EU membership .
It is important that we achieve a balance between enabling the Baltic states applying to join the European Union to modernize their fleets - in the case of Latvia , as has been said , boats are on average 20 years old - and the need to maintain overall fish stocks and not increase overall fishing capacity .
This scheme for the sale of Community ships , which must be at least five years old , to be reflagged as Latvian vessels , should contribute to the achievement of that balance , provided that there is careful monitoring to ensure that such boats are not subsequently reintegrated into the Community fleets and also that quotas are observed .
This is why we need an annual report on this issue .
If joint ventures and bilateral projects can be developed between Latvia and the EU in the course of modernizing and privatizing the ageing Latvian fleet , this can only be beneficial to the progress of Latvia towards full European Union membership .
In this spirit , we welcome the Commission proposals and look forward to a speedy confirmation of the protocol to enable such cooperation to start at Community level , in addition to existing bilateral initiatives by individual Member States .
Mr President , it was almost seven years ago , and like today it was a Friday , when I made my first fisheries speech here in the plenum .
In Germany we say Friday is fish day .
Only on Sunday is there tasty roast meat .
What has changed today ?
As far as the day of the week is concerned , not much .
I am disappointed about that .
Even when we look at the agenda of the part-sessions of the next six months until July 1998 , in general nothing about the scheduling has changed .
That is not right .
Why not ?
Just look at today 's report .
It points to the future of the EU after the year 2000 .
How can I convince you of that ?
Before the Commission begins the negotiations about a new agreement , and before extending such an agreement , it must present an assessment of the essential elements .
These are the state of the fish stocks , the effects of the agreement on the Community budget or the division of the financial participation of the European Community and the ship owners .
For instance , this agreement with Latvia , in its protocol , goes particularly into this financial participation by setting up joint enterprises .
With the Treaty of Amsterdam , an enlargement of the European Union is now becoming reality .
It obviously includes , of the Baltic states , Latvia as well as Estonia and Lithuania .
Against the background of the Treaty of Amsterdam , the previous fisheries agreements - that is the agreements of the EU with these third countries - gain a new meaning .
The things which matter as far as the expansion is concerned are strengthening basic democratic values , creation of competitive jobs to overcome structural weaknesses in the medium term , encouragement of small and medium-sized companies and improvement of European environmental quality .
The last leaves much to be desired in the Baltic .
The experience which has been gained with the administration of EU money , the preoccupation with these Community procedures , and setting up joint enterprises , will - I am convinced - help Latvia on the way to faster privatization , and at least benefit its efforts to prepare its fisheries administration sufficiently for its future accession .
The fisheries agreement with Latvia is virtually a factor in the introductory strategy for this candidate for accession , and must thus not only be seen with goodwill by the present Community , but explicitly welcomed .
I hope that you are now convinced that we should not only approach it on a Friday .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Macartney on the preparation and presentation of his report .
Of course , any report for which he has responsibility is prepared well and this is no exception .
In the fisheries agreement between the EU and Latvia signed on 16 December , the contracting parties agreed to encourage the establishment of joint enterprises as laid down in the protocol conditions .
I think it is vitally important that there should be such enterprises and I believe those contributing from within the EU can play an important role in the development of the industry in Latvia .
This is important to that country and , as in my own country , important to the peripheral coastal regions where there is no alternative source of employment .
The protocol will have important advantages for the Union and Latvia .
The establishment of joint enterprises and financial participation by the Union will assist Latvia to meet some of its industry 's main objectives which are : modernizing the fleet , improving the fisheries administration and boosting imports for its processing sector .
The EU will benefit from the transfer of vessels to the Latvian flag and , more importantly , have access to its fishing zones .
This will relieve , even if in a small way , the pressure on the fleets and the pressure on the stocks , taking into consideration in particular the fact that they are under-fishing their quotas .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate Mr Macartney on his report .
This protocol is designed to transfer capacity from the European Union to Latvia by making it easier to establish joint enterprises .
Vessels are to be re-flagged , supposedly with a provision that it does not lead to an increase in the overall capacity of the Latvian fleet .
But the question here is how can this actually be ensured ?
On average , the Latvian fleet is some 20 years old , whereas the EU vessels which will be transferred can be as young as five years .
Even if the gross registered tonnage of the fleet does not increase by transferring vessels , such a substitution of younger vessels for older ones will lead , inevitably , to an increase in the effective fishing capacity of the Latvian fleet .
One of the lessons learned from my report on the control of the CFP was that even the EU vessels registries were not accurate .
So how can we be sure of the current capacity of the Latvian fleet and that these transfers will not lead to an increase and more overfishing ?
Compared with the agreements with the ACP countries , this is a much more equitable agreement in that it is not an exploitation of the country involved ; Latvians will be employed .
This is a very important aspect that should be transferred to agreements with ACP countries as it is much more equitable .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Macartney .
We should always welcome the signing of a fisheries agreement from the basis that they should be beneficial and equitable for both parties .
We regret , therefore , that Article 6 of the Protocol with Latvia will ruin what might be a good start in the phase of fisheries relations with Baltic countries , and even more seriously there is possibly a grave precedent being set for the future .
The Article I referred to , which the Commission should never have accepted as discriminatory and clearly prejudicial to Community interests , establishes that joint enterprises are obliged to have a crew who live exclusively in Latvia .
The present crews in these ships , Mr President , will therefore lose their jobs .
A summit on employment has just been held , which has stressed that this is one of the most serious problems for the Union and its solution should be our prime objective . We cannot understand why the fishing authorities accept clauses to boost the number of unemployed .
On the other hand a new regulation on the Structural Funds , strongly linked to the creation of employment , is in an advanced stage of preparation .
Therefore it might be taken as a contradiction that any employer who showed a real interest in promoting a joint enterprise would have no access to Community funds since , as in Latvia 's case , not only would jobs not be created but they would be destroyed with joint enterprises .
The fishing authorities have not only assessed these consequences but in addition intensify them with agreements of this type .
Mr President this is regrettable and dangerous , all the more so when we are talking about a country - Latvia - which is a net exporter of fishery products to the Union with whose production we are in direct competition .
Therefore , Mr President , I think that in future we should not adopt these kinds of clauses and urge the Commission in future not to include them in fishery agreements .
Mr President , in the first place I would like to congratulate Mr Macartney for his report and I am pleased to warmly welcome the conclusion of this Protocol .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you well know , after the expansion of the Community in 1995 , the Commission negotiated new fishing agreements with a series of third countries .
The Council 's negotiating guidelines were looking at the establishment of joint undertakings and joint enterprises in the fishing sector as a fresh element in the new fishing agreements .
The proposal here consists of a Protocol on the establishment of joint enterprises with Latvia as it applies to the fishing agreement which was ratified last year .
Once approved the present Protocol should bring up to date all the fishing agreements with the Baltic States in accordance with the Council 's negotiating guidelines .

In this way we will contribute to the alignment to which Mr Macartney was referring in his speech this morning , in the negotiations for accession to the European Community for all those countries who have applied . I can tell you as well that we look favourably on the proposal to investigate this .
In regard to the speech from Mrs Fraga Estévez I would like to say to her that , in accordance with the plan for permanent joint enterprises , ships will be removed from the Community register and be made to fly the flag of a third country .
Consequently they are subject to the legislation of such a country .
Latvia explicitly declared that the captain and crew of the Latvian ships should be Latvian citizens or permanently resident in Latvia , in accordance with the legislation of that country .
Similar arrangements are included in the Protocol negotiated with Lithuania .
Since this Protocol was accepted by the Member States , and ratified without too many difficulties , the Commission has carried out negotiations with Latvia in accordance with the same approach that was followed with Lithuania .
But I would like to reassure Mrs Fraga Estévez by telling her that the Commission has the firm resolve , when it negotiates similar Protocols in the future , to do as much as it can to safeguard Community employment as far as is possible .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mountain regions and Structural Funds
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-1016 / 97 by Mr Ebner , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission , on taking into account the specific nature of mountain regions in the reform of the Structural Funds ; -B4-0008 / 98 by Mr Azzolini , Mr Podesta and Mr Santini , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Commission , on mountain regions ; -B4-0009 / 98 by Mr Ephremidis , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Commission , on mountain regions in the European Union ; -B-0006 / 98 by Mr Bontempi and Mr Cot , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission , on mountain regions and the Structural Funds ; -B4-0007 / 98 by Mr Macartney and Mrs Ewing , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on the reform of the Structural Funds and the problems of mountain regions ; -B4-0010 / 98 by Mrs Lindholm and Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on mountain regions and the reform of the Structural Funds .
Mr President , normally when we talk about mountain regions and mountain areas we think about agriculture .
However this is just a part of the problem relating to mountains : there are other problems such as the question of environment , the question of employment and many others besides .
It also needs to be said that the mountains are not just the Alps , as is often stated and as was said yesterday ; there are mountain areas in almost all of the countries of the European Union .
The debate about of the reform of the EU Structural Funds for the period after 1999 is already in full progress .
In view of the direct relation to areas and the area effect of regional and structural policy , and of the increasing importance of the regions , which is always emphasized in the context of subsidiarity , it is considered right and necessary to supplement these efforts by formulating and introducing region-specific matters .
A whole series of international and cross-border agreements , arrangements , models - for instance , the Alpine Convention , to which the European Union is a signatory - refers to the special features of the Alpine area , and encourages , in particular , integral actions to safeguard and develop it as an area for living , commerce , recreation and above all nature .
Achievement of these goals also requires that the EU should become active , and the precondition for an integrated , sustained development strategy , which encourages the exploitation of the internal dynamic in the mountain area .
The European Parliament adopted the last report about mountain regions in 1988 , that is ten years ago .
The system until now of restricting Structural Funds support to the defined areas has not made it possible to make regulations about a specific target area for mountain regions .
In Agenda 2000 , the Commission defined its plans for this reform for the future period 2000 to 2006 .
Positive features are that the financial framework has been extended , and that more money - ECU 75 billion - is available for this period than for the period 1993 to 1999 .
However , regarding the allocation of resources by the new target definition , it should be observed that the globalization of the agricultural and food markets particularly endangers the small-scale mountain farming businesses , which exercise an absolutely primary ecological function , unless special measures and long-term action programmes for the mountain economy are provided .
According to the speech yesterday by Commissioner van den Broek about Alpine transit , the Transport Council has dealt with defining an Alpine clause .
They want to conclude an Alpine treaty , and to provide a declaration of the Alps as a ' sensitive zone ' .
According to the Commissioner , the Commission welcomed this conclusion of the Council of Ministers .
The Commission would thus also be put into a position to watch over Alpine protection .
A change of direction is visible here .
But this thought must be thought out to the end .
In this connection , I ask you , Mr Commissioner , to inform us in what way the Commission intends to take special account of the mountain areas in the next revision of the Structural and Regional Funds in March this year , to safeguard this area for living , commerce , recreation and nature .
Mr President , the discussion under way on the reform of the Structural Funds has two substantial objectives .
The first is to improve the operation of the Funds themselves and to prepare the Union for the great challenges which await it and which we all now know by heart : expansion , the reform of the CAP , policies on the environment , policies on employment , the training and movement of young people , and the fight against this century 's ills , such as cancer , AIDS , drugs , including the new sickness , that of trying to legalize drugs .
However , apart from these problems , for which there is room in other debates , it is right , here , to highlight the way in which the reform of the Structural Funds speaks directly a language like that of the mountains .
In fact , the second objective is that of recognising in the distribution of the Funds those so-called areas of hardship or disadvantage . And certainly the mountains feature among them , especially those mountain areas in which decay , desertion , and the exodus of the young now constitute an endemic and apparently , at least up to now , unstoppable ill .
The European Parliament 's last report on mountain regions dates back to 1988 .
Ten years is a long time for a fragile and delicate policy area such as that of the mountains .
In the light of the recent approval by the Commission of the Alpine Convention , together with the important reforms contained in Agenda 2000 , it really is necessary to get some new ideas into gear , and this task falls to the Commission .
Can the Commission therefore tell us what measures it intends to take to put the Alpine Convention into effect , to recognise the specific nature of the mountain regions , and above all , to create a serious network of specific measures which would at least create the correct approach to the problems of mountain areas ?
I say all this in the light of the reform of the Structural Funds which those of us who live in the mountains are watching with great concern ; from seven funds we are reduced to only three , and furthermore both of the funds dedicated chiefly to agriculture , 5a and 5b , have disappeared , the second being specifically for agriculture in areas of hardship and mountain areas .
Among the three objectives and Objective 2 , which has to be responsible at once for reform and restructuring in the industrial , urban and agricultural domain , of 13 initiatives only 3 remain .
The Leader programme remains , though much criticized , and above all , concerning the annual budget , of ECU 30 billion , 2 billion is to be recovered which constituted the ex-fund 5b .
I therefore ask the Commission , Commissioner Oreja , that you would convey this message to your colleague Mrs Fischl , in order that at least this 5 billion remains allocated to mountain agriculture .
Mr President , we spend a lot of time talking about the Alps and other mountain regions , and there is a risk that we could fall into the self-deception of thinking that there are no problems in the plains , that everything there is getting on fine .
Not so ! But it is indeed true that in mountain regions the problems are more numerous , more acute , and need to be dealt with directly and in an integrated way .
We all know that they share certain common characteristics : despite their variety and individuality , mountain regions have natural disadvantages caused by their climates and the composition of their soil .
On the other hand , they have some positive features , they are environmental storehouses , repositories of historical and cultural traditions , and all of that must be conserved .
The efforts to do this so far have been fragmented and inadequate .
Mountain regions have deficient infrastructures , if any at all , both technical and other , in the sense of social welfare , the social state , education and health care , and this leads to the stripping of those areas , their abandonment and desertion , which will have catastrophic consequences for the environment , not only there but more widely and generally too . The result will be to destroy those roots of historical and cultural traditions .
Our question to the Commission is whether , with the changes now being made to the Structural Funds , these exceptionally urgent and great needs of the mountain regions will be taken into account , and much more so , to counteract the adverse prescriptions and restrictions introduced by Agenda 2000 , all the more now since enlargement towards the East will increase the proportion of mountain regions .
Mr President , I speak with the experience of my own country , where there are few plains and many mountain or hilly areas .
Will the Commissioner therefore confirm whether the changes to the Structural Funds will allow for integrated aid in support of those regions .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , my colleague Mr Bontempi ( who has asked me to apologize for his absence as he has been held up in Spain today , for reasons indirectly connected with mountain regions ) and I have , like other Members , noted the absence of any general debate in this house on mountain region policy , during the last ten years .

Certainly , other institutions have taken an interest in it , particularly the Committee of the Regions , in 1995 , but we have seen important changes in the landscape of mountain regions , and in the more general framework which surrounds this question : changes in the common agricultural policy and the new developments foreseeable in Agenda 2000 , the Alpine Convention and its ' transit ' protocol , connected with yesterday 's debate on Alpine transit , and finally the substantial reform of the Structural Funds , the main subject of today 's debate , the main subject because the problems of mountain regions are problems of a transcendental , transversal nature and are affected by all EC policies .
First of all , they are affected by the common agricultural policy , because without agriculture in mountain regions , we cannot protect our heritage .
It needs to be maintained .
Our mountain regions must not be invaded by wasteland , or damaged by avalanches and landslides .
Farmers in mountain areas must therefore be sure of an adequate income .
A recent report by the French Planning Department , under the initiative of Mr Bazin , on the effects of the reform of the common agricultural policy on agricultural incomes , asks several questions in this respect .
It notes the on the whole favourable effect of the reform of the agricultural policy , in all agricultural areas , but those who have gained the most , in this respect , are farmers in underprivileged areas but not in the mountains .
Farmers in the plain are in second place .
On the other hand , the research highlights a serious falling behind of farmers in mountain areas , whose average income is increasingly falling below the national average , that is , the handicap of being in the mountains is not being compensated to a sufficient degree .
A slight change in the mechanism of allocation of aid would doubtless put an end to this trend , and would also have a favourable effect on agricultural employment .
I shall do myself the honour of forwarding this information to the Commission .
The second question I should like to raise relates to the policy of encouraging quality .
It is obvious that in mountain regions we need to have a policy of quality production , because it is impossible to compete with the milk factories in the plain .
This also applies to cheese , as well as honey , ham , and arts and crafts .
This policy was encouraged , in France , by the Mountain Regions Act of 1985 , which instituted a ' Mountain ' label .
The label was declared contrary to the Treaty by the European Court of Justice , in the Pistre ruling of 7 May 1997 , which , rightly in fact , detected discrimination against non-French products .
We must therefore find another means of encouraging the quality of production , at the European level , and why not by means of a ' European mountain ' label ?
That is the name that professional people in my country have suggested .
I would like the Commission to consider that proposal .
Finally , the aim of the Structural Funds should be to compensate for natural handicaps .
A specific ' mountain region ' objective has now been excluded ; it would be contrary to the concentration of the Structural Funds .
But it is at least necessary to confirm the specific identity of the ' mountain regions ' , in respect of Objective 2 , and to create a firmer link with physical handicap , instead of the simple criterion of income , because some economic activities can have a harmful effect on environmental protection , or agriculture in mountain areas .
That is the case with road transport , or some forms of mass tourism .
The conditions of allocation of aid must be relaxed , in compliance with the provisions of the Treaty , particularly those relating to competition .
Finally , to conclude , Madam President , Mr Commissioner , a word about cross-border programmes , which relate to several mountainous areas , certainly not all the mountain regions of Europe , but several mountainous areas , particularly the Alps and the Pyrenees .
The Commission has decided to develop these programmes and to give them larger grants .
I am very pleased about this and I hope that these programmes will take fully into consideration the specific nature of the mountain environment as it is , because our mountainous areas are part of a heritage which is common to the whole of Europe .
It is a fragile heritage . It must be protected , that is , the men and women who maintain it must be encouraged , within the framework of a proper sustained rural development policy .
That is what we want and what we hope the reform of the Structural Funds will achieve .
Madam President , I should like to say , first of all , how much I welcome the initiatives taken by colleagues in joining us in raising this issue , which is clearly of very great importance .
Also , the timing is very significant given that we are facing a review of the whole idea of structural and regional funding .
One of the problems that we face is of definition .
Let me just read from the question which I have tabled , along with Mrs Ewing : ' What exactly is a mountain ? ' . This sounds like something that could be settled easily by a geologist but the economic characteristics of mountains depend on the latitude as much as the altitude .
The key criterion , I would argue , is the tree line .
The trees indicate how high things can grow in the mountains .
I would urge the Commission to bear this in mind when looking at this proposal .
The second definition problem concerns the data which affects the mountainous areas .
It is very easy , indeed , with the sparseness of population of mountainous areas for the disadvantage which the inhabitants of those areas suffer to be lost in a much bigger area of definition .
I know that the Commission is very much wrestling with the problem of defining areas .
I would counsel against losing the disadvantage of those areas in a much bigger area just for the sake of administrative convenience .
That is a battle which will have to be fought , and fought very hard , right across Europe .
I would hope that the Commission would be able to look pragmatically at the whole question and begin to take into account the question of climate , not just some of the macro-economic indicators .
Some people might think that is a tall order , but there is an encouraging precedent , and that is what has happened in the accession negotiations with Sweden and Finland when the Swedes and the Finns quite rightly argued that Objective 6 , as we now call it , should be recognized , i.e. that the climatic disadvantages of the north of those countries should be the subject of a special objective .
That is due to be transferred into Objective 1 .
That is fine as far as it goes .
But as far as it goes is not enough .
We have to argue for the same principle to be applied right across Europe so that those who are challenged by a very cold climate at certain times of the year or permanently , for that matter , would qualify for the same sort of treatment .
This would have application certainly to the highlands of Scotland .
People go there to train to attack the Himalayas and therefore , by definition , the mountains are seen as fairly cold and challenging .
It also applies to other parts that colleagues have mentioned from France , Italy and South Tyrol .
All this mean that we have to move towards a new approach to the question of redressing the disadvantages which clearly is at the heart of the whole idea of regional and structural policy .
I commend these initiatives to the House .
I hope that the Commission will take them on board and respond positively .
Madam President , it is very positive that Parliament is drawing attention to the special situation and the problems which the EU 's mountain regions have .
We have several , including the regions in Southern Europe which have been mentioned here , in Greece , Spain and Italy .
We also have mountain regions in Central Europe and mountain regions in Northern Europe .
Apart from that , we will probably also have mountain regions in the new Member States .
Just as Mr Macartney said , it is worth noting that the problems are not the same .
I believe it is very important to define what we mean by mountain regions .
Not least the question of climate is important .
As a Swede I am of course particularly passionate about the problems which the Scandinavian areas have , and which are today covered by Objective 6 .
To be brief : what do we mean by mountain regions ?
I think it is with this definition that we must begin .
The mountain regions are Europe 's greatest ecological heritage , but they are a sensitive one whose unique biological character can easily be destroyed for a long time to come , perhaps forever .
They are also in many places Europe 's largest reservoirs of drinking water , something which we all know we must be concerned about .
The major threat in a number of areas is mass tourism which wears down and overloads the ecology and the biology .
It is the development of both large and small transport links , roads , motorways , tunnels , which we have talked about here , and not least the trans-European networks as a whole .
Environmental damage in both air and water is increasing .
The problems of sparsely populated areas are making people move ; small farming and forestry businesses are being broken up and the particular culture and cultural heritage which is found in many places is being destroyed .
I am thinking not least of the only minority people in the EU , the Sami in northern Scandinavia .
There people have developed an interplay between nature and mankind .
In spite of everything we Greens are not in favour of the creation of special programmes or objective areas for mountain regions .
We are running a clear risk of having an inflation of different objective areas , such as islands , wetlands , mountain regions , cities etc .
We do not believe in that model .
Future regional policy must take account of certain regions in a different way than is done today , but as a whole and not just bit by bit .
That also applies in this case to mountain regions .
We want people to see whether these areas can be supported when people develop an ecological and environmentally-adapted lifestyle and production .
Perhaps people could consider whether it would be possible to put eco-labels on certain areas where people work and live in a certain way , and also provide increased aid via the Structural Funds .
Perhaps it would be possible to develop and expand Natura 2000 .
There are a lot of things people could consider , but we would like to know what the Commission wants .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this matter allows the Commission to clearly state its stance on the reform of the Structural Funds and , more exactly , on the way in which it will take into account the specific characteristics of mountain regions .
As we think about adapting the structural and agricultural policy , set down in Agenda 2000 , questions put to the Commission deal , fundamentally , with the possibility of producing specific measures for mountain regions .
For example by creating an objective called " mountain ' which would join together the remaining structural objectives .
In this regard the Commission points out that adapting to local needs should bear in mind the requirements to keep the structural policy fairly straightforward as well as to assure an enhanced concentration of Structural Funds .
The system proposed in Agenda 2000 allows , in our view , the reconciliation of the necessary simplification with a wider consideration for the specific problems of the mountain regions , and it does so for two reasons .
Firstly , because the reorganization of the rural development policy should contain important decentralization of support policies - a question to which Mr Macartney referred earlier in his speech - and greater integration of the different instruments which are already there , which will allow , through the application of integrated regional programmes , a more suitable adaptation to the specific needs of the different regions in the European Union .
The mountain regions should reap special benefits in relation to their definite needs and be reasonable about them .
Secondly , because attention given to agro-environmental measures in the Agenda 2000 proposals will also allow optimum use to be made of the specific features in the mountain regions .
The growth of conservation and value of the environment which responds to the awareness that society has about threats which endanger these and which finds a single area of application in the mountain regions , can be carried out in two directions ; on the one hand by strengthening the mechanism for compensatory allowances which might become a basic support tool for extensive agrarian practices which respect the environment ; and on the other hand - here I am trying to answer the concern shown a moment ago by Mr Cot - through the growth in environmental measures dedicated to a few specific objectives .
I am thinking , for example , of the maintenance of Alpine pasturing , among things , which can receive greater financial support and as appropriate higher percentages of cofinancing .
In regard to the latter I should point out that other ecologically sensitive areas , for example wet regions , can also receive greater support .
On the fringe of this general proposal the Committee has put forward two more specific questions relating to the mountain regions ; the first refers to the Alpine Convention and the measures which the Commission intends to put into operation to apply this ; secondly , in relation to the classification criteria for the mountain regions and , in concrete terms , altitude .
In regard to the Alpine Pact I wish to point out that although the European Community has ratified and signed some of its protocols amongst which mountain agriculture can be found - before beginning the ratification process for the same we must hope to effect a linguistic harmonization of the protocols .
And given the situation the Commission 's action consists for the moment in the active involvement in the work of the Standing Committee on the Alpine Convention , and in the system to coordinate what we can see and find out about the Alps .
Finally , as far as the classification criteria for mountain regions is concerned , the Committee prefers to hope that the basic principles for reform of the Structural Funds can be decided before taking on problems of this more specific nature .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the questions and explanations of the various parties have already shown in how many ways the mountains can be seen .
That extends from Scandinavia to Greece , and I assume that the first questioner referred mainly to the Alps .
Since I am also a resident of the Alps , I will concentrate rather more on this area .
However , at the same time I would like to point out - and here I agree entirely with the previous speaker , Mrs Lindholm - that we should be wary of going into detail again , at a time when we are concentrating the structural policies of the Union on the basis of Agenda 2000 , even with the agreement of this Chamber .
I believe that we should stick to the fact that the decisive motive force for the structural policies and support in this field is finally the prosperity of these regions , and thank God the Alpine lands are not necessarily the poorest in this Union .
Therefore , in connection with such discussions , the question should finally be raised : Who should pay for it ?
Where should the money come from , should we deduct it from somewhere , or should we provide extra money , and who is going to provide it ?
But what we need , and thank God it has been mentioned repeatedly this week , is a clear Alpine policy of this Union .
In connection with Alpine transit , we hear and get the feeling again and again that for some European politicians the Alps are just something like an artificial obstacle .
There I would like to quote a colleague of the Greens who spoke yesterday , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , who said , directed to the Netherlands among others , I quote : ' If the Alpine biosphere is destroyed , you will not need to build any more dams against sea floods , but against the Rhine , because once the Alps are destroyed , you can report high water and land under water in your country all year ' .
I believe that in this example we can see how much things are interwoven with each other , and how much the principle of the free market within the Union occasionally collides with what are in the end the bases of the life of this entire continent .
I believe that we should take the debate which Mr Ebner has opened today as the occasion to have a more intensive discussion of such principles , in the context of the future policies of the Union , and not to maintain this opposition between economics and ecology , but to understand that one is impossible without the other !
I believe that the general public hardly knows that we in the European Parliament have so much work that we cannot even celebrate our national day .
Our members who have birthdays are also very active .
The next speaker is one of our three birthday children today .
Mr Bernard-Reymond now has the floor for the European People 's Party .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , the European project is a project for civilisation .
This means that although Europe has accepted the challenge of globalization , it refuses to see that , under the effects of hard and fast liberalism , the mechanism of market forces alone will lead to an unvarying world , built according to the laws of competition alone .
Liberalism , which decompartmentalizes our economies , by stimulating innovation , by leading new countries to achieve growth , is a powerful force with regard to progress .
But we also know what imbalances it can lead to in social and also in geographical terms .
That is why each country tries to make those corrections , which are most suited to its culture .
And it is from that point of view that we must indeed reposition European social policy , and also regional policy , one of the areas of which relates to mountain regions .
Mountain regions are special , rather vulnerable places , and nothing better will ever be found to protect them than to encourage healthy agriculture .
They are places in which the notion of balance between various imperatives is essential .
There is the question of improved access - and I do not hesitate to say that even today , although I may sound very old-fashioned .
Improved access by road and even by motorways , which we should not fail to build where they are still needed .
Secondly , of course , improved access by rail , and by means of telecommunications .
By means of high quality agricultural development , tourist facilities , environmental protection , all ideas which must be included in the plans relating to cross-border mountain regions , at the European level .
In order to do so , it is essential to recognize the specific nature of mountain regions , as a concept , legally and financially .
It is not a question of covering the European area with a patchwork of statutes .
It is not a question of enclosing mountain regions behind shields or privileges .
It is simply a question of helping mountain regions to innovate , to invest in lasting development , and of enabling them to play a full part in the construction of a balanced European society , which will therefore be of a high quality .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I listened very carefully to your answer to those who tabled the joint question on mountain regions .
Permit me to tell you , however , that your answer was very general .
You did not address the very specific questions which Members had put to you , for example Mr Santini , but other Members from other political groups as well .
As a supplement to what we have already heard from the other speakers , which I accept and subscribe to , I in my turn would like to ask you whether the European Commission has considered how it is going to deal with two additional problems which will probably arise in the future .
I refer specifically , first to the problems that are likely to emerge once the postal services have been deregulated , especially in mountain regions . And secondly , to the problems which are likely to occur after the deregulation of Europe 's railways .
You know that on both these issues the European Parliament has tabled very specific proposals and has adopted them within the reports that have appeared , and you know that the European Union has not accepted them all , at least so far as the postal services are concerned .
I would like you to tell me whether you have reconsidered the matter and how you propose to deal with it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the oral questions raised by my colleagues relating to mountain regions and , in particular , to Alpine areas , raise for us a series of problems which are burningly topical .
There are substantially two reasons for such notable interest .
The first is that we are talking about mountain regions , regions , that is , of which the special geomorphological nature , with all its positive consequences in terms of environment and economy - two terms which , as has already been stressed , are not antithetical but complementary - has only recently begun to be acknowledged .
Mountain regions are not something self-contained at all ; on the contrary they are of fundamental importance for the regions which surround them .
And this leads us on to the second reason for their importance which is quite close to home for a few of us , and that is the specific nature of the Alpine area , an area which represents , if I may say so , a sort of specific nature of specific nature .
Unlike other mountain regions , the Alps have never been a barrier ; on the contrary , they have always stood as a true crossroads , that is , a place of exchange , rich in peoples , economies and cultures , and they are also - I am pleased to be able to stress this - the mother of specific cultures , which are too often forgotten , like the culture of the Walsers and the culture of the sacri monti .
This is why a particular status should be accorded the Alpine area within the concept of mountain regions , even through the Structural Funds , a particular status which could not fail to take account not only of the economy but also of the culture , not only of its belonging to individual States but of its specific transnational nature which is a real paradigm of what we are in the habit of calling a Europe of the regions , a Europe of the peoples .
I would find it rather interesting to know what the opinion of the Commission is on this point .
Madam President , the mountain regions in the European Union - as has already been pointed out in the debate - have similar features , and the mountain regions in nearby countries involved in the enlargement also have similar features .
In many cases they are regions tied closely to rural life , also on occasion with some development of the tourist sector ; they are sparsely populated and are difficult to develop and this makes it difficult to keep people on the land with an adequate infrastructure and services by providing grants .
At the same time they are enormously attractive areas due to their natural beauty and because of the possibilities of their heritage environment .
There have been Community initiatives dealing with other European regions with common features , the outlying or maritime regions etcetera , but the mountain regions in the past have scarcely had any specific initiative ; if any it was very specifically related to an aspect of agricultural policy .
As we approach the debate for the next reform of the Structural Funds , this question , which we are debating today , is opportune and we have already heard how the Commission has done some thinking in this regard ; it would be useful indeed for the Commission to put forward a communication on possible innovations , where the Structural Funds in these mountain regions in recent years have been used , in the different countries in the Union .
This will allow verification of whether there has been any added value when the Structural Funds have been used in these areas .
In reforming the Structural Funds we have to look at the specific problems of these regions , what to do to maintain , protect and empower their own surroundings , making use of endogenous development and bearing very much in mind the very fragility of these natural surroundings when they are attacked by the use or misuse of foreign elements which can spoil the land and its natural features .
The same concern should be present , not only on the Structural Funds , but also in the thinking and reform proposals for the common agricultural policy .
The areas with important mountain regions - I live in one of them , where areas very close to the sea and predominantly mountainous areas live side by side - are an important part of the reality of this European Union .
For this reason , it will be necessary that the regulations which will govern the Structural Funds in the future , in the way expressed by the Commissioner or in an even more detailed way , will deal with implementing them positively and integrally in this common heritage , within the framework of a rigorous regional policy , with the aim of making progress in the cohesion of our regions and our peoples .
Madam President , the truth is that we are at a defining time in the new Community policies for regional development , within the framework of Agenda 2000 , and this is the right moment to discuss this topic and formulate proposals so that the specific problems relating to mountain regions will be included in Community policies for regional development .
Regions with a depopulation problem are , in some cases , lacking economic alternatives and needing development which moreover should be balanced with their natural environment , so that they can continue to maintain this balance in the future .
Indeed up to the present time an objective for these zones has not existed .
The Commissioner was discussing the need to keep Community regional policies fairly straightforward but , within this simplicity it would be of more interest to empower these areas as the Commission - I am sure - will try to do in its new proposals .
These should include special integral measures for the development of these areas as vital , through their economic development , the development of leisure pursuits and natural development .
Besides , many of these are cross frontier areas because , if mountain chains have divided such states , on both sides of them there have been areas of coexistence , natural surroundings and population ; in this sense the empowering of cross frontier experience in the mountain regions would be of greater interest .
At present there are many pilot schemes which the European Commission might use to empower these areas in their proposals and use them as a model .
I am referring to cases of collaboration in the Pyrenees .
I am sure that the Commissioner who , besides being Basque , knows his country very well , acknowledges them .
Indeed there are models in the Aleves mountain , in the Pyrenean and Navarran valleys or in the French Basque country etcetera that may be taken as a model of what may generate economic activity respectful of the environment .
In this sense I would like to congratulate the Commissioner especially for the report he has made in his last speech about empowerment also for mountain pasturing in so far as , besides generating economic activity , it helps to preserve the natural environment and certain cultural areas .
Madam President , this debate concerns regional policy and an equal Europe .
These are questions which belong to the area of solidarity .
Everybody should be able to live a good life in our Europe .
These are also areas , as many speakers have said , which have very special conditions .
In my case this concerns Sweden , Finland and Northern Europe , 2 0-2 500 km north of here .
It is largely a question of ecologically sensitive areas , very large natural resources and an immense biodiversity .
That is why all discussions about aid should be based on the individual local and regional conditions , because it is very easy for large scale forms of aid and exploitation which do not suit the areas to do more harm than good .
This also applies of course to all other mountain regions .
I shall continue by describing a little of how things look in my home district .
What we are particularly concerned about is , of course , Objective 6 Aid which is now disappearing with the changes being made in the Structural Funds .
What is going to happen with Objective 6 Aid for Sweden and Finland , now that the Objective Areas as such are being abolished and are being included under Objective 1 ?
This is very important .
We got these opportunities for support through the Objective 6 Area in connection with the negotiations prior to EU membership , above all because the climate is very severe . At the moment it is 30-40 degrees below freezing in northern Sweden .
It is very difficult for those who have not been there to imagine a landscape which looks like this .
It may be 100 km to the nearest built-up area .
The population density may generally be 1-3 people / km2 .
People live by doing lots of different things , farming , forestry on a very small scale which provides a little money .
Swedes , Finns and Sami live in the area .
People live close to nature and from nature , and people are dependent on the survival of nature 's resources for their own survival . There is major depopulation and stagnation in many of the areas .
Unfortunately the EU 's agricultural policy has concentrated a bit much on large farms , both in Europe and southern Sweden , while small farmers in northern Sweden have huge problems .
I have a question which I am very anxious to have an answer to from the Commission , if the Commissioner is now listening .
My question is : What proposals does the Commission have for Objective Area 6 when new criteria are to be determined after the old period expires in 1999 and the new period begins ?
I am very anxious to have an answer to that .
Madam President , I must say that I am very happy that we are having a joint debate about the special features of the mountain regions .
In the end the mountain region is the most sensitive rural area , and therefore continues to need our support , if it is to be maintained in its entirety and multifunctionality .
Therefore , the high position of the rural areas must be clearly established in Agenda 2000 .
Specifically , we need to extend the differential compensation allowance for disadvantaged areas , intensify the brand and tradition protection of typical products of these regions , and support forestry more strongly .
Another item which deserves support is without doubt better use of renewable energy .
On this point , we must not forget that whenever agriculturally productive land becomes disused , in whatever way , it means a declaration of bankruptcy for our system .
Agriculture cannot be laid down like an industrial business , for instance , and must be considered over a much longer period .
These areas should therefore be particularly included in the consideration of renewable energy .
As well as increased payment for agricultural and ecological efforts , of course there must be compensation for permanent natural disadvantages , to safeguard the cultivation of the mountain areas .
This is not least what tourism means .
Austria is the country of the European Union which has the highest proportion of farmers for whom farming is a secondary occupation .
The vast majority of farmers are active in the tourism business , and in both occupations they ensure that the attractiveness and economic productivity of the mountain regions are maintained , and that continuous migration from the rural areas , and thus depopulation of the mountain regions , is stopped .
This also shows the profound social significance and multi-functionality of agriculture .
In Austria , just 70 % , or 2 323 000 hectares , of the agriculturally productive land comes into the European Union 's category of disadvantaged areas .
The EU average is 56 % .
In concrete terms , this means that for instance in Austria 150 000 businesses are in a disadvantaged area .
With regard to the enlargement of our Community to the east , the best thing would be to continue the agricultural guideline .
Only this will ensure that it is not only a burden on domestic farmers , but that everyone has to bear their share of this great work of European unification .
Madam President , above all I would first like to thank Mr Ebner for introducing this question , and second , I would like to make a comment .
It shows that the Friday sittings have a purpose , because on Fridays we talk about more serious things , instead of practising demagogy , and besides there is much more consensus between the parties than at other times !
I would like to add to what Mr Macartney said .
He mentioned a very important point , that not only bureaucratic criteria should be applied to defining the regions , that it is not just made to depend on height or depth , but that the climate and social conditions also play a part .
Secondly , I would like to emphasize here that - as we have heard from all sides - it is not just the economy which is crucial .
There is only a social function of the economy , which is the only one which actually means the future .
Particularly for us in the mountain areas - there are very many mountain areas in my home country , although people generally do not know that , but Upper Bavaria consists partly of mountain areas - this means first that the small farmers must be maintained at any price , because without these people there are no more mountains .
Then everything is ruined , as can be seen in all too many places in America , for instance .
Second , in the whole definition of transport we must put always the ecological aspects in the foreground , because when we see the destructive effect which certain roads have already had , through Trentino-Alto Adige for instance , when we know how dangerous certain projects are for us , we have to say that the ecological standpoint must be allowed a quite high status , because only in this way can we maintain the heart of Europe !
Madam President , Austria is famous for the beautiful Alps and also for the newly created national parks .
Yet an enormous structural change is taking place in these areas .
On the one hand , we endeavour to look after the traditions , the beauty of the land , its naturalness and unspoiledness , and on the other hand we think intensely about the future , safeguarding the future , and the opportunities which the future will bring .
I believe that we must do more research in this area .
We must see with what products and services we can look into the future , we must do market research to see what visitors can come into this region , what aspects of the region are treasured , what services can be offered in this region and what products can be sent out of this region .
The second , and perhaps even more important point is education and further education in these areas .
We should think about what education and further education structure we can offer in these areas .
Madam President , two words no more .
Firstly , to say to you ladies and gentlemen that I have noted the speeches made here this morning .
In some of them I found something similar to the speech I made halfway through the sitting , but anyway I will forward them to the Commissioners , most particularly to Mr Fischler who is the Commissioner responsible for all of them .
Mr Kaklamanis has referred to the different topics which are being taken up in this matter , since here we are dealing with the Structural Funds and agriculture , and he has referred to the liberalization of the Post Offices and rail networks .
These are two matters with which we are now concerned and are subjects also of questions in Parliament , and the Commission , being aware of such problems , will provide at the right time corresponding and fitting replies to the same .
On the subject of the Alpine regions I wish to pose two questions : on the one hand everything that refers to increasing compensatory allowances in the disadvantaged areas ; and on the other greater support for Alpine pasturing within the agro-environmental measures .
I wish to assure Mr Lindqvist that although I am only wearing one of the headphones I can hear him , and besides with my surname I have no option but to listen .
So you can understand that I follow very attentively all the speeches and especially yours , Mr Lindqvist , when you refer to all the problems posed in the Nordic regions and have clearly shown the contrast between the Alpine regions and the Nordic region .
There is a very specific subject here which has been put forward to which I cannot give you a reply , but indeed I have listened to you - which is what we are referring to in the classification criteria for the mountain regions which have still not been defined .
But we are going to move onto that .
As you know , Mr Lindqvist , we are at this time examining reform of the Structural Funds .
Mr Imaz has referred , for example , to the idea of simplification - he has mentioned , to which I am especially sensitive , some mountains in the area , in the common region , the common country which we have in the Basque area - and he knows that I have travelled over all those mountains , have climbed to the top of them throughout my life and really I am very sensitive to the arguments he was using .
And so , I would like to say to him that if really the Commission 's purpose is to look for greater simplification of the Structural Funds , this does not mean that it is impossible to reconcile simplification with a wider consideration of the specific problems relating to mountain regions .
Dr von Habsburg has made a specific mention of this and I wish to join him in that too .
We are going to have to bear in mind , particularly those subjects which I am going to hand over to Mr Fischler and the other appropriate Commissioners in so far as it concerns them .
I think that it is very useful - indeed Dr von Habsburg 