Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 24 March 2011 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sittings : see Minutes
Statements by the President
I would like to start by making some comments and passing on some information .
On 26 April , 25 years will have passed since the Chernobyl disaster , which was the most serious nuclear accident in the history of humanity .
We still remember those who sacrificed their health or even their lives while battling the disaster , and also the hundreds of thousands of people who had to leave their homes .
The then authorities of the former Eastern Bloc countries spent too long concealing information about the disaster from the world and , above all , from their own citizens .
This made it much more difficult to take any measures to mitigate the effects of the disaster .
Later , however , Chernobyl became a symbol of effective cooperation between the authorities of the countries affected by the disaster and the international community .
While we remember the Chernobyl disaster today , our thoughts are also with the Japanese nation , which is struggling with the aftermath of the tsunami and the accident at the Fukushima nuclear power plant .
Next comes a second piece of information , which is also a painful reminder .
In several days ' time , on 10 April , a year will have passed since the Smolensk air disaster .
Ninety-six people died in the disaster , including the Polish President and his wife and 18 members of the Polish Parliament .
One of the members was ready to take a seat in the European Parliament , as one of 18 extra MEPs .
The majority of those who died held high-ranking positions within the state .
They were known personally to many present in this Chamber .
I myself knew at least half of them .
The reasons for the disaster are not yet entirely clear , and we are still waiting for information in this respect .
At this time , we once again join those still mourning their loved ones .
The third piece of information relates to the fact that the European Parliament is alarmed at the US Supreme Court 's rejection of Troy Davis ' request that his execution be delayed , and that it be made possible for his case to be reopened .
I would appeal to the relevant American authorities of the state of Georgia to make use of their right to commute the death penalty imposed on Mr Davis 20 years ago to a punishment of life imprisonment .
Death can never be an expression of justice .
The next piece of information relates to the fact that we are also deeply concerned by events in the Republic of Côte d 'Ivoire .
The presidential elections brought terror and violence to the country , instead of the peace , future and prosperity awaited by its citizens .
Laurent Gbagbo must recognise the results of the elections and hand over power .
We call on both sides to put an immediate stop to the use of violence against civilians .
The international community must do everything in its power to stop the massacre of the population .
All those guilty of crimes will be brought to justice .
This is our deep conviction , and the European Parliament will do everything possible in this regard .
The final piece of information concerns the fact that , in line with my promise to keep Parliament up-to-date with the progress of investigations into the allegations of corruption against certain Members of the European Parliament , I would like to remind you that on Thursday , after a meeting of the presidents of the political groups , you received a letter from me with the latest information on this matter .
We are also taking firm action with a view to drawing up a code of conduct for interest groups and lobbyists , as well as for Members of the European Parliament .
During today 's meeting of the Bureau at 18 : 30 , we will discuss this matter and decide on the next steps to be taken in this regard .
Mr Nicholson has asked to speak .
Please take the floor , Mr Nicholson .
Mr President , could I take this moment to reflect on the murder in Northern Ireland on Saturday of a young police constable on his way to work , just a few weeks qualified to do the job .
In my 22 years in this House , I have had many occasions where I have had to condemn the terrorists who carry out such atrocities .
I thought that time had passed and I would never have to do so again .
Our thoughts are with the family of the young man , who had a career and a great future in front of him .
It was a clear and deliberate attempt to once again destabilise my region .
I want to make it clear that I believe that the vast majority of the people of Northern Ireland do not wish to return now , or any time in the future , to what we went through in the past .
The people of Omagh suffered a lot .
For this to happen to them as well , I have no doubt , brings back many terrible memories .
Can we send our sympathy to the family and everyone involved , on this very sad occasion for my region ?
( Applause )
Thank you for your comments on this matter .
I would like to inform Members that yesterday morning , I issued a special statement concerning this matter - a statement by the President of the European Parliament , in which I condemned this event , and , in particular , the fact that the victim was so young .
I also expressed the hope that Northern Ireland will live in peace , as it has recently succeeded in doing .
Members can read my statement from yesterday morning on this matter on the European Parliament 's website .
( GA ) Mr President , I also condemn the killing of Ronan Kerr in a bomb attack in Omagh , in my constituency , at the weekend .
He was a young 25 year-old man who joined the new police service and was killed because of it .
It is not just an attack on this young man and his family but on the peace process in my constituency as well .
The people who killed Ronan Kerr are trying to block the progress of the peace process and we will not allow them to do so .
May I thank the President of Parliament today for expressing his condolences and those of Parliament to the family .
In addition , I sympathise with Ronan Kerr 's family and strongly condemn his killing .
Mr President , first of all , I want to thank you for issuing the statement of condemnation yesterday .
I want to support the statements of Members Nicholson and de Brún here today .
They have our full support to ensure that those responsible will be brought to justice .
The peace process , with the support of the European Union , has been very successful .
All sane people on the island of Ireland have condemned this atrocious act - the murder of Constable Ronan Kerr - ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam .
I want , in particular , to compliment his mother for the courageous statement she made last night in support of the continuation of the peace process .
Composition of Parliament
Ernst Strasser has submitted his resignation as a Member of the European Parliament with effect from 24 March 2011 .
Pursuant to Rule 4 ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , Parliament has noted his resignation and established the vacancy of his seat from the date previously stated .
Hella Ranner has submitted her resignation as a Member of the European Parliament with effect from 1 April 2011 .
Pursuant to Rule 4 ( 1 ) and ( 3 ) of the Rules of Procedure , Parliament has noted her resignation and established the vacancy of her seat from the date previously stated .
The competent Austrian authorities have informed me that Ernst Strasser will be replaced by Hubert Pirker with effect from 31 March 2011 .
I would like to welcome our new Member and to remind Members that pursuant to Rule 3 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , until his credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute , Hubert Pirker will take his seat in Parliament and on its bodies and enjoy all the rights pertaining thereto , provided that he has previously signed a written declaration that he does not hold any office incompatible with that of Member of the European Parliament .


( NL ) Mr President , I wish to raise a point of order in connection with Mr Strasser and the other Member who have left Parliament because of corrupt behaviour : I would like to ask whether you , Mr President , are going to check whether it is possible to stop their reduced pay , because it would be outrageous if anyone who has been involved in corruption here left with reduced pay .
Would you please look into this ?
We will answer that question later , as I was not prepared for it .

( ES ) Mr President , on a point of order : you earlier referred to a request , on behalf of the whole House , that a state of the United States imprison someone for life rather than executing them .
I should like to request that , while we do indeed request that this sentence be commuted , we do not say ' to the sentence of life imprisonment ' , particularly given what life imprisonment means in the United States .
I think it should be phrased as the death penalty being commuted ' to another proportionate sentence ' .
Thank you .
This certainly calls for a separate and far-reaching debate .
Finding a solution to this problem is definitely not a simple matter .
My next announcement is that the competent Austrian bodies have informed me that Hella Ranner will be replaced by Heinz Becker with effect from 1 April 2011 .
I would like to welcome our new Member and to remind Members that pursuant to Rule 3 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , until his credentials have been verified or a ruling has been given on any dispute , Heinz Becker will take his seat in Parliament and on its bodies and enjoy all the rights pertaining thereto , provided that he has previously signed a written declaration that he does not hold any office incompatible with that of Member of the European Parliament .
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under the ordinary legislative procedure : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 31 March 2011 , pursuant to Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Tuesday
With regard to the Fernandes report on estimates of Parliament 's revenue and expenditure for 2012 , the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group has requested that the vote be held over to the May part-session , and thus the request relates to holding the vote over .
Mrs Andreasen will present the request .
Please take the floor , Mrs Andreasen .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I rise to ask for the postponement of the vote on the Fernandes report .
The reasons are straightforward and relate primarily to the paragraph of the report which covers the House of European History .
The Committee on Budgets has been given conflicting , and I believe , misleading figures for this project .
An example of this is the mounting annual running costs : they currently stand at EUR 13.5 million .
This figure is in excess of what was originally quoted .
When I had suggested that the cost would be EUR 10 million , a faceless parliamentary official accused me of lying in the press by saying my estimates were , I quote , ' excessive ' .
This is not the way a Member of this House should be treated .
What is worst of all , Mr President , is the clear conflict of interests in having the chairman of the Budgets Committee sitting on the board of trustees of the House of European History , even if he is not remunerated .
In no other parliament would such a clear conflict of interests be tolerated .
It makes an absolute mockery of the committee process .
( Applause )
Until these matters are cleared up , the vote on this report must be postponed .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think this postponement is appropriate .
It is a case of four or five weeks , simply to examine a subject which , as we just heard , involves the disbursement of millions of euro by European taxpayers .
I therefore call for a vote in support of the request .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to say two things .
Firstly , the Committee on Budgets has done its job and brought the draft estimate of Parliament 's 2012 budget to the point where it can be examined , debated and voted on by your Parliament , by the House , in accordance with our procedures and with what we did last year .
Opinions differ among the groups .
They will be able to have their say .
Secondly , I cannot allow Mrs Andreasen , who is fully acquainted with this matter , to say that there is a personal conflict of interest in having me , the Chair of the Committee on Budgets , sit on the board of trustees of the House of European History .
I do not sit on the board in a personal capacity ; I am there in my capacity as Chair of the Committee on Budgets , appointed by the Committee on Budgets to represent it within that body , just as the Chair of the Committee on Culture and Education represents her committee within that body .
Naturally , if someone were to dispute that , I would be prepared to give up the role .
Still , one must be careful not to confuse matters when using words such as ' conflict of interest ' , Mr President .
( Applause )
With regard to the debate on the Single Market , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has requested that it be possible to table motions for resolutions to wind up the debate on the Commission statement on public procurement .
We are thus talking about a motion for a resolution , or a proposal for a resolution .
I would like someone from the PPE Group to present this request .
Who will be so kind ?
( Parliament rejected the request )
Wednesday
Mr President , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) proposes that we supplement the statement by Commissioner Barnier on public procurement law and its continued development in the European Union with a statement by Parliament .
That would give the matter considerably more substance and we therefore ask for support in this .
( DE ) Mr President , I support the proposal by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , as it makes perfect sense to discuss this .
I would just ask - in agreement with the coordinator of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Mr Schwab - that we do not vote on the resolution this week , but wait until May to do so , because we have not yet had time to discuss this among the groups .
Thus , I would say ' yes ' to the inclusion of this item on the agenda , ' yes ' to a resolution , but I would like the vote on the resolution to wait until May .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has requested that a debate be held on the situation concerning Ai Weiwei in China , and that it be included in the debates held pursuant to Rule 122 of the Rules of Procedure on Thursday afternoon , instead of the debate on Zimbabwe previously intended for this time .
I would like to ask Mr Verhofstadt , President of the Group , to take the floor .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Thursday
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , Mr Ai Weiwei , who is the best-known Chinese artist and dissident and has always had the opportunity to speak freely , was detained at Beijing Airport on Sunday and is , apparently , in prison .
Not only should I use this opportunity to protest against the Chinese authorities .
I also have to say to you and to our colleagues that we should perhaps reconsider our participation in the second China-EU summit next month in Beijing if this is the direction in which things are going .
It is necessary for us to have an urgent resolution on this as fast as possible so that we can increase pressure on the Chinese authorities to release Mr Ai Weiwei .
The first idea was to replace the urgent resolution on Zimbabwe on Thursday by an urgent resolution on the detention of Mr Ai Weiwei , but after brief consultation , it seems there may be a better option : putting Cote d 'Ivoire ( Ivory Coast ) on Wednesday , so that the space that is liberated on Thursday could then be used for this urgent resolution on Mr Ai Weiwei .
I have consulted the different political groups here and they agree with this way of changing the agenda .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like very briefly to speak in favour of this .
Given that the agenda for Wednesday afternoon is so tight , I would ask that the Council and the Commission make their statements very , very brief and that the Vice-Presidents in the Chair make sure that speakers stick very precisely to their speaking time .
Otherwise , we will have chaos .
I ask for the support of the Vice-Presidents in this .
We will have the discussion on Mr Ai Weiwei and China on Thursday afternoon , and the discussion on Ivory Coast will take place at about 8 p.m. on Wednesday evening .
( Parliament approved the request )
Wednesday
There is another proposal from Mrs Gebhardt .
Mrs Gebhardt , could you once again explain your proposal .
( DE ) Mr President , I asked that the vote on the resolution on public procurement be postponed until May , which , of course , means that the deadline for the submission of resolutions and amendments would then also be postponed accordingly .
You have not given us a chance to vote on that yet .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the subject , the time allowed to submit the amendments seems sufficient , so I think that we should not accept the proposal .
Mr President , I was not quite sure under which point I should raise this , but two weeks ago , the administration - following a number of cyber attacks - decided to close down the webmail for a week .
It is quite some decision to prevent people from accessing their webmail for a week .
Explanations are in order .
I would like to know if this was justified , if it was just a precaution , and how vulnerable our system really is .
Mrs in ' t Veld , we will look into this and send you the information .
Granting and withdrawing international protection ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Guillaume , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on minimum standards on procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing international protection ( recast ) - C7-0248 / 2009 - .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the first stage will be reached this week in the recasting of the Asylum Procedures Directive .
Indeed , our Parliament will be required on Wednesday to give its verdict on the revised Commission proposal on common procedures for granting and withdrawing refugee status .
This European Parliament opinion is essential to the dialogue that will be pursued with the Council in the coming months on a text that I believe is the cornerstone of the asylum package and on which - I am sorry to say - discussions are at a standstill in the Council .
It will serve as a basis for a new version of this directive , which I hope will enable us to stick to our 2012 deadline for implementing common asylum rules .
The vote on this report coincides with the publication , last week , of a UNHCR study on the 44 industrialised nations .
The study shows that , contrary to popular belief , the number of asylum seekers in rich countries has decreased overall by 40 % in 10 years and by 5 % in one year .
Armed with such data , we need to study the root causes of this decline .
Is it because of fewer push factors , or tighter migration control in some countries ?
What that report also shows is that developing countries today assume the lion 's share of the responsibility for asylum , even though they do not necessarily have all the resources to do so .
Europe must therefore do its fair share , and for that it must adopt clear rules .
This brings me back to this text on asylum procedures and to the main challenges .
Often described as a catalogue of the worst national practices , the current directive has two major disadvantages : it fails to sufficiently protect the rights of asylum seekers , and it creates major disparities in treatment within the Member States .
Indeed , major discrepancies still remain between the different asylum systems in Europe .
To take just two examples , in 2009 , the percentage of positive decisions at first instance in the Member States ranged from 65 % to less than 1 % .
The time limit for lodging an appeal against a negative decision at first instance ranged from two to 30 days .
There are a number of disparities , then , between the Member States , whether in terms of the grounds for accelerated procedures , or in terms of access to personal interviews or to effective remedy .
The fact is , such disparities are incompatible with a common asylum system which ought to offer equivalent protection throughout the EU .
They also run counter to one of the cornerstones of the Dublin II Regulation , which is based on the presumption that the Member States ' asylum systems are comparable .
Legislative harmonisation is therefore essential to ensuring that we have fair , accessible , safe and effective procedures at long last .
Since I believe they are incorrect , I should like to respond once again to some assertions made by the detractors of this text , for whom this directive ultimately amounts to little more than an increase in costs and abuses .
Admittedly , these procedural changes may create costs in the short term .
However , a little clear-sightedness would help us see that it is , in fact , the misuse of inadequate procedures in quality and security terms that is today costing the Member States dear .
I would mention two indicators to support my argument : the very large number of appeals and the length of the procedures thus generated .
I should also like us to move away from the black and white idea of asylum , where it is said to lead only to abuse .
In a context in which immigration issues are being exploited , to defend asylum as a fundamental right is an obligation .
Moreover , if the most reticent MEPs take anything away from the situation in the Arab world , it will be that the European Union has a responsibility to grant fair protection to victims of persecution .
I therefore support the Commission 's approach , which aims to improve the procedures at first instance - ' front-loading ' - because high quality decisions at first instance will be particularly beneficial for victims of persecution insofar as they will enable the competent authorities to deliver robust decisions , improve the defendability of negative decisions , and thus reduce the risk of them being overturned by appeal bodies , better identify cases of unfounded or abusive applications , and reduce reception and procedural costs in the Member States , while supporting their efforts to expel asylum seekers whose applications have genuinely been rejected .
Lastly , I should like to say a few words about some key points that will enable us - I hope - to take this report further now .
Firstly , the right to free legal assistance at first instance is , to my mind , an essential guarantee when it comes to improving the quality of decisions .
Secondly , better account will be taken of vulnerable applicants , a group of people that the current directive completely overlooks .
The third challenge is to establish more ambitious time limits for appeals so as to strengthen the right to effective remedy , and to provide greater guarantees in the case of accelerated procedures , in particular , a reduction in their grounds or the setting of reasonable time limits .
As for the safe countries concept , we call for a common European list to be adopted in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure , as the Court of Justice recommended in 2008 .
To conclude , the final adoption of this report should be a strong signal from Parliament to the Council and the Commission .
As I see it , Parliament 's red lines have been established and the bar has been set : we are aiming at the upwards harmonisation of protection standards , and we should be delighted at that , ladies and gentlemen .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the vote on the Asylum Procedures Directive this week is very important .
It will be a crucial step on the road towards the conclusion of the second phase of the common asylum system by 2012 , in line with the EU 's commitment to the Stockholm Programme .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Sylvie Guillaume , for her outstanding commitment to this file and for the good cooperation between us .
You have shown great resilience , Madam , and a deep understanding of the needs of asylum seekers and of the challenges faced by national administrations .
The new Asylum Procedures Directive will be the cornerstone of the Common European Asylum System .
Asylum seekers must , as you said , Madam , be offered the same level of treatment wherever they apply for asylum in the European Union .
Today , we know that there are lots of differences , which is , of course , very hard to understand in the same European Union with the same international conventions and the same European values .
It is crucial that the common procedures are fair and efficient .
They must help to prevent abuses of the asylum system , but fully respect fundamental rights .
I deeply believe that these objectives can be achieved , but only if the common rules ensure the same high quality of decision by asylum authorities across the Union .
The Commission proposal has been prepared in this spirit and I note with satisfaction that Mrs Guillaume and the report of the Committee on Civil Liberties generally support this proposal .
Many amendments in the draft report in fact increase the level of guarantees to asylum seekers , particularly with regard to minors .
Some amendments also aim to provide more flexibility for the Member States by introducing certain grounds for accelerated procedures .
I find the amendment on safe country notions very ambitious .
It would significantly restructure the set of rules and change practices in Member States .
I also note with interest the compromise amendments on free legal assistance .
This could indeed help to resolve a tricky legal issue that several Member States have mentioned .
As you know , the Commission is currently preparing a modified proposal for this directive in order to give a boost to the stalled negotiations in the Council .
The vote that you will take tomorrow or on Wednesday is a strategic benchmark in the negotiations .
The Commission will carefully consider all Parliament 's amendments in the preparation of the modified proposal .
I look forward to working together with Members on this and on the other proposals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to express my sincere thanks for the many talks we were able to have with the rapporteur and also with the Commissioner and shadow rapporteurs .
This enabled good compromises to be reached in some areas .
As Mrs Malmström just mentioned , this includes the compromise on free legal assistance , in particular , for the special protection of minors .
Other achievements include the fact that we were able to agree on which applicants were particularly worthy of protection and , in our talks with one another , we were able to find a sensible compromise .
Over and above that , we also found a compromise with regard to the subject of safe third countries .
The aim is to fundamentally improve the quality of the administrative procedures so that there are fewer hearings in court in the second and third instance , in order to provide asylum seekers who are genuinely facing persecution with as rapid and as consistently effective assistance and protection as possible .
I am strongly in favour of there being appropriate minimum standards in all Member States .
Unfortunately , however , both the Commission 's text and some of the individual amendments intended to amend the Commission 's text to a certain extent do the opposite of what this good intention is striving to achieve .
Many opportunities have been created to delay procedures or even to massively abuse asylum law .
I will give you a few examples of this .
For example , an applicant can make three inadmissible applications and has the right to go through the full procedure three times .
Only then can an accelerated procedure be carried out .
A procedure cannot be accelerated if someone is clearly not recognised as a refugee under the Geneva Convention .
In this regard , I would simply mention the subject of Tunisia and also that of economic migrants .
Another example is the fact that an accelerated procedure will also not be possible if subsequent applications are made without any relevant new content .
What I consider to be even more serious , however , is the subject of disappearing .
If someone illegally disappears , his application can no longer be closed with a negative decision .
He has to countersign the letter .
Therefore , if an asylum seeker were expecting news of a negative decision , all he would need to do - if we were to adopt the motion put forward by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - would be to refuse to accept the letter or not be there to receive it .
The consequence of that would be that he could prolong the procedure indefinitely .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I speak on behalf of my group when I say that we are in a very difficult situation practically and politically , in which Member States have been talking about completing an asylum package since 1999 .
If there is a political imperative , then it is today , with North Africa - and the Mediterranean - in crisis .
Talking about burden sharing should now lead to a practical and sensitive proposal .
On behalf of my group , I want to say that Sylvie Guillaume has prepared - in cooperation , as Mrs Hohlmeier said , with all the shadows - a proposal which is both sensitive and effective , and really provides , as the Commissioner said , a cornerstone of the asylum package .
This is why the vote on Wednesday is so vitally important .
If we can repeat the majority that we achieved in committee , we can reach a position of completing an asylum package which pays attention to the many concerns and sensitivities across this House .
If I can give you one example : I dealt with refugee cases for many years as an asylum lawyer , and I know that the enemy of good asylum procedure - fair , just , effective asylum procedure accepted by most Members States - is the lack of front-loading of asylum cases .
The fact that there is poor quality decision making right across the European Union in many Member States leads to higher costs for Member States , not lower costs .
So when Member States talk about the financial implications , they should understand that quality of decision making , getting it right the first time , and ensuring that the appeals procedure works effectively , is where we save money and where we are fair and just .
If any Member doubts that this report is an effective , fair and just report , they should look at these procedures very carefully and understand that much work has gone into dealing with many of the potentially controversial aspects .
It is also important to stress that the debate should not just be about cost : it is about harmonising practices across the EU .
It is clear that standards vary too much between Member States .
If we are going to continue with this kind of asylum lottery , we are not paying attention to the realities of asylum numbers going up .
As we know , those asylum numbers have been plummeting for many years .
Now we are in a more difficult position .
The rules in the Procedures Directive cover perhaps the most complex part of the whole asylum package .
That the procedure should be fair and effective can be a matter of life or death for those fleeing persecution .
We have to recognise our responsibility in upholding international obligations when dealing with people seeking protection within our borders .
Therefore , I want to congratulate the rapporteur and all the shadows for their dedicated efforts towards reaching a strong position in Parliament .
Let us repeat the vote that we had in committee .
Let us ensure that we send a strong signal to the Commission - but mainly to the Member States - that we are serious in this Parliament about completing the asylum package in a way that will be acceptable to many right across the House .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs most sincerely .
We had very many debates .
In the end , we reached some very good compromises , even though we all know that it is not always quite so easy , of course .
On behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , however , I would like to say that , in any case , we still have the goal of establishing a common , EU-wide asylum system by 2012 .
That also means that we must now make some real progress and also send a clear signal to the Council that we have not lost sight of this goal and that we are , of course , still prepared to enter into negotiations .
That goes without saying .
However , I also believe that we need to make it clear that , above all , we want a common asylum system .
It is not acceptable , as has already been said , for it to be almost like a lottery depending on where an asylum seeker makes his application .
It is not acceptable - and in this regard I am pleased that , at the last minute , we achieved success here - for every individual Member State to have its own national list of what constitutes a safe third country .
Either a country is safe or it is not - and then it still must be examined in each individual case whether it can , in fact , be a safe third country for the particular person who has made an application or whether , in this individual situation , it is perhaps not possible to simply say that is the case as such .
I am also convinced that , ultimately , the Member States will benefit from this , but so will the asylum seekers , who will have the chance , in future , to receive a ruling directly at the first instance in a fair and nevertheless rapid application procedure if this is implemented in the way that we envisage it .
I believe this also to be a right ; asylum is a right , not a favour .
We must take an absolutely clear position on this and then also have a clear procedure .
Above all , I welcome the fact that we have managed to further extend the rights of minors .
I am in favour of that and so is the ALDE Group , and I will be pleased if we get a good result in this regard tomorrow .
Mr President , the work that has been undertaken here on this report , under the guidance of Mrs Guillaume , is very important .
As Mrs Malmström said , it is the cornerstone of the European asylum system , and it is true that there is a huge gap between the current situation and a European system .
One ought , in fact , to call it an abyss , an abyss into which the rights of asylum seekers and the credibility of our protection system in Europe are sinking .
When we have States whose rates of positive responses at first instance range from 1-65 % , when we have , in a State such as France for example , 75 % of the protection decisions granted to Kosovars or Albanians being delivered on appeal , when we know that those appeals do not have suspensive effect , we gain some idea of the state of the situation and we really feel that the Council should get a move on and see that the option that has been chosen by the European Commission - and which is strengthened by the high quality report drafted under the guidance of Mrs Guillaume - namely , to improve the quality of decision making at first instance , is absolutely crucial .
As I understand it , the States that are shouting the loudest are not the ones paying , and nor are they the ones receiving the most asylum seekers .
It should be remembered that Cyprus , Sweden , Luxembourg and Belgium receive the most asylum seekers when taken as a proportion of their population .
Let us listen to those States too , then , because they can tell us what the best standards are when it comes to international protection for asylum seekers .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , I am very pleased to be having this debate today , with a view to the vote on Wednesday .
Hopefully , our work will shake the Council out of its inertia and trigger productive negotiations , allowing us to fulfil our objective of having a common European asylum system by 2012 and thus taking into consideration the hard work we have all put into this file .
I would like to warmly thank Mrs Guillaume for her excellent work and her conciliatory approach .
On the whole , the result is a good text which includes significant improvements with respect to the asylum procedures currently implemented in the EU , which vary enormously from Member State to Member State .
To name but a few , new provisions have been introduced to ensure each applicant is provided with adequate means to substantiate his or her claims in order to reach an asylum decision within a six-month period , such as the personal interview and free advice on procedural and legal aspects in first-instance procedures , including the preparation of the necessary procedural documents .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the existing directive of 2005 on international protection is to be recast as the Reception Directive for asylum seekers .
The new Reception Directive is a development of the EU 's common immigration and asylum policy as laid out under the Lisbon Treaty .
The new directive is intended to set up a new system for deciding the criteria for asylum seekers : who can and cannot enter Member States and qualify for refugee status and under what conditions .
It is intended to harmonise Member States ' asylum policy and give more rights and privileges to those seeking asylum .
The current influx of people from North Africa is , of course , just another beneficial crisis that gives the EU another opportunity to extend its power and dominion .
Immigration and asylum policy should be the sole prerogative of the independent sovereign nation state .
This proposed directive is the Lisbon Treaty doing exactly what its opponents said it would do : which , of course , is why you refused to give the people of Europe a referendum on it .
( NL ) Mr President , my party , the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) , has always been absolutely clear .
We have been , and will remain , against a European asylum and immigration policy .
Member States can decide on such matters perfectly well themselves .
The present Dutch cabinet has been the best cabinet yet , with an excellent agenda for asylum and immigration policy .
As far as that is concerned , Prime Minister Rutte and Minister Leers really do not need any interference from Europe .
My party is a party which speaks plainly .
What is today 's debate actually about ?
International protection .
We simply call it ' asylum ' .
Especially at a time when we are dealing with disastrous mass immigration of non-Western immigrants , we should not be mincing words .
Mr President , if it were up to Europe , we would throw all borders wide open and Europe would become a paradise for fortune seekers and profiteers , as if it were not one already .
Look at Italy , look at Lampedusa .
As far as Europe is concerned , all semi-criminal fortune seekers from Barbary would simply be included in the asylum procedure and would ultimately also be allowed to stay !
Mr President , could the Commissioner explain why Europe always has to take the strain ?
Why are all those boats heading our way ?
The only and the most appropriate solution is to provide relief to these refugees in the region .
Just let the African Union , the Arabic League or the terrible Organisation of the Islamic Conference resolve this .
It is them we should hold responsible for arranging shelter in the region , not ourselves .
All the more perverse is the fact that , with this report , we are actually making it easier for them to enter the European Union .
At the very moment that hordes of asylum seekers from Barbary are storming the European Union , we have to make asylum applications harder , not easier .
( DE ) Mr President , my fellow Member just spoke of hoards of barbarians coming to Europe .
This form of cynicism cannot go unchallenged here .
It is defamatory towards these people . I would ask you to reprimand him .
( NL ) Thank you , Mr President , I will correct that .
I did not speak about barbarians .
It may be that you heard that from the interpreters .
I am talking about the historical name of this region , namely Barbary .
You may have other names for this part of the world , but that is what I call it .
I am not saying that people from Barbary are heading for our shores like barbarians .
I would like that to be corrected .
Mr van der Stoep , all these remarks will be in our record , so you can check them .
All the original words , your reply and the second reply will be in that record .
( SV ) Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Guillaume , for her excellent and very hard work on this report , which represents a major part of the asylum package .
All Member States must have fair and legally certain procedures for asylum seekers .
The EU will never have a properly functioning asylum system if we do not have common minimum standards for processing applications and for the rights afforded to asylum seekers during this process .
Of course , these provisions must not merely exist on paper , but must also be applied in practice in a consistent manner throughout Europe .
That said , I think it is most regrettable that the Commission has announced its intention to table a new , watered-down proposal that is closer to what many governments in the Council want .
In view of the Commission 's position in this regard and of the mood within the Council , the vote on this report is even more important .
The European Parliament must now send out a clear signal that in any event , we support the right to seek asylum and we believe that all asylum seekers deserve a fair and thorough investigation of their applications .
The main method that is proposed , namely , that we should invest our resources in processing applications in the first instance , is absolutely the right thing to do and it will make matters easier for both the asylum seekers , who will be informed of the result more quickly , and the Member States , which will avoid the cost of further investigations as a result of the inadequate quality of the initial examination .
There are a great many good amendments in the proposal , but I would like , in particular , to highlight one amendment which ensures that the needs of particularly vulnerable applicants are taken into account , particularly those of unaccompanied minors .
The clear definition of family members that is proposed will also improve the situation for many minors in particular .
( SL ) Mr President , I would like to commend the excellent work done by the rapporteur , Mrs Sylvie Guillaume .
The European Union urgently needs coordinated , fair and efficient asylum procedures .
The need for these can be seen in the current crisis involving refugees from the Mediterranean .
Common rules are in the interest of both Member States and asylum seekers .
Ladies and gentlemen , the right to asylum is a key principle of human rights .
Refugees should not be punished for crossing borders .
Our fundamental task is to help all asylum seekers , to safeguard their basic human rights , and to ensure that high quality European standards are applied in considering their applications .
Unfortunately , it seems that fewer and fewer European countries are respecting the rights of asylum , or that they are receiving immigrants with increasing fear and distrust .
What is happening today on the Italian island of Lampedusa is alarming .
It is giving rise to the threatening and distressing feeling that refugees are not wanted in the European Union .
We must show solidarity with people who are fleeing trouble spots , particularly with those fleeing Libya , who need international protection .
In light of the developments in Arab countries and in North Africa , we need to be prepared for the possibility of even more refugees arriving in the Union in the future .
For that reason , too , we need to improve and coordinate procedures .
That will help us make life easier both for ourselves and for the refugees .
We will ease the burden of countries which currently operate more humane procedures for asylum seekers , and share the burden more fairly .
Europe must not become a fortress .
Asylum seekers must not become victims of our systems .
I would like this report to be endorsed by a large majority on Wednesday .
( EL ) Mr President , I must agree with what has been said , that we all want a reliable and effective asylum procedure and we all want to safeguard these objectives .
I too , however , shall cite an example from our experience in Greece a few months ago , during Parliament 's official asylum mission .
When we arrived at the airport , we visited the detention centre , which was holding a third-country national ; he was brought before us and we spoke to him .
He told us that he had applied for asylum and after a while , he started to speak to us in Greek .
We asked him where he had learned to speak Greek and he replied : I speak Greek because I have been working in Greece for 10 years ; I went back to my country and returned and now I am applying for asylum .
Let me explain : of course , we need to focus on the reliability and transparency of these procedures and to protect those who are entitled to asylum ; however , we also need to watch out for abuse .
There are provisions that need careful attention .
I refer to a number of comments made by Mrs Hohlmeier , to which I would add this : we are saying that , after six months , the burden of proof for people being prosecuted in their country shifts to the Member State , not to the asylum seeker ; this alone creates bureaucracy and may be used by some as an argument for abuse .
( RO ) Mr President , I want to begin by congratulating Mrs Guillaume for the fine job which she has done .
The amendments tabled to the current Asylum Procedures Directive mark an extremely important step towards establishing a common asylum system throughout the European Union .
The main added value of the new directive is the clarity of its rules and procedures .
It sets out sound , transparent regulations on the authorities competent to consider international protection applications and guarantees that these applications are handled as quickly and efficiently as possible .
We must absolutely ensure that the protection afforded across the entire European Union is of the highest standard .
At the same time , it is important for us to continue to harmonise national legislations in order to avoid disparities between the asylum systems which currently exist throughout the European Union .
Our ultimate aim must remain to create a proper common asylum system , as stipulated by the Stockholm Programme .
( DE ) Mr President , if there is one thing that is certain , then it is the following : on their own , some of the individual Member States of the European Union are overstretched in the area of asylum , and also in the area of migration and immigration , as we can clearly see from the developments of recent weeks , but also of the last few years .
It is therefore necessary for the European Union to assume ever more responsibilities in this regard in order to ensure that the asylum system in the European Union operates in future according to principles that must be a matter of course for all of us , namely , uniform standards , fair and just procedures and respect for fundamental rights .
On the other hand , however , we must also prevent the system from being abused , because that , of course , is always a problem that is discussed in great depth by people in the Member States .
This task is difficult enough , and I hope that we will manage to do it successfully .
( SK ) Mr President , the draft of the submitted directive on minimum standards for hearings in Member States on the recognition and withdrawal of international protection is based on previous experience of asylum hearing procedures in individual Member States .
The Commission 's effort to introduce common procedures on granting and withdrawing a unitary asylum status or additional protection through improving the harmonisation of asylum hearing instruments and improving the quality of the hearings in order to cut the number of revised decisions , however , is running into numerous objections from the Council of the European Union and from some Member States .
I firmly believe that the opinions of the Council and the Member States who ultimately implement the asylum hearings should be decisive for us .
In my opinion , therefore , if we do not listen carefully to their comments and advice when amending the asylum system , then our work is unlikely to bring the desired effect .
I therefore consider it very important to have further consultations over the prepared amendments , particularly with the relevant EU Member State bodies .
( DE ) Mr President , despite the influx of people from North Africa , the rapporteur clearly fears that there are too few refugees in the EU , as she calls for the definition of the family to be extended .
It is apparently irrelevant whether the family members came together before or after fleeing from their country .
New partners and adoptive children are also to be included in the new definition .
Special protection is to be afforded to refugees with problems in relation to their gender identity , whatever the rapporteur means by that .
Such wordings leave the door wide open to abuse .
It is also naive to believe that asylum seekers can expect the same high level of social provision in any Member State .
The European Union is made up of States with very different standards of living .
The same applies to the concept of safe country of origin .
If it is a democratic state based on the rule of law , it must also be classed as safe .
Finally , as Tunisia and Egypt are heading in the right direction , they should probably also be classed as safe third countries .
Mr President , international protection is a coded and euphemistic term for asylum .
The word asylum has rightly lost its glamour in the eyes of the general public .
Asylum seekers who pass by , or through , safe countries are migrants of choice , not genuine refugees .
People who come to Europe simply because they come from unsafe countries might be unfortunate , but Europe cannot be expected to house the entire population of every unsafe country on earth .
Genuine asylum seekers should seek refuge in the first safe country ; one that will be culturally , religiously and ancestrally related to them .
The role of Europe and the West should not be to act as a giant reception home for the vulnerable populations of the world .

Our role should be to stop creating the instability that fuels these vast population movements : there must be no more wars such as those against Iraq and Afghanistan ; we must pull out of Libya before we are drawn into a ground war ; we must cancel the planned conflict with Iran and we must avoid encouraging discontent in other Middle Eastern states .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as has been said many times , we have been negotiating this for a very long time and - as Mr Moraes pointed out - we have had the objective of having a joint common asylum policy since 1999 .
The Council has made the decision to have this by 2012 , and we are beginning to see an end to the deadlock that we have had for so many years .
I would like to thank Parliament , because I think it has made a great contribution to this .
We must have a fair , efficient and coherent system that is equivalent in all Member States .
It has been very clear from the beginning , in my contact with the different rapporteurs on the whole package , that there would have to be some amendments .
This is not something that the Commission just came up with .
The deadlock is such that we need to make some compromises so that the two legislative partners in this can agree .
With the vote that you will be making tomorrow or on Wednesday and with the Commission 's proposals in this , we will be in a good position to try to see if we can find some compromises .
We have been involved in contacting the Council throughout the spring in order to identify the main difficulties here .
If we want to achieve an agreement on the asylum package by 2012 and thus commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Geneva Convention - I think we all want to do that - we must be ready to make some compromises .
This is a very good start .
It is the cornerstone of the future system .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , all the shadow rapporteurs and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for this work .
Mr President , I should like to begin by offering my thanks for all of the speeches - well , nearly all of them .
Mrs Hohlmeier has left , but I hope that someone will tell her that I have not given up hope of convincing her that Tunisian nationals are not claiming asylum throughout the European Union and that , consequently , there is little reason for them to make a second successive claim .
I wish to make two small points by way of conclusion , but they are nonetheless ones which I consider rather crucial .
I should like to stress that the aim is not to turn the Member States against the principle of upwards harmonisation , quite the contrary .
I can understand that there is some resistance and some misgivings , but I would also like them to understand that they have everything to gain by investing in proper , effective procedures at first instance .
The proposed reforms are along these lines .
The second key point , to conclude , is to affirm that Parliament has an important role to play .
We are colegislators .
The European Commission has indicated on several occasions that it wants us to play an absolutely fundamental part in the follow-up to this procedure .
Well , on Wednesday , we will have the opportunity to state loud and clear our priorities for genuinely harmonised procedures in this area .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the report by Mrs Guillaume will take place at noon on Wednesday , 6 April 2011 .
Dual-use items and technology ( debate )
Τhe next item is the report by Mr Leichtfried , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Community regime for the control of exports of dual-use items and technology - C7-0062 / 2010 - .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when I took on the task of preparing the report on the control of exports of dual-use items and technology , although I had some idea of the scope of this report , I did not realise quite how extensive it was .
This report is essentially about a practice that somehow always ends up in the shadows of reports , but which , on the other hand , safeguards jobs and , in my opinion , must be regulated throughout Europe .
It is essentially about facilitation of export licences for products that can be used for both military and civil purposes .
These include everything from chemicals to nuclear fuels , weapon parts , computer components and ultimately - and we debated this very intensively - even software and software components .
In my view , it is important that the different regulations that we currently have in the Member States are brought into closer harmony , that they are made more precise , more specific and also more transparent , and , above all , that they can attain transparency at European level .
With this report , it was probably possible to see the consequences of the Treaty of Lisbon for us in the European Parliament properly for the first time .
The Commission originally put this proposal to the Council in the belief that the matter would perhaps be settled by the time the Treaty of Lisbon was concluded .
That was not the case , however .
Thus , it has also come to the European Parliament , and I think it is good that it is being debated in this House , because we see some things , which I will now come to , in a different way to the Council .
We have succeeded in overcoming certain legal complications that arose as a result of the method employed by the Commission .
I would like , in particular , to thank the representatives of the Commission for the fact that we have succeeded in regulating the matter in such a way that , from a legal point of view , we are now on a safer footing .
Finally , just a few key problems remain .
In this House , we are essentially in agreement on everything , with one exception , and in that regard we are not in agreement with the Council , either .
It concerns the question of whether exports should be authorised after they have taken place or before they take place .
In this regard , it is sensible , for reasons of safety , oversight and transparency , to ensure that someone asks first before something hazardous is exported and does not retrospectively apply for authorisation after these products have already been exported , as we will then probably not be very successful in prohibiting this export .
That is the familiar ex post - ex ante debate : in my opinion , it would make more sense for authorisation to be granted first and then for the products to be exported .
Where we are all in agreement - although not with the Council - is on the subject of transparency in respect of the reporting obligation .
I think that the European Parliament should ultimately be informed - how that is achieved from a technical point of view can be discussed - of what , where and how much has been authorised , because we are clearly the body that has to ensure that everything is carried out properly .
It is also important for us to discuss how we should deal with exports of devices that could possibly be used in violations of human rights .
I think that such exports should not be permitted .
We must ensure that that is the case .
I now look forward to the debate .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , every day , European businesses have to compete in an ever-changing and more competitive environment .
The questions of dependability and timely delivery are as important as those of quality and price .
Exports of dual-use items create particular challenges in this regard , as such exports are subject to authorisation requirements .
Dual-use items are not niche goods .
They are very much items legitimately used in a broad variety of industrial sectors - the space industry , the telecommunications industry , aviation , the chemical industry and many others .
The goods are controlled because they could also potentially be used for military purposes .
Many Member States make special export facilitations available to their exporters .
These facilitations take the form of general licences and allow businesses in certain Member States to export dual-use items with the minimum burden .
Following an analysis of these national facilitation measures , in 2008 , the Commission put forward its proposal aimed at extending these national facilitations to exporters throughout the Union .
The proposal for a new EU general export authorisation is designed to allow exporters in all Member States to reap the benefits of simplified export procedures for certain dual-use items to certain destinations .
In this way , participation in international exhibitions and fairs will become easier .
Exporting items after they have been repaired will also become simpler , and exports of telecommunications equipment and certain industrial chemicals will be simplified .
On the other hand , Member States will be able to concentrate their limited resources on transactions that actually do pose a risk .
The Commission regularly receives complaints from industry that certain exports are being prevented from entering one Member State while identical transactions are given a green light in other Member States .
The proposal in front of you is a first step towards eliminating these inequalities within our Single Market .
Many other countries are taking similar steps to prioritise their work on export control , and we should not be left behind .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Leichtfried , and other Members for their very constructive work on the proposal .
The report presented by you and your committee is definitely a step in the right direction and is broadly consistent with the Commission 's view .
Mr President , Commissioner , before us we have a subject that affects trade and security to equal degrees .
Dual-use items are products with two uses .
That means that they can have both a civil use , as well as a perfectly sensible or downright dangerous , but in any case security-relevant , use .
Some parties , for example , the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology , claim that these are - and I quote - ' non-critical items ' .
That is incorrect .
This Parliament has previously taken a more responsible position in its committees .
I speak as rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence .
In these committees , we have taken a very clear position .
We believe that it would be extremely negligent not to take certain control mechanisms into consideration .
I would therefore like to appeal to my fellow Members to follow the recommendations of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Subcommittee on Security and Defence and , in particular , the recommendations of the rapporteur , who has just spoken , with regard to the question of ex ante control .
This is the one major controversial issue that we still face with regard to this matter .
To perform checks only after the event would result in less security .
However , we want more security for EU citizens and also more security for our partner countries and trade partners .
We do not want the principle of ex ante control - which the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Foreign Affairs have followed - to now be replaced by the principle of ex post control .
That would place trade interests above security interests .
Many Member States , the Netherlands for example , have expressly warned against this .
It would therefore undoubtedly be in the interests of our citizens for the plenary to confirm what the committees have drawn up .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Dual-Use Regulation under debate provides for the acquisition of general authorisations for non-critical items and technologies that are exported to third countries and fulfil a dual purpose .
However , these general authorisations are also intended to enable European exporters and small and medium-sized enterprises to plan reliably .
This regulation is intended to represent a relaxation for our European exporters in order to spare them time-consuming individual authorisation procedures and , above all , also to enhance their competitiveness .
I therefore think that detailed registration procedures and the additional requirements imposed on exporters will not result in a relaxation , but rather additional expenditure .
There is no doubt that we must ensure that exports that fulfil dual purposes are also used in a safe manner and cannot present a danger , but , in any case , we also have to question the excessive and unnecessary additional expenditure .
I could give the example of a medium-sized enterprise in the field of mechanical engineering that offers a 24-hour service for repairing machines and supplying machine parts .
These services must also continue to be possible despite more stringent export provisions .
The same applies in the area of cyber attacks and the involvement of stakeholders .
If we do not have clear criteria and framework conditions for these areas , and if the wordings are imprecise , then I have to question the additional expenditure and the generalisation here too .
Although it is extremely important to involve stakeholders in decision-making processes , this must always be done with a view to the practical and sensible implementation of the decisions .
Here , too , there is no question that transparency and security are essential .
Finally , I would like to stress once again that this regulation is intended to contribute to a facilitation of the procedure and a reduction in bureaucracy .
Against the background of the safe use of products and technologies , it is intended to strengthen our European economy and simplify the associated administration .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate my colleague for the exceptional work he has done on this report , which is so technical , but which entails real implications for the security of Europe 's citizens .
The European Union has been enforcing export control measures on dual-use items for nearly 15 years .
The adoption of preventive measures such as export licensing requirements and customs registration enables the European Union to take care to avoid the proliferation of weapons , especially weapons of mass destruction .
However , the European Union 's dual-use regime needs to be more transparent and democratic .
A secure system must be set up where notifications about exports involving items which can be used for both civil and military purposes will be collected , transmitted and stored to prevent the danger of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
I also welcome the rapporteur 's proposal calling on the Dual-Use Coordination Group to submit an annual report to the European Parliament to help the latter fulfil its control function .
It is the duty of the European Commission , in turn , to inform Parliament about the implementation of the regulation 's provision on setting up a Community regime for the control of exports of dual-use items and technologies and to submit an impact study for the measures being proposed .
Last but not least , the European Union 's representation in international export control regimes needs to be improved .
Unfortunately , the lists of items to be controlled are updated by the international regimes and transposed into European Union legislation without the European Parliament being able to participate in this process .
This is why I call for better control from Parliament and for its legislative role to be facilitated , as assigned by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , for time immemorial , if there is one trade that is difficult to control , it is the arms trade .
There are various ways to make this control difficult .
One is to trade in apparently harmless weapons or techniques that can easily become a weapon , and that is why we are concerned with dual use in the regulation .
Another difficulty is the plethora of rules that make any control system ineffective .
When we started working on this case , the Commission asked us to amend a regulation dating from 2000 .
Meanwhile , this has been revoked and we were called on to amend the more recent 2009 regulation on the basis of the same obsolete proposal .
We have just entered trialogue and we already have a new legislative proposal from the Commission , again to amend the regulation .
The first request is therefore to establish clear , simple and transparent rules for European exporters having a consolidated text .
Four points on the position of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( ALDE ) .
With regard to shipments of low value , we in the ALDE concur with the Council in being very sceptical about this system .
Parliament has already limited the maximum value from EUR 5 000 to 3 000 and imposed various other criteria .
The list of destination countries is very limited .
This is something that small and medium-sized businesses legitimately want , but our main message is that we want security above all , as well as trade , and we must go back to work on this in the trialogue .
We support the policy of ex ante notification and the obligation of registration by Member States .
Finally , we demand the maximum degree of transparency to ensure that the regulation provides a mechanism which informs stakeholders , such as human rights or peace monitoring and trade unions organisations , of the various stages that made up the decision-making process , including through a report to the European Parliament

Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Leichtfried , for his work on this report and , on behalf of my group , I wish him every success in the undoubtedly difficult negotiations with the Council , which is unfortunately not present at this debate .
However , I would like to mention two aspects .
The amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) are not helpful to the rapporteur , but undermine the negotiating position of Parliament defined in the Committee on International Trade .
The amendments seek to make life easier for arms exporters .
Therefore , my group will not support these amendments .
Secondly , I would like to state that my group has considerable problems with the use of the dual-use list to block the access of developing countries in particular to high technology .
This relates , in particular , to restrictions on the export of high-performance computers .
We have seen the potential for the political abuse of the dual-use list , particularly in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
For this reason , we have drawn up Amendment 47 , and I would ask for your support for this amendment in the interests of the developing countries .
( DE ) Mr President , nuclear fuels , chemicals and computer programmes can be used for peaceful purposes , but they can also be used for military purposes .
Some Member States have been supplying Libya with weapons and even with torture equipment for years .
The most recent arms export report - more like a list of sins - clearly shows that Italy , Malta and Germany supplied the most weapons to Gaddafi .
France , on the other hand , was the front-runner with regard to supplies to the Arab region .
Others - like my country , Austria - abide by the restrictions .
We must combat this imbalance .
All Member States and the entire weapons industry in the EU must observe strict controls and transparency provisions .
However , the system must also be kept up-to-date .
Particularly with regard to software , IT and smart phones , it needs to be considered whether these will not be of benefit to democratic movements , as we have recently seen in the Arab region , of course .
We therefore need more discriminating analyses with regard to the potential uses and the dubiousness of the recipients .
( SV ) Mr President , the number of products covered by this legislation that can be used for both civil and military purposes is far greater than we first thought .
It includes everything from lorries to aeroplane jet engines and telecommunications equipment .
I therefore think it is important to point out that the direct reference to the weapons industry in this regard is often misleading .
It also makes this legislation important in terms of simplifying and harmonising the way in which we handle products in Europe that can be used for both civil and military purposes .
It must be stringent , predictable and clear , but also harmonised .
Every time I hear about a Swedish company that is denied the chance to export to another country for reasons relating to EU legislation , only to then discover that a French company , for example , is perfectly able to export the same products , it is clear that the EU has failed .
We must remember that trade is essentially a good thing .
I am thinking of telecommunications equipment , for example , which is incredibly important for democracy movements around the world .
This proposal must not make civil trade more difficult and subject to more bureaucracy .
I am therefore opposed to the proposal to introduce an ex ante declaration .
Modern , just-in-time delivery systems , service agreements and so on make it extremely difficult for fully legitimate products that we want to export and see more of .
Most companies know exactly what these products are .
Even if they apply an ex post notification , they know that they will be penalised if they export anything .
I think it is important to simplify trade .
We need to ensure that the legislation is stringent , clear and harmonised , but also simple .
This does not fit well with having an ex ante check of everything that is exported .
For example , it makes it more difficult to send important telecommunications equipment to countries that need it .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank you very much , if I may , for giving me the floor .
Our problem concerns the fact that not all of the EU 's Member States apply the same criteria with regard to the export of dual-use items .
I therefore think that we should aim to ensure that all EU Member States apply the same high standards in respect of the export of civilian products which can be used for military purposes .
I believe that this regulation should , in particular , highlight the need to prevent the unjustified and undesirable proliferation of technologies and their software , since the number of attacks involving modern technologies and software is increasing .
I think that this would be an effective way to combat cyber-terrorism .
Mr President , the topic of the report is doubly sensitive , both politically and economically .
On the one hand , the EU wants to prevent dual-used goods to be used for military purposes and / or against people .
On the other hand , it has to consider the economic interests of producers and users .
The regulation is therefore inevitably bushy , having to cover for both existing intentional loopholes and anticipate for others in the future .
Moreover , while for some , the regulation would appear too strong , for others it would appear too weak , requiring constant revision .
As a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I fully support the need for a more transparent and stricter regulation .
I am therefore totally in favour of authorisation before export and not vice versa .
Particularly after Lisbon , Parliament can only help , and this is exactly what it is doing here and now .
Consequently , its role should be strengthened , not overlooked .
( DE ) Mr President , when it comes to the export authorisation for dual-use items , we are probably all agreed that we need uniform rules in the European Union so that the Member States do not all follow different practices , which would lead to distortions of competition and achieve precisely the opposite of what we actually want .
Of course , it sounds logical when we say that exports should be authorised and approved in advance .
We want more transparency and we want this to be monitored so that we can learn from it .
In this regard , I would like to express my support for Mrs Köstinger , who said that we obviously need a system that is bearable for our small and medium-sized enterprises and one with which they can cope .
The world market is not only for large concerns , but also for small and medium-sized enterprises .
That would also be my appeal to the rapporteur , namely , to ensure that the conditions and requirements laid down are also bearable for , and capable of being implemented by , our small and medium-sized enterprises .
( PT ) Mr President , the problem with using civilian products and technologies for military purposes is that there is no approach to it that does not become tied up with controlling exports of what are known as ' dual-use products and related services ' .
This control of exports is important , and should be carried out in a rigorous manner , which does not adversely affect developing countries ' access to the products and technologies required for their development .
It is important to increase the transparency of the relevant processes and to enable democratic scrutiny of them .
However , there is also a need for consistency in this area between other European Union policies and the objectives of this regulation .
For example , we recall the research projects financed by the Seventh Framework Programme , especially those being engaged in with the participation of the Israeli aerospace industry , which manufactured unmanned aircraft used in the attack on the Gaza Strip in 2008 and 2009 , causing the deaths of dozens of people .
There is also a need for a rigorous assessment of possible dual civilian military use of the results of these programmes .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , on behalf of Mr De Gucht , I would again like to thank the rapporteur and his committee for the work they are doing .
The Commission very much shares the views in their report and on the two remaining issues where they propose one ex ante system .
The most important thing for the Commission is that it is the same system , because we have to avoid all kinds of double standards and over-complications here .
We also agree with you that some kind of reporting mechanism is necessary - without , of course , posing an exaggerated burden on small and medium-sized companies in particular .
However , some kind of reporting mechanism would be necessary , and I hope that you will be able to reach a conclusion with the Council on these remaining issues later . Thank you again for this debate , Mr President .
Mr President , I wanted to use the last two minutes to appeal to the Council .
However , there are only empty seats where the Council is supposed to be .
I am not sure whether it is sensible to conduct debates without the Council .
I think it would be appropriate to inform the Council that , if it wants something from the European Parliament , it ought to come here and listen to the relevant debate in this House .
I know that this matter concerns a large branch of industry .
It concerns a lot of items and it concerns jobs , particularly jobs in small and medium-sized enterprises which produce high technology and which are incredibly important .
For them , it is extremely important that there are uniform regulations in the European Union and that we do not have a situation where - as Mr Fjellner mentioned - one country meets its obligations , but another does not , and , in the end , the ones that lose out are those that abide by the rules .
That should not be the case .
It is therefore important for us to find a solution quickly and also for the Council to accept that not everything is as it perceives it to be .
This is also important .
With this realisation , we will quickly reach a solution in the interests of European industry , European jobs and the protection of human rights and the preservation of security and of freedom from injury outside the European Union .
This report is intended to facilitate this .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the report by Mr Leichtfried will take place tomorrow at noon .
European statistics on tourism ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Brian Simpson , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , concerning European statistics on tourism - C7-0085 / 2010 - ( Α7-0329 / 2010 ) .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would first of all like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs for their efforts on what is actually quite a technical report .
The Commission 's proposal on tourism statistics has given us a good opportunity to revise the existing legal framework on the collection of statistical data on tourism in Europe .
This is especially relevant at this time , when all eyes are on developing a strategy for European tourism policy on the back of the new EU competences in this field .
Updating our tourism statistics database can , in turn , play an important role in giving policy makers a good basis for implementing successful tourism policies .
For these reasons , the approach that I took , supported by our shadows , in formulating Parliament 's position , was to strongly support the aim of improving the completeness , relevance and comparability of the statistics on offer in this field , bringing the statistics more up to date with new trends in the tourism sector to reflect , for instance , the increase in Internet bookings and in short-stay trips .
We are all agreed that improving the competitiveness of EU tourism is a way to keep visitors coming to Europe , so it is important that the statistics we collect keep pace with the changing nature of the sector , identifying current and potential trends in that sector and monitoring supply and demand .
In this way , the statistics collected can be a useful tool for supporting the decision maker in the tourism industry .
On the one hand , it is also important to ensure that the updated statistics are as complete as possible , giving a good overview of tourism across Europe , whilst , on the other hand , bearing in mind the need to keep the burden down for respondents .
It was for that reason that I was keen to see a final agreement on incoming data collection on same-day visits , which we now have in the final agreement , as same-day visits account for a large part of tourism activity .
Parliament also pushed for the regulation to cover areas of data collection which , until now , have not been thought of as relevant for tourism statistics but which we felt needed to be included as part of the recognition of tourism 's important social , economic and environmental impact .
I thought that the collection of data on employment and economic expenditure - the so-called tourism satellite accounts - was particularly relevant in this regard and we pushed hard for this to be included as part of the regulation .
The final agreement with Council now includes a provision on drawing up pilot studies that will enable Member States to show the effects of tourism on the economy and on employment , which I hope will contribute to a better understanding of the true size and value of our tourism industry .
The final agreement also sees the inclusion of pilot studies that show the effect of tourism on the environment - an interesting avenue to pursue , given the need for a sustainable tourism approach .
The inclusion of data on accessibility to tourist accommodation for persons with reduced mobility , which was the only real sticking point that we had with Council , is also now an important inclusion .
Following Parliament 's insistence on this point , Council finally backed down and agreed to its inclusion as part of the basic information collected from tourist accommodation establishments .
Together with the agreements that we have reached on restricting the delegation of powers to the Commission - which I also had some concerns about - I am very pleased that first-reading agreement has been found with Council .
I hope Parliament will lend its strong support to the agreement in Wednesday 's plenary vote .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , in these times of austerity , the Commission is rationalising as well .
Mr Simpson , as rapporteur you said that this is a technical report , and it is indeed , but nevertheless it is an important one .
The purpose of the proposal from the Commission was to update and optimise the existing legal framework for European statistics on tourism .
Both producers and users of tourism statistics have requested this adjustment .
So the ultimate aim is to provide monthly and annual European statistics on tourism supply and demand using a common framework .
The proposal is very well balanced in terms of data needs and the burden put on respondents and administrators .
To achieve this , permission has been included to collect some parts of the data on an optional basis or every third year , to defer the entry into force of certain provisions to a later stage , and to exclude the smallest enterprises .
Following an informal trialogue held on 12 January 2011 and further discussions , as you mentioned , rapporteur , a compromise text was agreed between Parliament and the Council .
In particular , the Council agreed to an additional demand from Parliament of having the variable concerning the accessibility of tourist accommodation for persons with reduced mobility included in the regulation .
All amendments in the report and the compromise text are acceptable to the Commission .
Therefore , I would like to thank you , Mr Simpson , and the shadow rapporteurs and the members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism for your constructive work on the proposal .
Following fruitful cooperation between all three institutions , I believe that we have now reached our objective , which is the establishment of a common framework for the systematic development , production and dissemination of European statistics on tourism .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by thanking the rapporteur for his commitment and his skills of political succinctness .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will wholeheartedly support the compromise reached with the Council .
This regulation replaces the text in force since 1995 , which no longer reflects today 's reality on some key issues , such as new needs and new user habits , the need for more timely data and improved comparability , and completeness of the statistical framework .
The final text incorporates all the policy priorities supported by the PPE during the negotiations ; in particular , a better definition of the parts of the regulation amendable by delegated acts , introduction of the definition of ' same-day visits ' , which is essential for including in the collection of statistics all those who travel within a single day , thereby also including the phenomenon of conference tourism , a better definition of the statistics to be collected , including expenditure by tourists in transit for food and drink in bars and restaurants , which represents a substantial part of our tourism industry , accepted - even if only on a voluntary basis - by the Council , and data on accessibility for people with reduced mobility .
The rapporteur has already duly noted that this is a key point for the Parliamentary delegation .
In conclusion , this regulation is an important element within the new European tourism strategy that all the European institutions are examining .
This will permit an updated legal framework that is in step with market developments and offers a clearer and more coherent approach to collecting data on tourism , and it will also ensure more effective monitoring of the sector for a better understanding of consumer needs .
I again express my thanks to Mr Simpson , the Commission for the initiative , and the Council for its excellent mediation .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Brian Simpson , for this report on the EU regulation establishing a common framework for developing , producing and distributing European statistics on tourism .
It is the task of Member States to collect , compile , process and transmit harmonised European statistics on tourism supply and demand .
The majority of businesses in the tourism sector are small and medium-sized enterprises .
Their strategic importance is not just restricted to their economic value but , above all , the considerable potential they offer in terms of job creation must also be recognised .
According to the Eurostat data for 2007 , one European family in three could not afford to take a one-week holiday every year .
The economic crisis has increased the number of European citizens vulnerable to the risk of poverty .
As a result , there has been an even bigger fall in the number of those who can afford to have a weekly holiday every year .
I therefore think that the tourism statistics are necessary and also relevant in terms of assessing the social aspect of this sector .
Social tourism boosts the number of European tourists and helps counter the seasonal nature of tourism , reinforce the idea of European citizenship , as well as foster regional development .
Social tourism statistics would enable the Commission and Member States to identify the specific needs of different social groups and devise suitable programmes .
When compiling European statistics under this regulation , national statistical authorities should also provide data on the funds used for tourism by each Member State , in particular , where EU funds are used .
Last but not least , I think that European tourism statistics should also include data about the staff employed , their seasonal nature , professional training and qualifications , as well as information about their current working conditions .
We cannot have a high quality tourism sector without well-trained staff .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate the committee Chair , Brian Simpson , for leading the work of the committee and work on the file , and , above all , for having allowed its conclusion - at least I hope so because the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( ALDE ) will be voting for this - and approval on first reading , and hence the successful conclusion of the regulation .
This task actually involves reviewing the regulation , which sets out to establish a common framework for the collection of statistics on tourism and , more specifically , for all its stages , ranging from the collection to the processing , treatment and transmission of statistics , enabling optimum knowledge of the financial world that is activated and revolves around tourism .
Mr President , it is clear that , since the 1995 directive , which is the predecessor of this directive , remarkable growth has been recorded in tourism and we must acknowledge , in particular , the great prospects that the economic system of tourism will contribute to the European economy as a whole in the near future .
I worked on the file as a shadow rapporteur for the ALDE Group and , as I said earlier , we are going to vote in favour of it .
I think the Simpson report will be particularly popular due to the notion of tourism satellite accounts , namely , the adoption of pilot projects that will make it possible to assess the economic impact on individual sectors of the economy , in other words , aspects relating to same-day visits , the evaluation report to be drawn up every five years and the possibility , indeed the necessity , of a five-yearly report to assess the effects of statistics .
I will conclude by saying that this is part of the new responsibility arising out of the Treaty of Lisbon and I think this time , we are beginning to assume the responsibilities of Parliament effectively and we will do the same with the next file being worked on , soon to arrive in this Chamber .
Mr President , it is a known fact that the European Union is the number one tourist destination in the world .
Tourism accounts for 4 % of GDP in the EU , 2 million undertakings are involved in it , and it pays for approximately 8 million jobs .
As such , Mr Simpson 's report on the Commission 's proposal for a directive revising the legal basis for European statistics on tourism is important and comes at a crucial time for the future of tourism , given that the economic crisis and the recent military operations in the Mediterranean represent a threat to tourism and , at the same time , create conditions for diverting tourism to safe destinations in Europe .
We call on the Commission , in addition to collating statistics , to incorporate all measures relating to tourism and the numerous tourism-related sectors , so that we can ultimately upgrade the tourism product .
In Greece , tourism is a pillar of the economy , representing 7 % of GDP and providing 700 000 jobs .
Mr President , in order to make sound decisions in any industry whatever , we need to be armed with as much in the way of information and statistics as possible and to ensure that regions are spending their money properly in developing a product that has such huge potential .
I welcome this report .
Statistics are absolutely vital .
However , they are useless if we cannot compare them , and this report by Brian Simpson goes a considerable way towards ensuring that the information which is now being collected , and will be collected in the future , is easily accessible and can easily be used positively for the benefit of the industry itself .
I welcome the work that Mr Simpson has done and , as he has said , he has the unanimous support of the committee and quite a number of committee members are here now .
I also share his concern about the quantity of the delegated acts the Commission wants to have .
I would much rather see changes to the fundamentals of this framework decided under ordinary legislative procedures .
We are MEPs from the different member countries , we have our finger on the pulse , we know exactly what the situation is in our Member States and , without in any way showing disrespect to the Commission , I would say that we are the people who ultimately know what the product is and what the potential is .
Until 2004 , we had regional development , transport and tourism all under the one heading .
In 2004 , those areas were divided between committees , and we now have transport and tourism in one and regional development in another .
As far as transport and tourism are concerned , tourism is still very much the Cinderella .
It is an area of huge potential , an area that can develop into something even greater than we are talking about .
Our colleague over here mentioned 4 % of GDP .
But if you look at it , you see , for example , that Europe is the number one destination in the world , accounting for 40 % of global arrivals in 2008 .
Tourism represents 9.7 million jobs every year .
So what we are talking about here is a mosaic of different countries , different cultures , with huge potential .
We have only dipped our toe in the water ; we have only started to tap its potential and we need to drive forward from here .
Above all else , if we are to drive forward and develop tourism , we need the kind of report that Brian Simpson has produced and we need to work on it .

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to warmly congratulate the speaker , Mr Simpson , on the agreement he has achieved in an area as technical as tourism statistics , having fought every inch of the way .
However , Mr President , this is a sector in which we are talking about more than 2 million companies , many of which are , of course , small and medium-sized enterprises , providing almost 10 million jobs ; a sector that is extremely labour-intensive and in which human resources , and the quality of these resources , are fundamental aspects ; a sector that accounts for 5 % of the European Union 's gross domestic product .
We are really talking about one of the most important sectors of the European economy , given that the European Union is also the world 's number one tourist destination .
In short , the Union enjoys a leading position that , until recently , has been left too much to the vagaries of the market and prevailing circumstances , with the severe inequalities and wastage that these imply .
The Treaty of Lisbon has finally given us precisely the legal basis we needed for a new tourism policy in the European Union , which the European Parliament had been calling for through a range of pilot and preparatory projects .
Last year 's Commission communication set out the new goals for these powers , and the need to strengthen the tourism sector through better coordination and complementarity with the Member States .
It stated that better , comparable , exhaustive , up-to-date and reliable data were needed to achieve this , and this is precisely why Mr Simpson 's report has set out these new directions and requirements .
It extends the criteria for defining the great diversity of tourism , not just holiday tourism , but also social tourism , etc .
It highlights the need to make accessibility for people with reduced mobility a more visible issue , includes the environmental factor , and opens the way towards taking the tourism satellite accounts into consideration in order to gain a much more reliable economic picture .
It also combines new aspects and criteria , such as short day trips and data relating to the restaurant trade , which are of such importance to a tourism-focused country like Spain .
All these new data will help to provide a much better understanding of this sector , which is such an intensive generator of the employment we need .
These new statistics mean we will be better placed to modernise and tackle the future challenges of a sector that must form the bedrock of a large part of Europe 2020 , above all , in terms of the intensive creation of jobs , which should be of good quality .
Thank you very much .
Now I give the floor to Mrs Meissner .
You have one minute .
( DE ) Mr President , I would first of all like to offer my sincere thanks to Mr Simpson .
In the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we know that , if our Chair prepares a report , we will not actually have anything to say against it .
He always takes a great number of things into account , and the only thing we can say is : excellent Brian , we can support that .
In this case , it has been variously said that it is a technical report .
That sounds so boring .
I do not find it at all boring .
Although it is technical , it describes tourism , which really is a very important economic objective for us in Europe .
It has already been mentioned that 40 % of people worldwide travel to Europe .
Thus , Europe is an important region for tourism , and therefore it is , of course , vital to know why these people travel to Europe .
If , with our new competence under the Treaty of Lisbon , we now want to develop a new European framework , we must be familiar with the data and also be able to exchange this data in a harmonised way .
That is the purpose of this report , and it also shows the new developments , for example , in terms of same-day visits or bicycle tourism .
We also want to include our industrial heritage .
All of this must be included in future so that we will really know how to set our objectives .
Therefore , thank you very much - it is a good report and I believe we are able to support it .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I think we are all agreed on the importance of tourism .
It plays a very important role not only for citizens in Europe , but also for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Statistical data are crucially important .
Only by creating a reliable and complete database will we be able to make policy that enables tourism to realise its full potential .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his work , and my colleague , Mr Fidanza , has just presented the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
For my part , I would just like to raise three fairly general points .
Firstly , I believe that we must make real use of the new political means afforded to us by the Treaty and create added value for the Member States .
My second point is that , since the various EU financial funds are , and will be , increasingly under pressure , it is very important to compare the results of the various Member States and to opt for the best practices , thereby achieving a certain degree of harmonisation where everyone gains .
My third and final point is that we need to develop tourism satellite accounts , which Canada has had for years .
This would enable us to determine even more effectively the repercussions for the economy , jobs , the environment and so on , and hence to respond to a number of issues in all political fields connected with tourism .
( RO ) Mr President , I find regrettable the complete lack of any kind of official statistics on rural tourism and agritourism , with the only data available being based on estimates .
In this circumstance , I welcome the actions envisaged by the European Commission aimed at increasing the socio-economic knowledge base for tourism .
I also wish to emphasise the importance of the ' ICT and tourism ' platform proposed by the Commission .
However , I think that efforts need to be stepped up to equip rural areas with a state-of-the-art IT infrastructure , for instance , by providing broadband Internet .
More than 500 000 accommodation establishments are involved in rural tourism and agritourism , offering more than 6 million beds .
Both these sectors have seen average annual growth of 10-15 % in recent years , thereby making a vital contribution to improving the quality of life in rural areas and to the diversification of the rural economy .
Mr President , out of respect for the rapporteur I will try my luck in English and hope it will be good enough !
It is very important when we think about tourism that we recognise what a huge economic factor tourism already is within the European Union .
It is also a huge factor regarding work space , and especially regarding small and medium-sized enterprises , which do much business within the field of tourism .
We also have to recognise that tourism has not only positive values , but also causes problems - problems related to transport , to overcrowded beaches , and so on .
To solve these things , we need good statistics , good data .
This report helps us with that .
It is a very good report and everybody should support it .

( ES ) Mr President , all I wanted to do was to slightly contradict what Mr Leichtfried has said to spice up the debate a little .
I understand Mr Leichtfried as saying that tourism causes transport problems .
I believe , in fact , that what transport does is to improve and promote tourism and that , therefore , just now when we are reviewing the trans-European transport networks in Europe , we should bear this very much in mind , as there is evidence that better , smoother running transport , with greater capacity and less environmental impact , is a key element for the tourist sector .
I therefore hope that , in the future , the funding of the trans-European networks , and the data that we receive from this , will also improve the capacity of the tourism sector in Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , it would be nice if questions regarding the reasons for success as a tourist destination - in other words , why one destination is in demand whereas others are seeing a fall in visitor numbers - could be answered using informative statistics .
However , that is a wish that will probably not be fulfilled .
Too many uncertain factors , such as particular weather conditions , turn tourism predictions into a game of chance .
It is not even possible to say with certainty whether the opening of new flight connections is increasing the number of overnight stays or whether , on the contrary , new flight connections are a result of increasing demand on the part of travellers .
However , the limited availability and comparability of tourism data is also a problem from the point of view of town planning .
At the end of the day , if a potential increase in visitor numbers is forthcoming , it is important to organise this in such a way as to avoid it having a negative impact on the local population .
Flexible working hours and safety influence tourism just as much as social changes .
The decisive factors , however , will probably ultimately be the global economy and perhaps the price of oil .
Even the best European tourism statistics can do little to change these .
( RO ) Mr President , Mr Simpson 's report is an important milestone as regards the European statistical framework for tourism .
Given its high potential , tourism therefore contributes to employment and economic growth .
The efficiency in processing the data and comparability of the statistics supplied need to be improved .
With the aim of tackling the global competition in the tourism sector , Romania has devised for itself in a professional manner a strategy which makes it stand out from other tourist destinations in the world .
The strategy is based on Romania 's branding as a country , which is a concept we are using to present to prospective tourists the authentic nature of our traditions and the wonderful landscapes we have .
I should emphasise that developing tourism could also help reduce inequalities in the regions of south-eastern Europe .
The focus must therefore be on diversity .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to point out that , unfortunately , the European Parliament very rarely concerns itself with matters relating to tourism .
Upon closer examination , the work of the Committee on Transport and Tourism can be seen to consist of matters relating to transport 95 % of the time , and those relating to tourism only 5 % of the time .
Although I wholeheartedly endorse Mr Simpson 's report , I have one request : if we wish to discuss statistics , it is very important to compare things which are comparable .
The next stage of our work should be to adopt standards in individual areas , for example , in the case of hotels .
If a hotel has two , three or four stars , this must be very clearly formulated .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , can I say to Mr Simpson that the number of speakers on a very technical report shows what important work he has been doing and how important this is .
Despite being technical , we certainly needed to revise this regulation , which is very important .
It will also be possible to put up a robust , analytical framework so that we are capable of making informed policy decisions regarding all the aspects of tourism that have been mentioned here today and many more besides .
As tourism develops , we must also , of course , catch up with the statistics .
The three institutions have together made a proposal that balances the need to have information , on the one hand , but also to respect the burden on respondents , on the other .
I would like to congratulate Mr Simpson on the report and thank Parliament for this debate .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I listened with interest to what the Members said .
I particularly want to take up the point that was raised about the fact that , while it is a Transport and Tourism Committee , only about five per cent of our workload concerns the tourism sector .
This is true in some respects , but it is not because this Parliament does not want to do more work on the tourism sector : it is because the Council and the Member States will not let us do any more work on the tourism sector .
So if there is blame to be laid in that regard , it should be laid fairly and squarely at the door of the Council .
With this report , we have a framework that will give us the data required to help practitioners - those at the coalface - plan and develop our tourism product here in the European Union .
We have a very diverse tourism industry - from beautiful natural areas to sunshine beaches to our rich industrial and cultural heritage - and Members know how much industrial heritage is close to my heart .
Europe has a lot to offer visitors , be they from outside or from inside the European Union .
I think that , by getting this report together , it gives us the opportunity to plan to provide a fantastic product for people to come and see and enjoy during their leisure time .
I thank all the colleagues and the Commission for their hard work and their kind words .
Such cooperation makes the life of a rapporteur a lot easier .
I am not sure about it being exquisite : this is not a word usually associated with me , but I will accept it .
I can give you an assurance that , as Chair of the Transport and Tourism Committee , I look forward to a very successful conclusion to this matter .
( DE ) Mr President , I am not certain under which Rule I should now take the floor .
In an earlier debate , I complained about the fact that the Council is not present .
However , we should not only complain , but also speak out if something is good .
I simply wanted to point to the way that the Commissioner has acted today and the fact that her speeches have been brief , succinct and competent in terms of content - many of her colleagues would do well to follow her example of how to behave here in this House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 6 April 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Tourism is an important economic activity of the Union , with great potential for contributing to the creation of jobs and economic growth .
With about 1.8 million small and medium-sized enterprises , the estimated contribution of the tourism industry to European GDP in the EU is more than 5 % .
The system of tourism statistics is currently regulated by Directive 95 / 57 / EC on the collection of statistical data in this sector .
I believe that statistics are not only helpful for monitoring specific policies for tourism , but may be useful in the broader context of regional policy and sustainable development .
In recent decades , the sector has been facing major challenges such as increasing global competition , demographic trends , environmental constraints , the seasonal distribution of tourist movements and the increasingly frequent use of new information and communication technologies by customers .
In acknowledging the crucial role of statistics in the development of more effective tourism policies at European , national , regional and local level , I believe that the overall objective should be to strengthen the EU tourism sector through action coordinated at Union level to complement the efforts of individual Member States
European tourism has recently experienced a difficult economic situation , and this was aggravated by the eruption of the volcano in Iceland last year , because the interruption of air traffic due to the presence of volcanic ash clouds had a major effect on travel in Europe , causing significant disruption to airlines , travel agencies and tour operators as well as tourists themselves .
It is therefore very important to improve and define a new policy framework for tourism in Europe .
Furthermore , this sector is facing increasing difficulties and new challenges , such as competition , demographic trends , climate change and environmental constraints , and the seasonal distribution of tourist movements , which need to be addressed at both European Union and Member State levels .
It is important to draw attention to the fact that tourism is a major economic activity with a broadly positive impact on economic growth and employment in Europe .
Consequently , it is necessary to update and optimise the legal framework for European statistics on tourism , and we should strengthen the EU tourism sector through specific proposals and initiatives that would complement Member State programmes .
Tourism is also an increasingly important aspect in the lives of European citizens , more and more of whom are travelling , either for leisure or business .
Furthermore , this sector impinges on cultural and natural heritage and on traditions and contemporary cultures in the European Union .
Consequently , it is important to define a new framework for action to increase its competitiveness and its capacity for sustainable growth .
in writing . - It is appropriate that we will vote on a report on tourism on 6 April , which is known as Tartan Day .
Tartan Day is a day of celebration where Scotland reaches out to our diaspora in North America and encourages our North American friends to come and visit us .
It falls on the anniversary of the signing of Scotland 's independence declaration , the Declaration of Arbroath .
That centuries-old document sums up well the principles upon which all my work here is guided : ' It is in truth not for glory , nor riches , nor honours that we are fighting , but for freedom - for that alone , which no honest man gives up but with life itself ' .
There is ever-growing talk at the moment about increasing the EU 's global competitiveness ; tourism is one of the most important socio-economic activities , generating approximately 5 % of the European Union 's GDP .
To ensure the development of a sustainable , responsible , high quality tourism sector , it is absolutely necessary to update and improve the legal framework for European statistics in this area .
If we improve the quality of statistical reporting , based on reliable , comparative data , we will benefit from a solid foundation when it comes to making decisions on devising EU financial policies and instruments .
I think that we must do our utmost to remain the number one tourist destination in the world .
To achieve this , we need to make maximum use of every possible funding option .
In this regard , I call on the European executive to develop and mobilise instruments and programmes providing EU support which are specially tailored to the development of tourism in Europe , in keeping with the Europe 2020 strategy .
I believe that the current system for collecting tourism statistics is not consistent with the new requirements we face , or with the rapidly developing tourist services market or the fact that tourists ' habits are changing .
It is therefore right that the report should take into account features such as short breaks or the use of the Internet to book trips .
The updating and optimisation of the legal framework for the collection of statistical data in the field of tourism in the EU is extremely important in this respect .
Tourism statistics and social and economic indicators illustrate the influence of tourism on the current state of the European economy .
It is also vital to propose the insertion of a provision imposing an obligation to collect data regarding the accessibility of the tourist infrastructure to persons with reduced mobility .
As Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , I would like to highlight the significance of the tourism sector for Europe 's economic , social and cultural development .
European statistics in this field , together with concern for environmental protection , can play a key role in planning a European strategy in this area .
Reliable data which have been properly processed are essential in order to plan a framework of action in such a way as to maximise profit and to manage environmental threats .
I believe that one of the matters we focus upon should be the collection of data on the development and current state of agritourism and ecotourism .
A pan-European exchange of best practices is also essential for the dynamic development of this unique sector .
In order to meet our expectations , European decision makers and entrepreneurs need up-to-date and reliable data , which take technological changes and new trends in consumer behaviour into account .
It should be noted that the Treaty of Lisbon assigned new powers to the European Parliament with a view to stimulating measures in this field , as a result of which Parliament has a say in the revision of legal standards regulating this sector .
I hope that this will help ensure that work on a sustainable tourism strategy progresses constructively .
With the Treaty of Lisbon , tourism has become a Community responsibility in its own right , and we must therefore take control of this matter .
This proposal for a regulation enables us to update tools to improve the visibility and strengthen the appeal of Europe as a tourist destination of excellence .
By developing tourism , whether for business or pleasure , we are helping to revive and support growth and to create employment .
We will thus have reliable and effective databases , for use by the public authorities and professionals in the sector , which will enable us to adapt tourist services to tourists ' expectations , at a time when consumption patterns have changed and evolved and when competition is becoming ever stronger in this economically attractive , job-creating industry .
This will give us precise and valuable information for the discussions we will have and for the guidelines we will set on European tourism policy .
For these reasons , I supported this proposal . Thank you .
EU policy framework to fight violence against women ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Svensson , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on the proposal for a new EU policy framework to fight violence against women .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the shadow rapporteurs and my colleagues in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality for their strong commitment to fighting violence against women .
Ahead of the vote tomorrow , and in order to initiate the debate , I could have mentioned the number of women affected and how many women have been murdered as a result of this deadly violence .
I am not going to do that , but I will try to convey a few images of this violence ahead of the vote , so that all Members know that they have an opportunity to fight this violence right now by voting yes to the report tomorrow .
Imagine a mother sitting with her children and reading them a good-night story .
Suddenly , the door is jerked open and her husband , the children 's father , is standing in the doorway .
Both she and the children know immediately what is going to happen .
The children draw the covers over their heads , putting their fingers in their ears and closing their eyes , trying to shut out what they know will happen .
They hear their father shouting , they hear him kicking and striking their mother and they hear their mother 's groans .
That is one picture of this violence .
Here is another picture .
A woman who has lived for a number of years with threats , insults and abuse finally decides to leave the relationship to build a new life for herself and her children .
She flees and is lucky to find sheltered accommodation .
After a few days , she leaves her children at the day nursery .
The man is waiting outside and stabs the woman with a knife - she dies .
Yet another victim of the deadly violence that affects women .
This is a type of violence that is inflicted on women precisely because we are women .
The lethal violence against women illustrated by that last image occurs when the woman has finally decided to leave the relationship .
The most dangerous thing a woman can do is to ask for a divorce from a man who believes that he owns her .
She is in a very dangerous situation when the man realises that he is about to lose control and power over her .
Here are some more images .
A young girl is on her way home after a trip to the cinema .
She says goodbye to her friend and calls out ' See you tomorrow ' .
She still has a little way to go .
She hears heavy steps behind her , but only has time to register the fact that someone is following her .
She is attacked and raped .
She survives , but has to live with this for the rest of her life .
Other problems that we have to face include genital mutilation .
In its action plan implementing the Stockholm Programme , the Commission stated that during the period 2011-2012 it will issue a communication on this violence and that the communication is to be followed up by an EU action plan .
I welcome this and look forward to this action plan .
As long as women are affected by gender-based violence - just because we are women - we will not be able to call our society an equal society .
Women 's lives and their various life choices are restricted by this violence and by the awareness of how widespread it is in society .
Women are victims of gender-based violence , but I would also like to finish by saying that sometimes , we have to stop viewing these women simply as victims .
These are often strong women who , with well-functioning social support , manage to build a good life for themselves and for their children .
It is now up to us in the European Parliament to show that we support these women .
Member of the Commission . - Thank you very much , Mrs Svensson , for your very moving introduction on this extremely important subject .
Combating violence against women is a very high priority for the Commission , as is shown by the gender equality strategy .
There is still , as you show , a very big problem of violence against women in Europe , and for that reason , we are working on focused actions to address this issue .
We will develop a clear and coherent policy response to tackle this problem in Europe .
I welcome your report , Mrs Svensson , and I welcome this important initiative ; it provides the possibility to cooperate , exchange views and create synergies between what the Commission is doing and what the European Parliament is doing in order to define future action in this area .
A number of points that you raise in the report are actually covered by ongoing and planned actions of the Commission on combating violence against women .
To maximise our impact , we are focusing on concrete actions in an area where we have a clear legal basis to act in the Lisbon Treaty .
In the forthcoming victims ' rights package , we will , notably , address the protection of particularly vulnerable victims such as women , but also children .
This package will be presented next month .
Every victim of crime needs assistance in the aftermath of a crime and to cope with any proceedings that follow .
Women are , of course , particularly vulnerable if they have suffered violence in their home - rape or sexual abuse , stalking or other kinds of gender-based violence .
They need to be treated with respect and knowledge when they come into contact with people and the justice system .
These women also need specialised support and protection and should be given access to justice and compensation .
The current legal framework in the EU does not provide for a minimum level of treatment for victims throughout the EU irrespective of where they have been victimised , and that is why the Commission intends to act to strengthen the position of victims in Europe .
We are thus presenting , as a first step , a package of legislative measures on the rights , protection and support of victims of crime and the mutual recognition of protection measures .
Specific focus in this will be given to vulnerable victims such as victims of sexual and domestic violence .
The Commission will also provide for the mutual recognition of protection measures , which will benefit especially victims suffering repeated violence from a spouse , partner or member of their close family .
With this package , the Commission will make sure that in Europe , no woman crossing the borders and benefiting from a protection measure - be it of an administrative , civil or criminal nature - is left behind .
Our package will set out a general framework , which would then be completed in the course of this mandate by other instruments focusing on the specific needs of certain types of victims .
For instance , the Commission is concerning taking stronger action to combat female genital mutilation , as you also mention in your report .
In parallel with our actions in the criminal justice area , we will work for the empowerment of women , awareness-raising and the collection and analysis of statistics on violence against women .
The Commission will draw on the work by the European Institute for Gender Equality , which will collect and analyse data and statistics on this subject .
To conclude , I would like to underline that the Commission is currently providing important financial support to prevent and combat violence against women , particularly through the DAPHNE III Programme , the work of European NGOs and public authorities .
Mr President , on most occasions that I have spoken in Parliament , it has been to denounce violence against women , and I am here again to combat it .
I must say that not only do I not tire of doing this , but I think that it is essential to continue to speak out in public about this violation of human rights , as you cannot defend a cause without a sounding board .
Furthermore , this Parliament is the best loudspeaker available to me to defend all those women who suffer daily from abuse and who need us , as legislators , to compel the Member States to punish the perpetrators of this aggression in a manner that befits the seriousness of the crime , and also to provide assistance to the victims .
When , according to estimates , one in four women in Europe has suffered gender violence at least once in her life , and the same proportion of children , I believe that we cannot but demand greater commitment , as has been recognised by the Commission in its action plan .
I believe that we must keep on insisting , time and time again , in order to protect victims , as we did with the European Protection Order , for which I was rapporteur , and I hope that it will come into effect as soon as possible .
This report has benefited from a great measure of consensus and support from the outset .
This shows that when we tackle domestic violence , which affects all family members , including children , the elderly , women and men , this should not provide the opportunity for political opportunism , as it does us all great credit to be making progress towards finding a solution to this scourge of our society .
The first thing we must do is to speak up , and the second is to get down to work , for , although we have spent decades speaking about gender violence , we have not managed to reduce the number of deaths .
We must be doing something wrong , and therefore , it is time to leave demagogy aside and to move from words to actions .
We must give more genuine assistance and apply the legislation that women need if they are to live in dignity and safety .
I want all the victims to know that I shall always be here to speak up for them , until the day that , by working together , we manage to defeat this terrible enemy , which sadly ends the lives of so many innocent victims .
What I say is : we have had enough .
It cannot go on .
I ask all of you to say likewise .
Mr President , one in four European women are victims of violence .
More than one in 10 women are victims of sexual attacks , and our children also suffer violence .
Twenty six percent of children report having suffered physical violence during their childhood .
These figures show that Europe has a serious problem that requires action .
We can no longer turn a blind eye to this , and I simply cannot bear to hear any more stories of women who have had acid thrown in their faces by their husbands or boyfriends , or of women who are disfigured and mutilated .
I have heard the most heart-rending stories from many women , and every one of these stories is also a shameful blot on the EU 's history .
The EU needs to act now and stop this violence .
That is why this report on violence against women that we are debating today is so important .
We are sending a signal to the outside world that the European Parliament considers gender-related violence to be a violation of fundamental human rights .
Therefore , the Commission must respond now .
We need a directive , we want a directive that will stop violence against women .
Putting a stop to violence will require a coordinated and multi-faceted effort .
We need to secure the safety of the victims and provide them with the best possible protection , while also ensuring that there is nowhere in Europe where it is possible to avoid punishment for being violent towards women , and , most important of all , we must , of course , make a huge effort with regard to prevention .
Violence is not a private matter .
We can only end this violence by taking action from a political standpoint .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Thank you Mr President .
Let me first thank the rapporteur for the great work accomplished and all my colleagues for their determination not to give up fighting gender-based violence .
This report shows that the European Parliament considers that immediate action to combat violence against women is not only necessary but urgently needed .
The Commission must acknowledge that all arguments point to the fact that EU-wide measures and instruments have to be introduced .
We know that , throughout the Union , huge discrepancies exist in Member States ' legislation to combat violence against women .
Last year , a feasibility study by the Directorate-General for Justice found differences in access to protection orders , the availability of support services and the expertise and capacity of the responsible public servants .
We have seen signs of commitment towards the eradication of all forms of violence and an efficient policy framework at EU level , notably within the Women 's Charter which you presented last year , and the communication on the implementation of the Stockholm Programme .
Nevertheless , many Member States have failed in implementing efficient legislation to protect women from all forms of violence and discrimination , and we are now seeing that the core values of our Union do not apply to half its citizens .
Therefore , we now call on the Commission to come up with a dedicated legislative proposal .
A set of minimum requirements must be drawn up and incorporated into a legislative act which should be part of a comprehensive strategy addressing all forms of gender-based violence .
This strategy and policy initiative should also be complemented by broad awareness-raising activities .
I am thinking , in particular , about a European year on combating all forms of violence against women , for which we are currently collecting citizens ' signatures .
Finally , having regained our founding principles laid down in the Treaty , and the commitment from your side which has already been stated , we expect today a clear answer on how and when the Commission intends to propose effective measures at EU level .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I am happy that combating gender-based violence is a priority of both the European Commission and the European Parliament .
That gives us a common goal to make real progress in the coming years .
I hope this report will be considered an important contribution to the victims ' package that the Commission has promised us , and that the victims ' package will , in turn , be one of the aspects of a Europe-wide comprehensive strategy that includes victim support , but also other aspects of the struggle against violence .
For instance , we need a minimum level of assistance services .
Every woman should have access to shelters , to free legal aid and to psychological aid .
For example , we need to protect migrant women who do not have an independent residence permit and are extra vulnerable .
This report includes many important aspects and we , as Greens , hope that we can vote in favour of it .
But if recital J and paragraph 19 stay in , which call prostitution a violation of human rights without even distinguishing between voluntary and involuntary prostitution , we will have to abstain .
I hope it does not go that far and that we can have a strong and widely-supported report to offer to the Commission and to the Member States as our contribution .
Mr President , I welcome this own-initiative report of the European Parliament , and I take the view that Member States must introduce the laws which are essential for stopping violence against women .
Domestic violence is a very serious form of violence against women .
Domestic violence is not a private family matter .
The European Conservatives and Reformists are committed to supporting the family and , above all , children .
The problem of domestic violence is related to this .
Domestic violence has disastrous consequences for all family members , particularly children .
Children who repeatedly witness domestic violence often accept violence as a normal form of behaviour .
There is a strong likelihood that they themselves will commit these acts in school or later on in life .
Violence against women , in my opinion , also reflects and reinforces inequalities between men and women , and therefore often determines the position of women in society .
Women who are exposed to domestic violence commonly become economically dependent and are exposed to psychological pressure from the perpetrator .
We must pay due attention to domestic violence in order to bring it out into the open and help the victims , who are women and children .
We must therefore raise awareness of the occurrence of this form of violence .
We need to have a social debate on this issue , and we need to mount a prevention and awareness campaign , as women often do not like to speak openly about their traumatic experiences , out of fear for themselves and their children .
In connection with this , I also support the introduction of the European Protection Order , which , among other things , may help victims of domestic violence at the European level , as long as it has a sound legal basis .

Mr President , this is an important report that proposes a new global political approach against gender-based violence , with concrete measures including , in particular , criminal proceedings and preventive and protective action , drawing attention to the need to guarantee conditions for the emancipation of women , while also combating insecure work , unemployment and poverty , so that women can choose their lifestyles freely .
Unfortunately , women are currently unable to make this choice and are often forced into situations of dependency , including prostitution and submission to acts of domestic violence that would otherwise be unacceptable to them .
It is therefore time to move from words to actions in order to put an end to this violence , which is clearly one of the most serious forms of human rights violation .
This gender-specific violence , which also has a strong negative impact on children , and tends to worsen during periods of economic and social crisis , can no longer be accepted .
That is why we are calling on the Commission , as well as on the Member States , to take concrete measures as soon as possible in defence of women 's rights and against violence .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , combating all forms of violence against women is a priority for the Hungarian Presidency of the European Union .
I therefore call for long-term political , social and legal measures to do away with gender-based violence and to achieve true equality between the sexes .
I have been sponsoring , along with other colleagues in this House , the establishment of a ' European year of combating violence against women ' in order to raise awareness among European citizens .
I believe that the European Commission 's acknowledgement in the 2010-2015 Action Plan of the need to combat gender-based violence by all means is a significant step which must be translated into specific actions .
We still await the strategic plan that the European Commission announced it would be presenting this year .
This plan should introduce a package of legal measures and practices to ensure victims of violence are offered adequate protection by national criminal justice systems .
In Europe , it is estimated that between 20 and 25 % of women have suffered violence at least once in their lifetime .
Moreover , it is estimated that half a million women living in Europe have undergone female genital mutilation .
These statistics , which are unfortunately on the rise , are certainly alarming and worrying and require prompt action by European institutions .
Violence against women has negative consequences on the entire family .
Mothers can no longer instil a sense of security in their children and children become indirect victims of violence .
Violence against women is a phenomenon that is very difficult to monitor , because often the women who are its victims are ashamed and are afraid to report the violence to the authorities .
This makes the work of the institutions more difficult yet , at the same time , necessary .
So I join my colleague , Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio , in saying , ' stop violence against women , stop it immediately ! '
( PT ) Mr President , in my capacity as shadow rapporteur , I congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report , which deserves my group 's support .
It has already been said that violence against women represents a serious attack on human rights ; a serious violation of human rights .
We know that victims of violence are obliged to forego many of their fundamental rights , and that they are vulnerable to further abuse .
Not long ago , I visited a shelter in my country , Portugal , and spoke to a number of these women .
Some described a life of suffering , and it was only because their children put pressure on them that they had the courage to report their attackers .
Others described how their children , now grown up , filed charges , because the women themselves did not have the courage to do so .
It is unacceptable that they , the victims , should have to leave their homes , taking their children out of the family environment , while the aggressors remain at home .
I believe that we need to change legislation so that women are respected and so that women do not continue to be victims of violence ; victims of situations that have an adverse effect on all of us .
I would also like to say that this is an attack on democracy itself , too , as these women are being deprived of their rights as citizens .
Let us therefore combat this scourge together .
( PL ) Mr President , when discussing how to combat violence against women , we mainly think about violence within families or in personal relationships .
It goes without saying that this type of violence constitutes a serious wrongdoing , and the Member States should take firm legal measures to fight it .
I agree with the spirit of the Svensson report in this respect .
However I would like to take the opportunity of this debate to highlight a different type of violence not infrequently experienced by women .
I am talking about state-imposed violence , entailing removing children from their mothers , which is happening with increasing frequency .
Taking away a child is the worst possible violence that can be inflicted on a mother , and this sometimes happens for entirely trivial reasons .
I know of dramatic examples in Poland of children being taken away from their mothers , including one case in which a family court removed a 10 year-old boy from his mother because the mother was accused of praying too much .
There are situations in which children are removed because the parents are poor .
Instead of helping the family , the children are taken away to a foster family or taken into care .
There are also dramatic cases in which children are taken from their mothers due to disputes between the parents .
Dramatic scenes sometimes ensue when children are taken from their mothers by the police , social workers or court officials .
The value of the family is depreciating in Europe , and the state is interfering more and more in family life .
This not infrequently results in state-sanctioned violence which harms parents and which , above all , harms children .
Taking children from their mothers , and taking mothers from their children - for there are two sides to the matter - should be a final resort for when the child is being abused or suffering violence .
Children should not , under any circumstances , be taken away because of poverty .
Families and women in families should be given comprehensive support , and we should avoid breaking family ties , because this is not infrequently a medicine worse than the malady .
( PL ) Mr President , I welcome the fact that the European Parliament will adopt a report during this part-session which sets out a multi-faceted approach to violence against women .
I believe that employing such a broad definition of violence against women will help in the fight against this problem .
There can be no doubt that tangible results will only be achieved if integrated measures are taken at various levels - political , social , legal and educational .
Nevertheless , we are still waiting for a proposal for a directive which is focused exclusively on combating violence , and I hope that the European Commission will put forward a proposal of this kind in the near future .
I would like to conclude with two more comments .
It is of the utmost importance that violence against women should finally be perceived as wrongdoing , and not only from the perspective of the women themselves , or the social unit of the family , but also that we should be aware of the attendant costs which are borne by society as a whole , as is happening ever more frequently .
Secondly , during our debate on this problem , we should not concentrate solely on combating violence , but also on the various dimensions of such behaviour .
We should fight stereotypes and condemn social acceptance of violence against women , and try to change the way in which children are brought up so that future generations of young people believe in genuine equality between women and men and put it into practice .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Svensson on her report , which raises an extremely important and sensitive issue for society , namely , violence against women .
I believe that today 's words will be followed by actions , and that we will not only talk about violence against women but , above all , take action to defend women . Thank you very much .
( NL ) Mr President , in the Stockholm Programme , the Commission indicated that it would use all possible means to combat violence against women .
There is , however , no comprehensive strategy at the moment , and yet we need to act urgently .
Safety is an important commodity , especially for the most vulnerable amongst us .
This also applies to a large group of women who are still subject to forced marriages , honour killings and genital mutilation .
These harmful traditional practices affect many girls and women in Europe on a daily basis .
We need adequate resources to tackle this kind of violence .
To that end , we need investigations and we need to pay special attention to the victims of such practices .
Therefore , the Commission needs to set up a European strategy as soon as possible in order to combat violence against women , a strategy which will address traditional harmful practices , in particular .
Today , rather than tomorrow , and not just in 2012 or 2013 .
It is therefore unacceptable that an important instrument such as the European Protection Order has still not come about .
Somebody 's safety cannot and should not stop at the border .
( PL ) Mr President , following on from comments made by previous speakers and from the Svensson report itself , we should , first and foremost , emphasise once again that violence against women is still a feature of our society .
One of the main reasons why this phenomenon has persisted is the inferior material status of women and economic discrimination against them during their career , more restricted access to the labour market , lower pay and fewer social security benefits .
It is women who accept the consequences of motherhood and who bear the burden of bringing up children .
Social security in this respect is insufficient in many European countries .
During women 's working lives and , in particular , when they have retired , these factors mean that they are reliant on the goodwill of their spouse and social security systems .
This is a grossly unfair situation , and it must meet with universal opposition .
This is why it is so important to propose that women be paid in full for the time they devote to motherhood and bringing up children .
This is particularly important today , at a time of demographic crisis in Europe .
Measures to ensure equal economic opportunities for women may help to eliminate or reduce violence against them .
The economic dependence of women on men is one of the many reasons for women 's passivity , submissiveness and also , in a certain sense , their consent to the phenomenon of violence .
It is high time to put an end to this .
The European Parliament has far-reaching opportunities to improve this situation , particularly in countries where women are in a particularly difficult situation due to widespread poverty .
This is a very important message , and I am grateful to those who initiated this report for perceiving this problem and for actively taking measures to resolve it .
( HU ) Mr President , I , too , would like to thank the rapporteur for her report as I believe that it deals with a very important social problem .
In Europe , we have become used to the fact that very often , things move when they have economic importance .
I would like to emphasise , in particular , that the report points out that violence against women in Europe causes damage in the order of billions each year .
Violence is present at all levels : among the poor , the rich , the poorly educated and those with university degrees alike .
Moreover , it must also be said that every year , several hundred women are indeed victims of crime within the family .
A form of violence which has no precedent has also appeared in Europe , as has already been mentioned here .
Female genital mutilation and also honour killings are taking their toll in Europe .
Obviously , we would like a European norm to be created to overcome violence against women .
However , we know full well that this is almost impossible in the absence of a legal basis .
Nevertheless , what can be done is to create a common European strategy .
Even if we are unable to harmonise legal systems , clearly , exchanging good practices may be of significant help in this area .
The report also points out that there are some violent acts which are not recognised as violent acts by certain legal systems .
I believe that cooperation may bring some progress in the future , but what may make this cooperation effective is primarily a European strategy , which is very much needed . Thank you very much .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Svensson .
We know that violence against women and children is increasing across Europe .
For this reason , we urge the Commission to submit a proposal , as it has already promised , for a strategy on violence against women by 2011 .
This should be all-inclusive , in the sense that it should cover domestic violence and genital mutilation , but also some more insidious forms .
I am thinking of severe discrimination and bullying in the workplace against women who are pregnant or intend to marry and who are called on to resign beforehand , which is something that happens in my country but is no longer a crime as it was in the past .
I am also thinking of what can only be described as the incitement to violence perpetrated by the media and advertising .
After the directive on trafficking in human beings and the imminent directive on the victims of violence , announced by Commissioner Malmström , I think that the Treaty of Lisbon has laid the basis for achieving greater legal harmonisation in the way Member States acknowledge the importance of crimes of violence against women and children as specific forms of violence , as well as defining the essential standards of services for consulting , legal assistance and protection for women and children in cooperation with NGOs .
It will also lead to consistent and comparable statistics with impact analyses of forms of prevention and enforcement by Member States to ensure a reduction in violence .
I think , in this respect , that there is a common will by Parliament - I was one of the signatories to the written declaration - to define a year of reflection across Europe on the theme of violence , and I think that Parliament can add its very strong and very influential voice to this .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , violence against women is a serious violation of human rights , as we have all already asserted .
It is an old and global problem , affecting countries that are culturally and geographically distinct ; that are more- and less-developed .
This situation is frequently associated with dysfunctional families ; families in the most marginal social and economic strata .
Nevertheless , in truth , it is a phenomenon that exists in many families , irrespective of their level of education , economic position or social standing .
It is estimated that nearly a fifth of women in Europe have been the victim of acts of physical violence at least once during their adult lives .
The priority is therefore to provide support for women who are victims of violence , and this report contains a set of initiatives with this aim : notable among these are legal assistance for victims , stronger and more effective criminal investigation , the important measure of creating refuges for victims and establishing an emergency number , and provision for deterrent penalties commensurate with the seriousness of the crime .
The damage to the physical and mental health of women who are victims is incalculable , but society also bears high costs .
Combating this phenomenon therefore requires political and social mobilisation .
After all , this is a question of ensuring equality and development .
For this reason , the organisation of a European year of combating violence against women is to be welcomed , as it will have the effect of raising awareness of this terrible scourge among the European public .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to thank Eva-Britt Svensson for preparing an excellent report .
The real violations of women 's rights and violence against women highlighted by the rapporteur show once again that these truly are violations of a person 's fundamental rights , which know no geographical , economic , cultural or social limits .
According to the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme adopted last year , the Commission should , as a matter of urgency , draw up a strategy for combating violence against women , and I therefore call on the Commission to take concrete action as quickly as possible and to present such a strategy .
Gender-based violence covers sexual abuse , human trafficking , forced marriage and genital mutilation , and such violent crimes have an extraordinary impact on and do irreparable damage to a woman 's physical and mental health .
I would therefore like to call on the Member States to ensure better training for healthcare providers , social workers , the police and judicial authorities , and well coordinated cooperation , to enable them to respond to all cases of violence against women in a professional manner .
I would like to thank Commissioner Malmström , although she is no longer present , for the funding and support allocated to non-governmental organisations for combating violence against women , and would also like to recall that during the economic and financial crisis , instances of violence are even more widespread .
Consequently , we cannot reduce funding in this area .
( SK ) Mr President , although we have been drawing attention to violence against women and the violation of their rights for several decades , it has not proven possible to stop this reprehensible form of criminal activity .
The various forms of violence against women damage not only the women themselves , but also their families .
Family life often loses its meaning , which is to provide a sense of safety and security .
Children who encounter violence at home are , in a sense , also its victims .
We must therefore pay attention at the European level to the possible exposure of women and children to domestic violence .
In the case of older women or women who are physically or mentally weaker , the problem of self-defence and the protection of their own interests is even more complicated .
Women are also exposed to gender-based abuse through various forms of violation of personal freedoms , since human trafficking for sexual purposes in particular , for example , is one of the most serious problems affecting all of society .
It is vital , therefore , to press for more effective criminal prosecutions , and to ensure that the subsequent punishments reflect the seriousness of the crime .
It is essential to take steps to prevent these serious violations of human rights and freedoms , and to guarantee European women a dignified life .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to focus on two points : violence against women and the role of men as workers in hotels .
The figure of 25 % of women having suffered violence is totally unacceptable .
I think it suggests the need for an educational programme amongst young males , in particular , in anger management and respect for females , so that the idea of raising your hand to a female would be absolutely taboo and not the norm , as is often presented in films , in some cultures and , sadly it seems , in some homes .
The second point I want to mention is the role of men as workers in hotels .
The reason I say that is that there was a friend of mine , a beautiful young girl , Michaela Harte , killed in Mauritius on her honeymoon when she walked in on workers in the hotel who were robbing her room .
If it were the other way around , and a male walked in on females , the chances of their being killed would be far less .
There is a need to look at that risk and probability .
The whole question of males and their access to rooms , especially female 's rooms , has to be looked at .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the report by our Chair , Mrs Svensson , which highlights the need to view all forms of violence as crimes amenable to criminal law .
As a general rule , I particularly appreciate the fact that the European Union is composed of States with diverse and varied national cultures and traditions , but when it comes to violence , I am appalled to see the differences in treatment that exist .
Let us take one example : rape .
Although it is amenable to criminal law everywhere , it is not defined in the same way in all the Member States .
As far as Latvia is concerned , marital rape simply does not exist .
In Malta , the rape of a man by another man does not exist .
In Slovakia , to be raped with an object is not considered rape .
Hence , there are women , men and children with shattered lives lying behind all of these definitions .
To trivialise the definition of crimes is to trivialise the victims themselves , and their suffering .
I therefore call on the Commission urgently to develop an effective road map against all forms of violence .
( DE ) Mr President , it has been very clear in the debate that violence against women is not a trivial offence ; it is quite clearly a violation of human rights .
It has already been said that even children are sometimes indirect victims of violence against women .
They can even be direct victims of violence against women , because the main cause of still births and miscarriages is certainly the effects of violence against women .
It is not only a question of domestic violence ; there is also forced prostitution , honour killings - where there can actually be no question of honour - human trafficking , genital mutilation and much more besides .
The trigger for this report , for which I am very grateful to Mrs Svensson , was , in this case , not only the fact that it was noticed in the context of the report on equality that equality is also put at serious risk as a result of violence against women , but also the fact that , through the Treaty of Lisbon , we now have the opportunity to enact a directive and to establish a common legal framework in Europe .
That is urgently needed for us to make significant progress here , because this is a cross-border European problem that we must combat .
( DE ) Mr President , violence against women takes many forms , and it remains an international problem with which the international community has still not managed to get to grips .
The use of violence compromises the health , dignity , security and autonomy of its victims .
As a consequence , the women concerned are restricted in their opportunities to participate in social life and work .
Moreover , we just need to consider the costs to see that violence against women is also a social problem , for example , in areas of health and justice .
Women are at most risk within their own four walls .
The commonest cause of injuries in women is domestic violence .
Violence against women , whatever form it takes , is not a trivial offence .
The EU must also sign the UN Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women .
( SK ) Mr President , the exposure of an individual to any form of violence has far-reaching destructive consequences for the family and society , and particularly merits condemnation when committed against women and children .
However , I consider it alarming that domestic violence is identified as the main cause of miscarriages or stillbirths , and I am therefore pressing for all the available resources of criminal law to be applied to the effective suppression and prevention of physical violence .
I would like to draw attention to the urgent need to protect women , and especially poor women , from so-called surrogate motherhood .
Under the pretext of solidarity , surrogate motherhood exposes women to physical exploitation and even abuse , in direct conflict with the ban on trafficking in human bodies and body parts .
A woman 's dignity , intimacy and body are degraded in this way , and they become the subject of corrupt rental agreements on the international human trafficking market .
( RO ) Mr President , although violent acts against women are the most prevalent in the world , they are still the least likely to be punished , whether committed in conflict zones or democratic countries .
There are regions around the world where violence against women assumes every form : rape , sex trafficking , forced marriages , death , abductions for religious or criminal reasons , forced prostitution , not to mention violence within the family or from former partners .
In addition , the age of girls being subjected to violence is steadily falling .
I think that Member States should make additional efforts at EU level to provide comprehensive national statistics which will cover , to a greater extent , gender-based violence , as well as to improve the collection of data on this issue , with the aim of finding the most suitable solutions for punishing the culprits .
I also regard as useful the proposal for establishing an observatory on violence against women as part of the European Institute for Gender Equality , in close collaboration with the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights .
( RO ) Mr President , as shadow rapporteur , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for this report and I will only raise two issues .
I believe that it is time for us to go beyond the superficial approach to this issue because the lack of statistics , the lack of any consistent regulations on criminalising this issue in Member States , and the lack of concern for this matter , apart from general statements being made , confirm that this is indeed a subject which is handled superficially in the European Union .
This is why a directive is necessary .
The economic costs have not been analysed in any great depth , unfortunately neither in this report nor in other documents on the subject .
This is because this issue , which is currently exacerbated by the economic crisis , incurs quite considerable financial costs for national budgets , amounting to hundreds of millions of euro .
I believe that it is time for us to quantify these costs and attempt to respond to this situation using not only financial means , but also suitable legal instruments for tackling this problem .
( HU ) Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work .
I am proud of the fact that in Hungary , it was I who wrote the first two books on the phenomenon of violence against women about 15 years ago .
I am less proud that next to nothing has happened in this area since then .
It is a fact that there is no , and neither can there be any , single EU regulation , but a lot of European taxpayers ' money goes on prevention and care programmes .
I would like to address a question mainly to the Commissioner about how the appropriate spending of these funds is checked .
I have a suggestion : instead of asking the governments , ask the abused women concerned : for example , women who have been abused and taken refuge in shelters for women should be asked about the help they have received and the attitude of authorities to their cases in general , or girls and women suffering on the streets of Budapest or , say , Amsterdam , and who are hoping to escape from the hell of prostitution , should be asked about the type of help they have received from their state or government .
( RO ) Mr President , as is also clearly indicated in the report , the efforts to reduce violence against women must be supported on two fronts : at Member State level and through measures and programmes managed directly by the European Commission .
I think that it is of paramount importance to continue the Daphne Programme and to encourage the participation of Member States which are faced with a rise in this form of violence in the current difficult economic circumstances .
Nowadays , many people are facing psychological problems which sometimes trigger violence .
It is vital to provide training to staff working for the European Union 's police authorities as a basis for ensuring that investigations are carried out properly , with a good understanding of the issue and of the impact violence has on women .
This aspect is also supported as part of the Stockholm Programme .
Finally , the political effort must be backed up with financial support , and the Daphne Programme can provide a suitable framework for this .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , when it comes to equality issues , the European Union was , and is , at the forefront ; it is also at the forefront in the fight against violence against women .
In addition to the horrific nature of the matter , violence against women is also expensive .
The report states that the annual cost of this violence is EUR 33 billion .
That should take the wind out of the sails of those who say that the catalogue of measures that has now been established will clearly have a cost , too .
This catalogue of measures is necessary , however .
Training of police officers , judges , medical personnel - all of this is contained in the report , and I would also like to duly thank the rapporteur for that .
However , I do see one small fly in the ointment and I would like to highlight this .
Particular attention should also be paid to violence in the workplace .
It is important to provide more specific wording on this issue , too .
( CS ) Mr President , when we see examples in the media of maimed women and children , we always ask ourselves how those around them could have remained ignorant of it for so long .
It is therefore necessary that the proposed strategy of the Commission for combating domestic violence includes specific diagnostic mechanisms that are mandatory for health facilities and also for social workers , making it possible to provide genuinely rapid assistance to the victims .
Violence motivated through religious rituals must be severely punished , and this , together with a culture of awareness that includes training for judges , will lead to zero tolerance in society of violence against women , including the mutilation of female organs .
The strategy should also consider a free legal service and social assistance for victims of violence .
I would like to thank Mrs Svensson for a highly detailed report , but I will vote against part of recital J , because it promotes the right of women to kill their foetuses , and I do not agree with that .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for this very important debate on a subject that is obviously dear to many of us .
Again , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her important report , and also the shadow rapporteurs .
As I outlined in my introduction , we are planning several measures on this .
The victims ' rights package is , of course , extremely important and will come next month .
We also have the general equality policy for prevention programmes , awareness-raising and so on .
We are also following very closely the finalisation , right now , of the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence , in order - when it is ready - to propose to the Council that the European Union adhere to it , which would then make it legally binding in the areas where the European Union has competence .
I would also like to mention two other proposals that you have adopted : the directive on combating trafficking , for instance , contains a lot of preventive measures but also support for victims , for women and children who are victims of trafficking for sexual and other purposes .
Also in the different parts of the asylum package , special notice is taken of vulnerable people in asylum procedures , such as women who have been victims of sexual violence , etc .
The problem is , as you have all outlined , enormous , and it is a shame that women and girls in our European Union are afraid on a daily basis .
They are afraid of violence , rape and sexual abuse , and often from the people they love the most , whom they should be able to trust the most - husbands , partners , etc .
We need to act , and we need to act where we can see concrete results .
This is surely one of the most horrendous violations of human rights .
I would like to congratulate those very few but still brave men who have contributed to this debate , because violence against women is not a women 's issue : it is a human rights issue .
We can only achieve results here if we work together , men and women , to combat this horrendous phenomenon .
We need to work together : we need to achieve a Europe where women and girls do not have to fear violence just because they belong to the so-called ' wrong sex ' .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking my fellow Members for their very wise words during the debate and , above all , for the resolve that I can see that all my fellow Members have to fight this violence .
To the Commission , I would like to say that we look forward to the victims of crime package to provide further support for victims , but we also need a directive to combat this violence .
It is not necessary to agree with every word in this report , but it is important to vote in favour of it in order to send a strong signal to the Commission that we need a directive .
It is important to show all of these women who live in abusive relationships that they should not feel ashamed or guilty .
By voting ' yes ' to the report , we will show that the guilt is a crime that is committed against them .
They must not feel guilt or shame .
Finally , I would like to say that there are many of us women who have survived as a result of the efforts of society and through the work of shelters for women and women 's organisations .
It is now high time that these people and organisations did not have to shoulder the responsibility alone for helping women out of the situation that many of them are living in .
What is important is that we break the silence and that we show that there is support for these vulnerable people .
I would also like to emphasise how important it is to show that this is a problem that cuts across all social groups .
There are no particular groups that are affected ; it is found throughout society .
I appeal to my fellow Members to send out the signal that it is no longer acceptable for women to have to live under these conditions .
Women can establish a good life for themselves and their children , but to do so they also need support from us as elected representatives .
My thanks once again to all Members for your strong resolve .
Together , we will succeed in this fight .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 5 April 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I wish to express support for this report and its recommendations .
Research shows that the situation in my own state of Ireland mirrors the problem experienced across Europe .
In 2005 , the National Crime Council found that one in seven women in Ireland have experienced severe abusive behaviour of a physical , sexual or emotional nature from their partner .
In 2009 , I became the first ambassador of Rape Crisis North East based in the town of Dundalk .
This support and counselling service is one of many across the east of Ireland offering vital support for victims of sexual and domestic violence , yet it has to cope with a very difficult funding environment .
What is important is that the EU directs funding for research across Member States to ensure we have a full and accurate picture of the scope of the problem .
But there also needs to be support for NGOs and Member State governments to raise awareness about the impact and effects of sexual violence , be it domestic , rape or human trafficking for sexual exploitation .
Almost a quarter of women in Europe have suffered acts of physical violence at least once and more than a tenth have been subjected to sexual violence .
As a result of its social consequences , the economic crisis has helped exacerbate the situation in circumstances where poverty and the lack of education are factors conducive to gender-based violence .
This is why I think that coordinated measures are required against the causes of this problem , along with legislative harmonisation and closer judicial cooperation between Member States , with the aim of conducting investigations more efficiently .
In order to put an end to violence against women , EU Member States and institutions have a duty to initiate as a matter of urgency some of the following actions : information and awareness-raising campaigns , setting up refuges for victims , setting up a single telephone number across the EU for immediate assistance and providing support for highly vulnerable groups of women such as immigrants and asylum seekers .
in writing . - In 2008 , when I was a member of the Latvian Parliament , I tabled a draft amendment to the Criminal Law of the Latvian Republic , toughening responsibility for domestic violence to women and children .
Unfortunately , the amendment did not go through .
At the meeting of the specialised commission , when the amendment was being discussed , members of the Latvian Parliament behaved cheerfully .
As a result , cases of ' light ' injuries of children and women in families remain unpunished .
Cases are usually not investigated and sometimes the police refuse to accept applications from victims .
The protection of women from domestic violence is not regulated by efficient instruments in the Latvian Republic .
The Latvian authorities , the government , keep their eyes closed on obvious violations and are not going to put legislation in order .
In the light of this report , I appeal to all members of the European Parliament to pay attention to lawless behaviour towards women that is occurring in Latvia .
It can happen anywhere : on the street , on the underground , in someone 's own home - women and children cannot feel 100 % safe from attack anywhere .
The deadening pseudo-morality found in society should give us pause for thought .
The early stages of actual violence , such as intrusiveness , obscene remarks and harassment meted out by many migrants to western women on a daily basis are increasingly regarded as normal .
The disregard for women has reached peak levels when a German judge refers to the husband 's right of procreation as a decisive factor in her judgment in a Muslim divorce case .
By permitting migration , the EU has imported problems from every country of the world , including honour killings , forced marriages and domestic violence in patriarchal family structures .
Culture , religion and tradition must not be used to justify acts of violence .
That is the only way to break the spiral of violence .
The statistics provide no information on the extent to which the recorded increase in reported cases of domestic violence is related to the increased willingness of the victims to stand up for themselves or what proportion of these are immigrants .
It is a fact in any case that a large number of migrants are registered in women 's refuges .
It is also a fact that we need to put a stop to the pseudo-do-gooder mentality that treats crimes committed with a religious or cultural motive with leniency .
My commitment to the protection of the weak and women afflicted by violence compels me to vote in favour of legislation to guarantee the protection of victims of violence .
Women , like children , are particularly fragile members of our society in some contexts .
I therefore think it is important to ensure greater protection to women who claim they have suffered violence .
I am thus in favour of free legal assistance to women who are victims of violence .
I know there is a risk of inequality when men unjustly accused of violence have to pay court costs while their accusers receive legal aid : I have thought about this carefully .
However , I believe that the number of cases of violence , including family violence , should lead us to take the side of those who suffer the most serious damage from lack of support : female victims of violence are statistically a much more dominant share than the few criminals who take advantage of the system to get the better of innocent men .
It is difficult for battered women to file a complaint ; free legal assistance would encourage the victims and help reduce the number of incidents that have gone unpunished .
When we talk about violence against women , we often lack data , statistics and trends .
What we need , above anything else , is to be able to measure this phenomenon at European level , in order to understand the scale of the problem .
This will help us to better target needs and hence prevent cases of violence , help the victims and heal the wounds .
We must remember the victims at all times .
Whether we are talking about sexual abuse , the trafficking of women for prostitution , domestic violence or even violence with a cultural dimension - I am thinking here of genital mutilation and forced marriages - they are still serious crimes .
We need to come up with a general European framework to protect women from this type of violence .
We must stop being so nervous of the idea of making Europe the protector of women .
We need a European legal framework within which to implement concrete measures such as the emergency telephone number , and training programmes for the police , the judiciary and teachers .
The EU must offer solutions within Europe , but as a global player , it must also extend the scope of its action to outside its borders .
Unfortunately , it has not been possible to stop violence against women in Europe and in the world as a whole , even though the European Union and the UN have stated that combating violence against women is a priority for them .
It is true that there has been some progress and that people 's awareness regarding this subject has increased somewhat , but the European Union 's new political priorities are indispensable for combating violence against women more effectively and for achieving our common objective that women and children should not constantly live in fear of falling victim to violence .
The Treaty of Lisbon also provides the legal competence for this .
I consider it extremely important for the European Union to pay more attention in its legislation to violence which takes place between people in close relationships , because this is by no means a private matter .
Unfortunately , victims all too often fear for their family 's reputation and , justifiably , their safety and economic dependence , and so they do not go to the law enforcement authorities .
We should therefore also direct particular attention to developing a victim support system and overturning taboos that exist in society - in other words , we should improve people 's awareness .
The help provided to victims must be genuine and guaranteed .
One definite problem is a lack of shelters in Europe designed for women and children who have suffered violence , so the objective to build one shelter per 10 000 inhabitants for victims of crime is an entirely reasonable and necessary one .
In order to ensure that protection for women fleeing violence and persecution is improved , even if they change their place of residence in Europe , it is important to implement the directive on protection orders .
Violence against women takes various forms , from psychological repression and abuse to rape , sexual violence and the completely illegal and unacceptable ongoing trafficking and abuse of women by inhumane prostitution gangs .
These gangs often dupe mainly young women and then force them to work as prostitutes .
Many are driven to suicide in order to put an end to their nightmare .
We need to examine more closely the countries which are the starting point for trafficking gangs , where traffickers buy silence and consent from government officials , turning these countries into havens for human rights abuses .
These gangs could be combated through transnational cooperation between the EU , which is the destination , and these countries , which are the starting point for these illegal gangs .
I call on the Commission to take action in this direction .
Obviously , the organisations involved in women 's rights seriously have their work cut out in this sector .
This report represents the third contribution in recent months towards combating violence against women , following the European Protection Order and the directive on combating human trafficking .
Violence against women is unquestionably a serious problem in all sections of society .
The data in the report speaks of one woman in four experiencing physical violence in adulthood , with more than 10 % of women becoming victims of sexual violence .
These are alarming figures , behind which lie individual life stories .
At the same time , only one in ten victims of violence seeks professional help .
The reason for this is that most of them do not know how to deal with the situation .
Violence against women has enormously destructive effects , not only on the women themselves , but also negative consequences for the people around them , and children in particular .
I support the proposals leading to greater awareness and training for people who may come into contact with this form of violence in the course of their work .
At the same time , it is also necessary to ensure better care and assistance for the victims .
I also welcome the report because of the need to send a clear and strong message to society that violence will not be tolerated .
Human rights and gender equality are among the EU 's priorities .
Since violence against women is a brutal violation of human rights and one of the main obstacles standing in the way of equality between women and men , the fight against this scourge should become our main objective .
The approach taken to violence against women differs according to national legislation .
Some Member States , for example , Spain , have well thought-out regulations in this area .
Some do not have any at all .
There are also significant differences in terms of the conviction rate for violence against women in the individual Member States .
In view of the Member States ' differing legal regulations and frequently limited influence in terms of enforcing the provisions of international law with regard to the fight against violence , the need for clear and binding regulations at EU level in respect of the problem is becoming ever more apparent .
The various EU actions need to be summarised and presented in a single comprehensive strategy , the aim of which will be to combat violence against women throughout the EU .
This strategy should be consistent with other international initiatives and be based on available EU programmes and best practices in the Member States .
Work on a joint directive against violence should be completed within this parliamentary term .
This is necessary in order to ensure that it can never be said again that even cows enjoy better protection in the European Union than women .
We are all aware of violence against women , and we debate it , but when it comes to eliminating or doing away with it , the results are poor .
Violence affects women at various times of life , from childhood to adulthood .
It happens in school , at work , in peer groups , in public and also in private family life , or life with a partner .
It takes many forms - from physical and sexual to mental and social , and even economic violence .
It is experienced by women from different educational backgrounds , socio-economic positions , ethnic groups and religions , and by women from both urban and rural environments .
It should be emphasised , however , that violence against women is a problem that we must all address .
Eliminating it requires not only active institutions , but also active individuals - men and women - who do not turn a blind eye to this unpleasant phenomenon in our society , and who are willing to get involved personally in enforcing the principle of zero tolerance .
The individual Member States must play a greater role in this , drawing up action plans for combating violence against women , boosting media awareness and adopting specific criminal laws and measures .
in writing . - ( PL ) Unfortunately , despite all our efforts , violence against women , and violence in other areas of life , is still a major problem in Europe .
Violent crimes are committed in all Member States , and they affect people from all social strata .
This means that the fight against this problem and assistance for its victims must be multi-faceted .
In order to prevent this kind of violence , it is important to support families and ensure their harmonious development .
With regard to crimes involving violence against women , I believe it would be worth considering the introduction of a single European emergency telephone number , which could be called to obtain support or report a crime of this kind .
The EU should aim to ensure that tougher punishments are meted out for violence against women , in particular , in the case of crimes involving sexual violence .
Such crimes often remain etched in the minds of the women involved for many years , causing them to suffer and making it impossible for them to function normally .
It is also imperative that better protection for the rights of victims in criminal proceedings be introduced at the same time .
A key issue referred to in the report is the problem of prostitution and trafficking in women .
In order to combat this practice effectively , what is needed is a pan-European agreement involving not only the EU Member States , but also countries outside the EU .
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
EU response to the migration flows in North Africa and the Southern Mediterranean , in particular , in Lampedusa - Migration flows arising from instability : scope and role of EU foreign policy ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Commission statement on the EU response to the migration flows in North Africa and the Southern Mediterranean , in particular , in Lampedusa , and
the report by Fiorello Provera , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on migration flows arising from instability : scope and role of EU foreign policy : .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , some honourable Members may be getting tired of me but I think this joint debate on migration flows is very timely .
This will be both a general discussion of the role and scope of EU foreign policy , as outlined in Mr Provera 's report , and an opportunity for me to inform you about how the EU is responding to the crisis in the Southern Mediterranean .
Let me start by thanking Mr Provera for his excellent report which I read with great interest .
It is a very timely subject for discussion , as is the role that EU foreign policy should play with regard to the very complex and multi-faceted nature of migration .
Let me start by outlining some elements of the EU response to the crisis in the Southern Mediterranean and then move to the more general role of EU foreign policy .
As you all know , we are faced with a situation in the Southern Mediterranean that has become very critical in recent weeks with regard to the migration flows involved .
More than 400 000 people have been displaced since the outbreak of the changes in Northern Africa and in Libya .
Most of these people are third-country nationals who have come to Tunisia or to Egypt .
A majority of them have been repatriated to their countries but a few thousand are still there and I will come back to them in a little while .
Around 20 000 migrants , mainly from Tunisia and , to a lesser extent , from other African countries , have managed to enter the European Union irregularly , reaching the shores of Lampedusa and Malta .
Both of these islands are therefore under strong migratory pressure .
The European Union has already responded to these serious , but different , challenges in an effective and rapid manner , taking three concrete actions .
Firstly , the Commission has mobilised EUR 30 million to manage the humanitarian emergency generated by the sudden inflows of migrants and refugees in the countries neighbouring Libya .
With the assistance of funds provided on a bilateral basis by the Member States and other international donors , it has been possible to offer temporary shelter to migrants and refugees , to meet their basic needs , and to return them to their respective countries of origin .
Secondly , we have reacted to the irregular and mixed flows across the Mediterranean Sea .
Frontex , with the assistance of several Member States , launched Joint Operation Hermes , aimed at assisting Italy in controlling vessels that carry migrants and refugees .
What is more , Europol has deployed a team of experts to Italy with the aim of helping the law enforcement authorities to identify possible criminal networks involved in trafficking .
Thirdly , the Commission has tried to ensure that , in the very short term , the Member States exposed to the growing flows of refugees and irregular migrants could cope with the financial consequences of this displacement .
We have rapidly identified EUR 25 million which could be mobilised under the External Borders Fund and European Refugee Fund if and when specific requests are made by the Member States .
Only one request has been made so far , but we are ready to consider further urgent requests .
I believe that this first response has been comprehensive ; it is clear , however , that we need to do more .
We need to set up a more structured , sustainable plan able to cover the various dimensions of this phenomenon , based on solidarity between Member States and in full respect of the European Union 's international obligations .
I have visited Egypt with the Hungarian Minister of Foreign Affairs , Mr Martonyi , and Tunisia with my colleague , Commissioner Füle , who is responsible for neighbourhood policy .
This was partly in response to the conclusions of the European Council , which asked the Commission to liaise very actively with these two countries .
In the run-up to our June JHA Council , I intend to propose a package of proposals to the Commission in May that will address the EU approach in the area of migration , mobility and security with the Southern Mediterranean countries .
Several measures need to be taken in the short term .
On the continuous and possible increase of flows of refugees coming from the Libyan territory , the following actions will be considered : an adequate level of funds needs to remain available to support the provision of humanitarian assistance .
In this context , funds will have to be earmarked to meet the basic needs of the refugees , to facilitate their return to their countries of origin , when appropriate , and to support their successful social and professional reintegration back home .
Moreover , an increasing number of refugees fleeing Libya are third-country nationals who were residing in Libya as refugees or asylum seekers .
These people , a few thousand , cannot be returned to their countries of origin .
Resettlement needs to be considered .
The Commission is ready to facilitate this process and calls upon the Member States to take responsibility and to engage in such resettlement efforts .
There will be financial support for this , from the European Refugee Fund in particular .
In this context , it is imperative that the Council and the European Parliament make an effort to rapidly achieve an agreement on the European Resettlement Programme .
All three institutions are in agreement on the political aim of this ; we must find a way out of this institutional deadlock .
It is also urgent to develop a regional protection programme encompassing Egypt , Libya and Tunisia .
Under the thematic programme for cooperation with third countries , the Commission has plans to allocate EUR 3.6 million to support such a programme .
The deployment of EASO teams to the Member States affected by these flows will also be considered , with a view to helping the authorities screen the asylum seekers .
Finally , in the event of a massive influx of displaced persons and if the conditions foreseen in the directive are met , the Commission would be ready to consider making use of the mechanisms foreseen under the 2001 Temporary Protection Directive so as to provide immediate protection for these people on the territory of other EU Member States .
The intention would be to give breathing space to the national asylum systems and to promote voluntary solidarity measures between Member States .
With regard to the continuous inflows of irregular migrants coming from the Southern Mediterranean , which could increase , the Commission believes that Joint Operation Hermes , coordinated by Frontex , should receive additional resources from Member States .
Frontex will stand ready to provide logistical and financial support to assist the Member States concerned , to organise return flights , and to deploy Rapid Border Intervention Teams if they wish .
It is essential that the competences of Frontex are strengthened rapidly and more effective tools are put at its disposal .
The amended regulation establishing the Frontex agency should be adopted by the Council and the European Parliament as soon as possible .
Specific projects are also being prepared by EU services and will shortly be launched , in partnership with the countries concerned , starting with Tunisia and Egypt .
The aim is to enhance their capacity to control their borders - in cooperation with the relevant authorities - to fight against criminal organisations promoting the smuggling of migrants and people trafficking , to facilitate readmission and social and professional reintegration , and to identify and register migrants entering the territory and treat them in accordance with international standards by offering asylum to those in need of international protection .
These measures represent the immediate answer to the situation .
However , we also need to implement long-term , sustainable programmes .
With my partners in Tunisia and Egypt , we discussed bringing in working arrangements on a variety of issues covered under the Mobility Partnership .
This could take the form of a new tailor-made EU approach , considering each country on its own merits , and taking into account the EU 's overall foreign policy with a given country .
Partnerships could cover everything from visa facilitation , under certain conditions and for specific categories , labour migration , preventing irregular migrant flows , setting up asylum systems , readmission , law enforcement , return , etc .
We agreed with the two countries ' interior ministers to set up a working arrangement and to start identifying what we can do together .
I am convinced that this coherent EU foreign policy approach will help to set up a long-term system to address migration flows and this brings me to Mr Provera 's report .
Protracted , long-standing conflicts and humanitarian crises in regions , such as the one we are talking about , are important factors fuelling South-South migration and migration towards the EU .
Our main global challenges , such as migration , fully underline the importance of developing a comprehensive approach linking security , stability , crisis management and development .
As the report suggests , such an approach must be based on a strong human rights approach , notably with regard to migrants ' rights .
Special attention must be given to the situation of vulnerable groups .
We share the view that it is crucial to put in place more long-term , sustainable cooperation programmes to address migration , mobility and security , in combination with the promotion of democracy , the rule of law and good governance with third countries .
This approach should be tailor-made , as I have described , looking at each country on its individual merits .
This comprehensive approach fits in with other policy processes such as the nexus between security and development , which is mentioned in both the European Security strategy and the European Consensus on Development .
We have to mobilise the full range of policies and instruments at our disposal with regard to poverty eradication , early-warning systems and preventive diplomacy , humanitarian aid , crisis response actions , including sanctions , crisis management missions and post-conflict reconstruction and peace building .
This report is therefore very timely , as the EU currently has to deal with a crisis .
But it also represents a possibility to start something new , the possibility to support the fantastic new democratic forces that are emerging : there is a great willingness to reform countries , especially in Tunisia but also in Egypt .
The Global Approach to Migration , as an external dimension of the EU 's migration policy , is to be based on a genuine partnership with third countries .
This is mentioned in the Stockholm Programme and the Stockholm Action Plan and we will provide further initiatives in the Global Approach to Migration presented this autumn .
The aim is to define the objectives of the approach more clearly and in more strategic terms .
It will propose priorities , principles and concrete measures but will also look more closely at the link between migration and development and between migration and climate change , for instance .
I know that you are all willing to discuss different elements of this .
It is a complex and very difficult issue which demands a great deal of time and effort to assess properly .
It is also very event-driven and it changes almost by the hour .
So far , the Commission has tried to be constructive and to address this in a very comprehensive and inclusive way .
I look forward to taking your questions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this tragically topical own-initiative report was first drawn up more than a year ago to assess the phenomenon of immigration and its structural causes in a pragmatic and balanced manner , regardless of political or ideological prejudices .
We wanted to investigate the role of foreign policy and its ability to have an effect on the deep-seated causes of immigration , beyond humanitarian or emergency causes .
Wars , ethnic tensions , persistent climate change , human rights violations , a lack of civil and economic liberties , endemic corruption , a lack of institutional representatives of citizens ' needs , such as trade unions , associations , political parties : the set of all these elements represents the field of deployment of European foreign policy and resolving these problems will remove many of the reasons that cause millions of people to emigrate .
No development cooperation policy can be fully effective without tackling the causes of instability in migrants ' countries of origin .
This involves regional cooperation with both with the country of origin and the country of transit , including through bilateral agreements .
The Millennium Development Goals are already very ambitious , but certainly will not be achieved without political stability and without implementing effective mechanisms for preventing conflicts and maintaining peace .
The global reach of this policy and its holistic approach require clear ideas and substantial financial resources that are difficult to come by in this moment of crisis .
It is therefore advisable to coordinate the actions of the Union with those of other major powers such as the United States to avoid duplication of funding in the same areas or dispersal of financial resources , as has often happened in the past .
A global phenomenon must be dealt with by a global policy .
We must lead the migrants ' countries of origin to democracy and good governance by making available our values and our experience .
Under the European Neighbourhood Policy , we should offer an economic agenda that can increase levels of employment and trade agreements that can generate real economic development consistent with market laws .
Commissioner Füle and the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , drew attention , with the slogan ' more for more ' , to the concept of conditionality of aid which aims to reward countries that are most actively setting out on the road to democratic reforms and respect for human rights .
This is consistent with our European values , effective for development and - if you will allow me - morally fair to taxpayers .
I would like to conclude by stating that a European policy for the management of large migration flows should go hand in hand with acceptance of the concept of ' burden sharing ' , in line with the duty of State solidarity under Article 80 of the Treaty , because no country can face up to an emergency of enormous proportions by itself .
Finally , I thank Commissioner Malmström for her support for some or many points in this report , and I hope that Europe can actually work with Italy to address a phenomenon that has an international dimension and that affects every one of us .
Madam President , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur for the productive cooperation I received while drafting this report .
In relation to the particular subject we are debating today , the exodus of people from the Mediterranean region is not only a problem for the countries in this area , as the entire European Union has a responsibility to resolve this urgent humanitarian situation .
This is a specific situation which we were not anticipating when this report was drafted .
The view of the Committee on Development is that the priority must be to tackle the humanitarian situation and provide aid to the refugees .
However , we cannot accept the extremely populist solutions suggested whereby the citizens of Lampedusa were promised that immigrants would be got rid of within 60 hours .
Evacuations to the mainland region followed , but after the destination regions refused to accommodate the camps , repatriation got under way .
I find it unacceptable that France and Germany have refused to take some of the refugees and that the Italian Minister for the Interior is threatening to grant temporary residence permits , which would allow thousands of immigrants to move around the European Union .
These are not constructive and inclusive responses , in keeping with Member States ' commitments .
Neither selfishness nor forced solidarity feature among the values on which the European Union has been built .
This is why I believe that we must insist as firmly as possible on dialogue and cooperation in order to identify common solutions to this serious problem .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - Madam President , migration is not only happening from everywhere else to Europe .
In fact , most migration happens outside Europe , within countries or regions on other continents .
Currently , Pakistan and Syria are the countries that are hosting the most migrants - we should not forget that .
There are various reasons for migration : war , conflict , poverty , discrimination , violence and persecution , family , climate change and many more .
We should address these issues and we should fight the push factors rather than the migrants themselves .
In order to fight those push factors , we need a good development policy and , there , conditionality will not help much .
We need to revise policies that go against our development goals , as sometimes happens in trade policy and agriculture .
But we also need a good policy on democracy and promoting human rights .
In the past , the Community and the Member States have cooperated with third countries on stopping migrants and not on human rights .
The Commission had been negotiating an agreement with Libya to give support and aid to Libya so that Gaddafi would stop migrants .
Now is the time to change that .
I am very happy to hear that you agree with me that we urgently need to change to a more human rights-based approach .
We should not forget that stability is not the only thing people want and need .
Stability without democracy is not a sustainable way forward .
Stability plus poverty does not offer any prospects .
Stability is important , but it is not the only thing that matters .
We must not close the doors to the few migrants worldwide that take the road to Europe .
We need a common asylum system that gives efficient protection to those in need and we also need to protect conflict migrants .
We need fair access to legal migration that gives migrants proper social rights .
We need to find a way to protect climate migrants , as they have to flee because we cause climate change .
We also need to revise our visa and border policies from a human rights perspective .
We should not be scared of migrants .
They are people like us , often in dire need , looking for a better life and peace and prosperity .
Is that not what the EU was founded for ?
So I ask the Commission : will the common asylum system be put in place ?
Whatever happened to the Blue Card Regulation ?
And how will you ensure that Article 208 of the Lisbon Treaty , namely , the principle of not harming our development goals , will be fully implemented ?
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you , above all , for the commitment you have made in putting together this package of measures , which I believe sends out a political signal making it clear that this is not Malta 's problem , this is not Italy 's problem , this is not Spain 's problem : this is a European problem .
I think that this is the thrust of the references you made to the solidarity between Member States and the European Neighbourhood Policy , the desire to promote adequate funding for the humanitarian emergency , assistance , repatriation and training , to intervene in the topic of asylum seekers , to draw up a programme that breaks the impasse , the sacrosanct reference to Directive 2001 / 55 / EC , and the desire to strengthen the Hermes operation .
All this is truly a sign of a European desire to challenge the apathy and the inconsistency of many months .
At the same time , allow me to explain what lies at the heart of our concern .
We are not primarily concerned about the 20 000 who arrived in Lampedusa .
We are concerned with the political fact that this represents .
For example , what happened in 1989 , with the implosion of the Eastern system and the fall of communism , was a great burden , for example , on German and Austria , but then they found European solidarity .
An attempt was made to respond politically to that challenge and offer a road map , which resulted in the integration of many countries and many peoples , who are now in this House .
We do not expect much .
There are no grounds for integration of the Mediterranean , but there are grounds for a neighbourhood policy finally worthy of the name , for a European Mediterranean strategy finally worthy of the name .
This is what we are asking of Europe .
I believe that what you said is along those lines .
I would like to request , on the subject of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC , for example , that in addition to referring to it as you did , the Commission should come up with a real proposal to bring to the Council , that it should be voted in by the Council with a qualified majority , and that this should lead European countries to an unavoidable understanding that the problem of immigrants is a European problem and an understanding that the problem of protecting immigrants is a European problem that we can no longer evade .
Madam President , Commissioner , I also took part in the last debate in the Chamber on this very topic and I can only regret that , as only some of the proposals made in that debate have been taken into account , we have the numbers and the situations we are seeing today , specifically in Lampedusa .
We are aware of Mrs Malmström 's help and the efforts she is making , as Commissioner for the Home Affairs portfolio , to strengthen the European Borders Fund , the European Return Fund and the European Refugee Fund and , of course , running the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Members States of the European Union .
However , this crisis in the Mediterranean clearly shows that the issue is not only one of the credibility but of the viability of the European common immigration policy , which aims for an area of freedom , security and justice , in line with Articles 67 to 89 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The upshot of this is that this transformational challenging European foreign policy , challenging the viability of that strategy for the Mediterranean , of that association for the Mediterranean , poses a particular challenge to the humanitarian impact and significance of Europe in the handling of the humanitarian impact of displaced persons and potential asylum seekers and refugees .
Consequently , I should again like to stress that one function of this debate should be to break , for once and for all , the deadlock on the asylum package ; to call attention , for once and for all , to the need to implement and ensure compliance with Directive 2001 / 55 / EC on measures for displaced persons in the case of humanitarian emergencies and massive , unforeseen , flows of emigrants .
In addition to this , it should also , and most particularly , be to create a solidarity policy , above and beyond the directive , to bring into effect that solidarity clause that was again written in to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and which should be applied when we are faced with situations like this one .
For , indeed , we must be aware that neither Italy , nor Spain , nor Greece , nor any of the border countries on the Mediterranean , are in a position to tackle these problems on their own .
Furthermore , I am struck by the fact that there has not yet been any call , or request for the activation of Article 5 of that directive to apply that solidarity clause in line with the Treaty .
We should obviously use this opportunity to provide a dignified and supportive response to an issue which is , as is the Mediterranean , a distinctively European issue .
Madam President , we hear many people express concern about migration today .
People are quite simply afraid of mass immigration to Europe following the major events in North Africa recently .
These events are sure to be followed by migration flows .
It has already started and it is sure to continue .
It is inevitable that people will flee from instability and violence , particularly from the current situation in Libya .
Hitherto , however , the migration flows have been more horizontal than vertical and primarily concern Tunisia and Egypt , but thousands of people have also arrived on the small Italian island of Lampedusa and this is really putting the solidarity between our Member States to the test .
Worryingly enough , the EU Member States have so far not passed this solidarity test and do not seem to be willing to stand by one another in difficult times .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe believes that the most important thing we can do right now is to implement the Asylum Directive .
The answer in the slightly longer term is the preparation of a common European asylum policy that is worthy of the name .
This will , among other things , provide the opportunity to temporarily stop the transfers of asylum seekers under Dublin II when a Member State , for whatever reason , is extremely overburdened .
With solidarity also comes responsibility .
Every Member State must now respect and apply the directive that aims to harmonise the protection of people who are fleeing and , before 2012 , develop a sustainable European asylum system .
We have committed ourselves to implement this and we must do so and we must do it in a spirit of solidarity , with respect for international commitments for the common safety and stability of everyone .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I am very pleased that the Commissioner reminded us that the overwhelming amount of movement in the region has been in North Africa itself .
The UNHCR estimates that over 400 000 people have already left Libya .
That is something that , having listened to the debate on the Procedures Directive earlier , some of our Members would do well to remember : the majority of people are moving within North Africa .
We very much welcome the support given to the UNHCR and other bodies in assisting those displaced .
A lot of concern , however , has been voiced at the pressure on Malta and Lampedusa , and quite rightly .
It is significant , but not equivalent to what is happening in Tunisia and Egypt .
However , there is growing concern about what is happening to minors - unaccompanied or separated at arrival .
There is concern that they are not being properly supported or identified .
We hope that the Commission will look at their situation and at the situation of those others considered particularly vulnerable at this point .
We also welcome the willingness to consider using the Temporary Protection Directive .
Could the Commissioner please outline what criteria she will be using in making that assessment as to whether to bring forward a recommendation ?
Madam President , Commissioner , refugees have been received in Lampedusa under appalling conditions , without food or toilet facilities : under conditions that are really inhumane .
The detention centre is currently closed , with non-governmental organisations , journalists , and possibly even members of parliament not having access to it .
The Italian Refugee Council is requesting that temporary protection orders be granted for these refugees , under the terms of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC , and you approved this application , Commissioner .
I thank you for your intervention , as this application was wide-ranging and comprehensive .
There are things we agree with , and there are things with which we do not agree .
However , there is also a name for what is blocking this comprehensive action : the hypocrisy of the Member States .
You have spoken , Commissioner , about reaching a codecision on resettlement .
As a rapporteur , I can say that Parliament is ready to look at any idea that the Council brings to the table .
However , we have been waiting for a year and a half , and we have not heard a single idea about resettlement .
It is this hypocrisy by the Member States that allowed Colonel Gaddafi to sweep refugees and immigrants under the carpet for years while they were selling him arms .
That is why all the talk about the current lack of resources is also entirely hypocritical .
In 2009 alone , European Union countries earned EUR 343 million from arms sales to Colonel Gaddafi , while the initial amount they made available for receiving refugees from the Arab revolutions was EUR 3 million : one hundred times less .
I think that this difference says it all .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Lampedusa has been invaded by tens of thousands of North Africans that the island will never ever be able to accept .
Italy has , for weeks , been targeted by hundreds of boats of illegal immigrants .
If we do not react together , if the EU does not react , the migratory wave of displaced people will continue .
The illegal immigrants who have arrived in recent months must be sent home ; there is no alternative .
However , apart from a few words of solidarity , the Italian Government has been left alone to handle this biblical exodus of such unforeseeable dimensions
Where is Europe ?
Until now , Brussels has been guilty of hiding ; my fellow citizens can no longer stand its shameful behaviour .
Europe has left Italy alone to face the unprecedented emergency .
Europe should instead assist Italy in the repatriation of illegal immigrants and must also support the efforts of the Italian Government to prevent thousands and thousands of people from continuing to leave , mainly from Tunisia .
The Libyan refugees are a different matter : Europe should support Italy in the identification and logistics management operations , but , above all , must work to ensure that refugees are hosted in all Member States .
The reception of those fleeing from the war cannot be the burden of Italy alone .
It is time to stop talking .
The European Union needs to make its presence felt .
We cannot accept the fact that Italy is filled with illegal immigrants , while France rejects them so shamefully .
The illegal immigrants should be sent back home , while all Member States must now commit themselves to receiving the Libyan refugees .
( NL ) Madam President , what we are now witnessing in Lampedusa was described and predicted as early as in 1973 by the French writer , Jean Raspail , in his prophetic novel The Camp of the Saints .
The only difference is that reality is surpassing fiction .
Europe needs to take control of this situation instead of just letting it happen .
It is absurd to first applaud regime change in Tunisia and Egypt and to then immediately accept migrants en masse , or , more precisely , so-called refugees , from those countries .
Everybody knows that virtually no one on those boats , which are mooring in Lampedusa , is eligible to be recognised as a political refugee .
However , those people are now being allowed into European territory and , with the support of all kinds of subsidised groups , human traffickers and expensive lawyers , they will be starting procedures , drawing them out as long as possible and , if need be , going underground if they are not recognised as refugees .
Judging by current events , Frontex is not protecting the external borders of Europe ; it is treating them as a sort of welcoming committee .
Those boats should be escorted back to the places they are coming from and genuine refugees should , as far as possible , be accepted in their own region instead of in Europe .
It is also of fundamental importance that a number of international conventions are adapted to the needs of today .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to speak and to use this debate to talk about a fundamental issue : the emergency .
They cannot cope alone .
The root of this problem is , as everybody knows , in the unstable situations in Tunisia and Egypt , and the war in Libya .
However , there is no limit to how long it will last : unfortunately , it will last a worrying length of time .
We therefore need to decide how we can use our common policies to manage the emergency , because they cannot cope alone .
In my opinion , Madam President , Commissioner , solidarity with the victims and solidarity with the host states and regions must be our priority .
We have instruments that we are not using properly .
We have four funds .
Mrs Malmström told us clearly and briskly about sums that strike me as ridiculous .
She spoke of EUR 30 million , EUR 25 million on request , etc .
However , our four funds , the Refugee Fund , the Return Fund , the External Borders Fund and the Integration Fund , total almost EUR 3 billion within the scope of the financial perspectives .
Mrs Malmström , it seems to me that these funds should be used for emergency situations , because we need to have the ability to use them and modify them .
Our limitations in terms of collaboration and solidarity are symbolised by the fragility that the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union has demonstrated with the Hermes Operation .
The arrival of increasing numbers of people fleeing the war and fleeing from desperation highlight how limited this capacity is .
They cannot cope alone .
Who can cope ?
The European Union has the necessary solidarity to meet the requirements of this emergency in real time .
( PT ) Madam President , the Provera report could not have come at a more challenging time .
Tunisia and Egypt , countries with enormous economic problems , have already opened their doors to more than 400 000 refugees from Libya .
Despite this , European governments have chosen to whistle in the wind and ignore the 20 000 people amassing in Lampedusa in sub-human conditions .
The revolutions in North Africa have made it even more pressing for European Union Member States to fulfil their humanitarian obligations to take in refugees , and to set out a new migration policy based on solidarity , and on the other fundamental values and principles of the European Union .
The closed door and forced return policies used by some Member States over the last few years in relation to their Mediterranean neighbours may have prevented some migrants from reaching Europe , by means of increased controls within North African ports , patrols in the Mediterranean and even some more brutal methods , such as electric shocks .
However , this has been at a scandalously high cost : the rights of migrants and refugees , forcibly returned to regimes such as Gaddafi 's .
The current emergency requires the adoption of a common asylum system , with shared responsibilities including a temporary protection mechanism and much more resettlement on offer .
We need a new migration strategy that takes into account the original causes of migration , such as poverty , discrimination , conflict and political repression , among other things .
Without this , traffickers will always manage to find alternative routes .
The promotion of human rights , democracy and sustainable development therefore need to become a real strategic priority within the European Union 's foreign policy , and within development programmes for the Mediterranean and beyond .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the emergency situation is teaching the European policy on asylum and immigration a serious lesson It is again evident that the EU does not have a legislative and operational framework that enables it to cope with extraordinary but not unforeseeable events , such as the events of recent months in North Africa .
Lampedusa , Italy and Southern Italy are paying for these mistakes , but the main ones to pay are the refugees who are received in such an inhumane manner .
Despite Article 80 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU and the principle of equitable sharing of solidarity , all the countries are actually concerned only with their own affairs and the attitude of France , which shares a border with Italy , is unacceptable in the current European scenario .
In this regard , I urge the Commission to consider the possibility of seeking an explanation from the French Government .
For years , the EU has entered into agreements with third countries run by dictatorships , funding their activities and putting business interests before democratic requirements .
Europe has remained silent before the Libyan raids : does it also intend to remain silent in the face of the unsustainable situation of the tent camps ?
Of course , we all agree that we cannot make deals with Colonel Gaddafi , yet , a few months ago , I did not hear any objections to the Italy-Libya treaty , which has led to the immigration issue being addressed in the most inhuman way .
Today , President Berlusconi tried to use the same approach with Tunisia , offering money .
Perhaps , though , the new Tunisian Government has learned its lesson .
Yet , like it or not , it is the responsibility of the EU and the 27 Member States to take action , bearing in mind the overriding priority of international solidarity and the protection of human rights .
For this reason , I hope that the European Commission proposes the introduction of the emergency procedure laid down in Directive 2001 / 55 / EC on temporary protection as soon as possible , and that this proposal is adopted by the Council in the near future , because otherwise it will be in vain .
I also call for a parliamentary delegation , not a delegation of political groups , to be sent to Lampedusa to verify both the humanitarian conditions of the immigrants and the non-refoulement principle .
( FR ) Madam President , this report is sensitive , and I must criticise its title .
The use of the words ' migration flows ' sets the tone : it gives the impression that migrants are commodities or invaders .
These are historic times for the peoples of the Southern Mediterranean and us , but the fear of mass immigration is preventing the EU and the Member States from creating a new dynamic .
The recent democratic movements in the South have helped make us aware of our contradictions .
They have demonstrated once again the inconsistency and lack of vision of our obsolete and out-of-touch cooperation policies .
It is high time the European Union implemented a migration policy that is consistent with our values , that recognises that we live in a world in which people are mobile , a world in which human beings move around .
To continue to talk about migration flows is absurd and goes against our humanist values .
If we Europeans want to be major players in the world , then we have to change our approach and work towards creating a solidarity-based Union for the Mediterranean ; we cannot do so without revising mobility policy , or what is today referred to as migration policy .
We must meet the expectations of the peoples of the South .
The fear of immigration must no longer guide our policies .
Strengthening border controls must no longer be our main motivation in implementing cooperation agreements , as it was in the case of Libya .
We must review the conditions necessary for any signing of agreements on the movement of persons involving readmission agreements , so that we respect human rights .
Our actions are still characterised by a security-driven approach to mobility , which goes against our values and the requirement we have to protect populations .
The scandalous position adopted by Mr Berlusconi and Mr Guéant must be vigorously denounced .
Commissioner , what kind of policy must we adopt in order to establish a true Union for the Mediterranean , one in which we show solidarity with the peoples of the South , who today feel scorned by us ?
( FR ) Madam President , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left will not be voting for this report .
It does admittedly contain some positive points , but they are constantly contradicted by the practices of certain Member States , including my own country .
This report refuses to see that migration is primarily a South-South issue .
The failure to recognise this means that tensions will simply increase and will plunge a number of those countries a little further into poverty .
True , the European Union cannot accommodate all the destitute people in the world , but it is in no danger of having to do so ; the figures are there to prove it , regardless of the fuss some people are making .
The European Union cannot accommodate all the destitute people in the world , but it should make a contribution that is in proportion to its wealth , its needs and the damage that it has caused and that is still being caused today by some of its companies , which are plundering those countries ' resources .
This report remains in the tradition of this inward-looking fortress Europe , in defiance of its own interests , particularly its demographic ones .
No , the European Union has not learnt from the revolutions taking place in the Arab states .
It is not showing solidarity .
In the space of a few days , the Tunisians have accommodated more than 100 000 Libyan refugees in exemplary conditions .
No , Commissioner , Europe 's talk is no match for the problems facing the world .
It will only fuel the xenophobic policies of certain Member States , and I regret that .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to thank Commissioner Malmström for her hard work week after week in dealing with this epic disaster - because that is what it is .
Comments have been made , not only in this House , in an attempt to reduce and make light of what our government , our country and our people have had to face .
It has been , and continues to be , an emergency -humanitarian and otherwise - of exceptional dimensions .
I believe that our government , and especially our people , have really come out of this well in terms of international public opinion .
The people of Lampedusa behaved remarkably in firstly welcoming the migrants and then helping them out of their own pockets , and then , at a certain point , they said ' we cannot do this any more ' , because in addition to the human rights we discuss every day in this House , we must also consider the rights of peoples , including their right to maintain their identity , their activities and , naturally , not to be invaded .
The migrants also include illegal immigrants , criminals released from prison .
This rightly concerns the countries that must accept them .
Furthermore , when the migration takes on the dimension - I repeat - of an invasion , we need to face up to the issue .
We are one hundred per cent with our people , no ifs or buts .
The European Union must stand up and take note , Commissioner .
In addition to human rights , we must consider our rights , the rights of indigenous peoples .
For this reason , we fully endorse the efforts being made by Italian Government at the moment in Tunisia , because compared to the modest figures announced by the Commissioner , the Italian Government is offering Tunisia a lot .
A lot is being done and we are confident we will achieve tangible results
However , we must move from words to deeds and Frontex is not doing what should have been done to put an end to this hateful traffic , because this traffic is the shame of the Mediterranean and the European Union is partly responsible .
Therefore , I say put a stop to people trafficking and I say yes to a Marshall Plan for these countries .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Malmström , it is well known that people from over-populated , under-developed countries risk their lives every day because the EU , with its pseudo-humanitarian ideas , has not made it clear that the rules that apply to migrants are not the same as those that apply to refugees .
According to the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees , refugees are , as we all know , people who , owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race , religion or political opinion , are outside the country of their nationality .
However , this definition does not apply to the vast majority of people who flood into Europe on a daily basis .
Regardless of the situation in their home country , they just want to go somewhere in the EU - to the land that , in their mind , is flowing with milk and honey - in order to try their luck here and usually only in order to be included in our social systems .
This may perhaps make sense in their eyes , but as members of the European Parliament , we have to serve the interests of Europeans .
This certainly does not include permanently supporting millions of economic migrants who , with a lack of training and qualifications suitable for our labour market , are simply not much use to us .
It would also be extremely unfair to countries like Tunisia and Libya in particular , which are only just freeing themselves from dictatorial regimes and starting out on the road to democracy and which will need all the strength they have to rebuild their own countries .
These people must develop their own countries .
Since the end of the Ben Ali dictatorship , Tunisia has been a free country .
This situation must also be taken into consideration here in the EU in the discussions about how to deal with the mass influx of people from North Africa .
Therefore , all economic migrants should , in my view , be sent back even before they reach Europe .
They should not even be allowed to arrive in Lampedusa , and the EU agency Frontex should be given the appropriate powers by us to ensure that they do not .

( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard a series of measures and initiatives that are certainly reassuring and also along the lines requested by the Italian delegation in the meeting that we had last week together with the head of the delegation with President Barroso : more solidarity , more means , more specifics and more incisive action for Lampedusa , Malta and all the States that are exposed to exceptional migratory pressures that can only be tackled through European governance .
These reassuring statements are naturally consistent with our thoughts on the application of Article 5 of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC .
We trust that this can be brought before the Council within an entirely reasonable timeframe .
A more coherent European Neighbourhood Policy , based on results and on a policy of primacy in favour of border regions that can spend resources to ensure that their own young people can achieve work and growth opportunities in their own lands .
A better and more adequate operational plan for Frontex , which has actually made itself useful by carrying out joint patrols during this exceptional stage .
We believe that the section on funding for migration allows for the possibility of further action due to the exceptional state of affairs of which everyone is now well aware .
Commissioner Malmström , we have not mentioned countervailing measures .
Commissioner Hahn is not with you , and it would probably have been helpful if he had been .
A review of Structural Funds , a policy that takes account of an exceptional situation , the reduction in attractiveness , the penalising of the attractiveness of the region of Sicily with regard to fishing and tourism , for which Lampedusa and Sicily must somehow be compensated .
One hundred and fifty thousand Egyptians have returned to Libya , but this migration issue does not end here .
For this reason , we must act very firmly through a strong and decisive European policy and we trust that you and President Barroso can develop that strategy through a comprehensive migration plan .
We cannot wait for any more measures and we are confident that by the end of this month , Europe will come up with a migration plan , in the interest of the long-awaited solidarity that we want to see put into action at last .
Madam President , first of all , when I hear some - not all - of my colleagues who are taking part in this debate , they refer to migration as something which is not currently taking place , but as something which is going to take place .
A human tragedy is actually taking place as we speak in this House .
In many cases , we are talking about whether we agree or disagree , but one thing that we should be in agreement about is that this tragedy , which is on our doorstep - a few hundred kilometres from the European Union 's southern frontier - is taking place right now , and will continue to grow .
Yet we continue to debate , even when there is a tool - Council Directive 2001 / 55 / EC - which , on a recommendation from the Commission , can be set in motion by the Council .
How are we going to measure whether the influx is high , not high or high enough when it is all over ?
The European Union has to decide whether it wants to act or react .
We react when things have already occurred .
Let us not be the man of yesterday .
Let us be today 's institution .

Madam President , efficient management , coherence , solidarity , responsibility : these are supposed to be the foundations of an EU common immigration policy .
Contrast this with the actual record of the EU over the last decade , which deserves a score of about three out of ten .
This is not the fault of the Commission , which has produced a stream of policies and proposed laws , but largely of the Member States .
It is time to get off the reactive and chaotic back foot and onto the proactive , well-managed front foot .
Maybe we could benefit from looking at a country like Canada , and especially its policies on legal migration .
My own state , the United Kingdom , has stood apart from any idea of a common policy .
I regret that , but when so many of those interviewed in places like Lampedusa say they want to move on quickly northwards and often specifically to the United Kingdom , it does not help persuade my country , which has had very large immigration itself , to lift its border controls .
I believe in solidarity .
I believe that the Temporary Protection Directive should be invoked now .
However , there does have to be responsibility on all Member States - those in the north and also those in the south - to properly implement EU law on the reception of migrants and on the processing of claims with financial and other help , and also on integration and the enforcement of labour laws .
Solidarity and responsibility has to be a two-way street .
( FR ) Madam President , I do not think that we can welcome the revolution in Tunisia , on the one hand , and demand that the country implements the border control policy that existed in the days of the Ben Ali dictatorship , on the other .
I think we should stop putting pressure on the Tunisian Government , which has many other matters to attend to : its own refugees - as has been said - and overseeing its democratic transition process .
The situation , then , is a new and exceptional one , and this should perhaps enable us to think up appropriate solutions while at the same time showing solidarity .
Baroness Ludford is right - that is what is definitely lacking the most within the European Union .
I think that the work of the European Commission , and of Parliament , could consist firstly in declaring a moratorium on the return of Tunisians , because that really is improper and inappropriate .
We should also grant exceptional permission to reside to Tunisians who have already arrived in France and Italy , guarantee access to Europe to people seeking protection , and refrain from taking any steps or concluding any agreements that might get in the way of that protection , apply the provisions - as has been said - of the 2001 directive to all those eligible to take advantage of them , and accommodate refugees present at the border between Tunisia and Libya as part of the resettlement process .
Next , I believe that we must think about forging cooperative links with these future fully democratic countries , so that Tunisians can come and work , study and travel perfectly legally , so as to create real channels of mobility between the two shores of the Mediterranean .
( Applause )
( ES ) Madam President , I believe that Lampedusa has become a symbol of the inhumanity of the European Union 's immigration policy .
This is not a just an immediate problem ; it is a structural problem .
I remember 14 February 2009 , during the previous parliamentary session .
I went to Lampedusa with a delegation from my parliamentary group .
It was a journey into hell ; into hell , I say !
That migration policy was not based on the understanding that emigration is a right and not a crime , and it did nothing to guarantee the sacred principle of the right to request asylum .
In Lampedusa , in 2009 , nothing was done to identify people or to process asylum requests until the people did what they had to do : rise up , mutiny , because they were living like animals .
Between 2009 and 2011 , nothing has changed .
In fact , it could be said that something did change : President Berlusconi signed an agreement with Colonel Gaddafi in spite of the fact that Colonel Gaddafi was not complying with international law and expelled the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees knowing that he had 9 000 refugees in Libya ; the same Libya that is currently being bombed after a humanitarian appeal .
It is this hypocrisy that needs to be changed .
This is what needs to fundamentally change in the European Union .
Madam President , the Council decision adopts the UN Security Council Resolution .
Let me quote it : ' To take all necessary measures to protect the civilians and civilian-populated areas under threat of attack in Libya , while excluding a foreign occupation force of any form on any part of Libyan territory ' .
That single sentence contains two completely contradictory ideas .
How do you protect civilians from attack without occupying any piece of territory in order to do so ?
How can nations with long and illustrious military histories , such as Britain and France , adopt such a nonsensical policy ?
The answer to that is simple : they are bound to do so by the European Union 's Common Foreign and Security Policy , as a result of the Lisbon Treaty .
They no longer control their own foreign policy .
The Council decision goes on to say that responsibility for the Union 's military policy lies with the High Representative of Common Foreign and Security Policy . So Baroness Catherine Ashton will have the opportunity to wage her first war and put her name up there with the greats of military history such as Rommel , Montgomery and Eisenhower .
Well good luck to her , but what is more likely to happen is that this idiotic policy results in disaster for all concerned .
The priorities of the West , and the European countries in particular , should be to encourage moderate regimes in North Africa by all diplomatic means , and to protect our own borders from further mass migration flows .
That may not be the politically correct answer , but it is a realistic one from sensible nation states , were they able to take those decisions .
( NL ) Madam President , last Friday , hundreds of so-called asylum seekers from the former Barbary broke out from their reception camps on the Italian mainland .
These immigrants had been transferred there because Lampedusa is overfull .
Madam President , this is the harsh reality : thousands of prospectless immigrants from Barbary are abusing the instability in their region in order to seek a better life in rich Europe .
The immigrants who were interviewed on TV promptly indicated the cities they most wanted to go to - Amsterdam , Rome , it did not matter much - or to make matters worse , they complained about the lack of cigarettes and drink provided by the Italian authorities .
You would almost forget that people consciously choose illegality and deliberately misuse social services in Europe .
These so-called asylum seekers , whom I prefer to call freeloaders , must be received in the region .
Their shelter is the responsibility of the African Union , the Arab League or the terrible Organisation of the Islamic Conference .
The European Union is not responsible for these fortune seekers .
If , nevertheless , they do come in , let us greatly accelerate the asylum procedures of these so-called refugees and send them back as soon as possible to the countries in and around Barbary .
Let those countries take responsibility , not us and not now .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to ask my fellow MEP who spoke just now if it can really be considered appropriate to apply the terms ' freeloaders ' and ' fortune seekers ' to people who are fleeing from a situation of great political distress - and all the political groups agree on this - such as the one in North Africa .
I find this to be an extremely serious allegation and call on the President to somehow highlight what has been said and establish whether this can be considered appropriate in such a sensitive debate that touches on the suffering of human beings , who are clearly not considered to have the right to eat , as it has been said of them ' they even demand food and are lot of freeloaders ' .
I find it very serious that this has been said in this House and I hope that European citizens can read this extremely harsh utterance , which only serves to reveal the total political inadequacy of the person who said it .
( NL ) Madam President , Mrs Costa , you are right , I am using harsh words , but those words are very clear .
We in the European Union are now having to deal with a huge influx of refugees and the majority on the left are saying that these are just unfortunate people , all of whom are fleeing their countries .
Fine , but why do they all have to come to Europe ?
I think it is more difficult to reach Europe in a boat than it is to reach Morocco or Saudi Arabia .
Obviously , they are coming here because of our social services and because they will be able to get money from the government here .
You are just allowing all of that !
We must act firmly against this and we need to ensure that , as Members of the European Parliament , we stand up for the citizens of the European Union .
If you stick to this line of thinking , it will be our downfall .
Next , we will be looking to sub-Saharan Africa and , eventually , everyone will be coming here .
We cannot afford that .
That is your world , but not mine .
I wish you every success with that , but that is not what our citizens want , certainly not in the Netherlands .
Madam President , a few days ago , EU leaders announced that they stand ready to show concrete solidarity with those Member States most affected by migratory pressures .
Well , that time has come , because the mass movement has now hit the European Union .
We now call on the European Council to honour its word .
And for solidarity to be concrete , it must mean that all Member States shoulder responsibility for the displaced people who are fleeing Libya towards Europe .
We have a tool already ; we just need to use it .
It is the solidarity mechanism envisaged in Directive 2001 / 55 / EC , which does two things .
Firstly , it gives temporary protection to all displaced people who reach the EU .
Secondly , it puts the responsibility to host them on all Member States and not just on the country that they happen to arrive in .
The mechanism is triggered by a Council decision stating that the mass influx exists .
However , it must come on a proposal from the Commission - from you , Madam Commissioner .
There is no doubt that there is a mass exodus leaving Libya .
More than 400 000 people have fled Libya , mostly to Tunisia and Egypt , but also now to EU countries .
Last week , more than 800 people , mostly Somalis and Eritreans , arrived in Malta in just twenty-four hours .
Proportionally speaking , this has the same impact as 120 000 arriving in France in just one day .
Surely this would qualify as a mass influx .
So it is not the numbers in absolute terms that we need to look at , but the numbers in relative terms - their relative impact on the country of arrival .
I really appeal to you , Madam Commissioner , to take the political leadership and make this proposal .
I also appeal to the Council to honour its word and show concrete solidarity .
Madam President , the Council has refused to create an asylum policy and real formal burden-sharing since 1999 .
Speaking on behalf of David Sassoli and my Italian colleagues , what we see in Italy today is an emergency which has no real solution in law .
A solution should have been found by now .
Reception procedures , qualifications - the core of the asylum package which we are discussing today - should have been implemented long ago .
We would then have had a concept of resettlement and a concept of burden-sharing , but we do not .
For that reason , I say on behalf of my group that we must assist in this emergency .
We call on the Council in particular - but also on you , Commissioner - to show that political leadership , and to apply Council Directive 2001 / 55 / EC .
That will create a situation of resettlement which may at least alleviate some of the burden .
As well as doing that - as some have said - we cannot ignore our duties in relation to asylum and to international law .
Those duties will apply to so many people who are vulnerable and suffering today .
The reasons for the push factors of asylum are deep and profound - they are poverty and instability .
However , we have a situation right now affecting the Southern countries and we need to implement Council Directive 2001 / 55 / EC .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to address three points .
Firstly , we should make it clear that we are indeed able to provide assistance to refugees from North Africa , particularly from Tunisia , and that we also want to do so .
I therefore also welcome the fact that the Commission wishes to activate Directive 2001 / 55 / EC for giving temporary protection and I would , at the same time , call for all Member States to actually utilise this , not only Italy , but also France and Germany - above all , the countries that are actually in a position to invest .
Secondly , we expect a clear statement from the Commission to the effect that any agreements entered into with dictators like Ben Ali or Gaddafi concerning the prevention of migration - that is how I would describe them - are null and void .
Genuine partnerships with third countries , like Mrs Malmström mentioned , are probably not comparable with Italy 's idea of buying the readiness to take back refugees with EUR 150 million .
Instead of showing solidarity in respect of the prevention of refugees , we should be showing practical solidarity with North African States like Tunisia , to which 150 000 people have fled .
Thirdly , we need to understand how fragile the ground is on which the EU refugee prevention instruments are standing .
Frontex and Dublin II - we need a rethink where these are concerned .
We need liberal asylum and migration legislation in Europe and a different development policy that is genuinely sustainable .
( FR ) Madam President , at this stage of our debate , I am inevitably going to have to repeat or to support some of the things that have been said previously .
However , like several of my fellow Members , I also wanted to say that the problems that we are having to face - problems which the whole of the European Union is having to face at the moment - cannot be resolved by one Member State alone .
No Member State should have to rise alone to the challenges that it is facing and that , once again , the European Union as a whole , I believe , is facing .
The ability of the European Union to organise itself and to handle the situation by working together and as one is therefore really what I am asking for .
I believe that the time has truly come now to lay the foundations of a true European immigration and asylum policy .
A European asylum and immigration pact was adopted over a year ago .
The time has come now , I think , to apply it in a very concrete fashion .
We heard the Commissioner ; we heard a number of the recommendations that she was making .
I would like to come back to them and to support very strongly some of her proposals .
Yes , we must increase Frontex 's resources at all costs .
We must increase its human , material and financial resources , and we must ensure that it can provide greater support to Operation Hermes and Operation Poseidon .
Yes , we need extra , additional resources for those Member States that are principally affected , I would say , by the increased migration flows that we are seeing today .
That will be the financial expression of our solidarity .
Yes , we need to forge closer cooperative links with the countries of the Southern Mediterranean ; we need to support them , of course , help them , and find instruments .
The Commissioner mentioned - I believe that she travelled to Tunisia to speak on this issue - mobility partnerships .
Yes , we need to strengthen those instruments in a spirit of responsibility , in a spirit of solidarity , but also in a spirit of real , specific action .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you must have realised that this House enjoys plenty of solidarity , but this is not enough .
To introduce and empower a European immigration policy , we must do together what others cannot do , in other words , achieve the consensus of governments .
Take your proposals and put them before the Council .
We shall support you , because you must have realised , apart from some xenophobic remarks , that you enjoy great respect and great solidarity in this House .
Parliament will reaffirm this tomorrow , saying no to the refoulements , yes to the implementation of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC and yes to the implementation of Article 25 of that directive .
Tomorrow , we will do our bit in Parliament .
However we need others to do their bit ; for governments to be much less selfish ; for us to be seen sponsoring the solidarity needed to implement a European policy .
Your work is naturally central to this effort , because without the governments , Europe will be weaker .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner Malmström , ladies and gentlemen , we have all been saying how we are faced with an increase in migratory flows , in terms of both scale and complexity .
Chronic conflict situations in Afghanistan , Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are now being joined by an alarming increase in new cases , such as Egypt , Tunisia and Libya , which have led to a dramatic worsening of the situation .
Member States which , for geographical reasons , have been more affected by these migratory pressures , have also seen their ability to respond considerably reduced .
The chaotic situation on the island of Lampedusa , which several speakers have already mentioned , is one example , with the number of refugees exceeding the number of residents .
The Member States that are particularly affected therefore urgently need to receive the necessary support , through the provision of financial , human and technical resources , in order to ensure they are actually able to respond to the massive migratory flows , and to be able to respond with humanity to the human pressure with which we are faced .
I therefore support the call made by my fellow Members for the European Union solidarity mechanism to be activated immediately .
It is also important to take advantage of existing infrastructure and bodies , such as the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union and the European Asylum Support Office , and , probably , to reassess and adapt Operation Hermes .
I also agree with what Mr Tavares has already said about the process for resettling refugees .
It is important that the Council , which is not present for this debate , stops hiding behind legal pretexts and is able to bring this matter of refugee resettlement to a successful conclusion .
Lastly , Commissioner , I believe that we need more solidarity between the Member States of the Union , improved coordination of efforts , and a sharing of responsibilities and burdens .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is sad to note that sometimes , the West can find great solidarity when it comes to bombing , sending companies into third world countries and taking oil , but finds it more of a struggle to make solidarity and migration policies .
This evening 's debate touches on these themes .
I went to Lampedusa on Monday and saw 4 000 - 5 000 people on the ground , huddling together to sleep under the sun and the rain , doing their business where they ate and not being able to change the wet clothes - which some have said were designer labels , but are , in fact , fake designer labels - they had on during the crossing , in lamentable conditions .
Among these were 4 500 children , 12-13 year-old kids , living under the same conditions , conditions of discomfort shared also by the inhabitants of Lampedusa .
Tunisia is now home to 150 000 migrants who come from Libya and shows its solidarity .
It is a poor country showing solidarity , while wealthy Europe is unable to accommodate 5 000 migrants .
Europe should instead show its solidarity to these wonderful kids who have sparked the Jasmine Revolution originating in Sidi Bouzid that is changing North Africa and the world .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , your words are in line with what we wanted to hear .
I would not , however , like to ideologise this debate which is sometimes ideologised in a bipartisan manner .
I believe that it is a very serious matter to speak of a humanitarian emergency .
The question I ask myself , and that I also address to my fellow MEPs , is as follows : ' Can we speak of humanitarian emergency and stop at that point , or should we ask two types of questions , one about the emergency and thus about the immediate issues , and another about strategy ? '
The problem of Africa and the Middle East is a problem that must , by definition , lie outside Europe , and the question that arises is whether there can be development without democracy .
Let us remember that the revolt in these countries of the Middle East and the Mediterranean has not been about ideology but about bread , a revolt for democracy in order to survive .
We are bound to ask ourselves certain questions about this .
It is all very well , Commissioner , to address the problem of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC and everything that Frontex is doing , but Europe must ask itself what it wants to do about the Mediterranean and the whole of Africa .
Many of my fellow Members have spoken of Libya and other countries .
This makes me think of Darfur , of certain situations where genocide goes on every day in Africa .
The only discordant note I would add is this : it is not true that Europe is responsible for looting .
Of course , some European countries are partly responsible , but in Africa , a number of capitalist systems interact that are not based on the social economy of labour , like our own , but are based on the state economy , state capitalism .
The leading example is China , which buys sovereign debts and exploits entire populations .
We cannot go and oust presidents who are driven by crime .
Even the UN cannot do this .
I think that we should leave aside the ideological issues and think about the immediate problem , and that means welcoming these people , all of them together .
Tomorrow , though , we cannot avoid discussing Europe 's strategy towards the whole of Africa .
( FR ) Madam President , we have come to the end of the speeches , so I am going to focus on two points in the form of questions .
Firstly , the humanitarian chaos in the Mediterranean is the inevitable consequence of the shortcomings , indeed of the lack of a common migration policy , within the European Union .
To seek merely to prevent migration flows bound for Europe is unrealistic , and it means that , today , third countries and Member States in southern Europe are alone having to suffer the consequences .
The Italian response - collective expulsions - is not acceptable , and neither is the French position of closing the borders ; it resolves nothing and simply overlooks the real issues at stake .
My first question is this : can we expect a shake-up and the development of a balanced European migration policy ?
My second question concerns European solidarity also ; I do not see it as a slogan but as something that has become an urgent and absolute necessity .
I , too , urge the Council to respond urgently and activate the solidarity mechanism provided for by the directive on temporary protection in the event of a mass influx , but I also urge the Member States to respond to the UNHCR 's appeal for the urgent resettlement mechanism to be applied .
Therefore , my second question is : can we expect concrete action at the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 11 and 12 April ?
( RO ) Madam President , I believe that today 's debate on the Provera report is welcome in view of recent events in the Mediterranean region and North Africa .
I wish to begin by emphasising the need for an EU-level approach to managing the migration flows triggered by the wave of revolution in the Arab world , in the spirit of solidarity required by Article 80 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
On the other hand , I wish to congratulate Mr Provera for his report which underlines the need to take into account consistently the deep-rooted causes of the instability which is the source of the migration flows .
Plenty of events are going on at the moment , reminding us of the urgent need for action .
In the wake of the post-election conflict in Côte d 'Ivoire , for example , hundreds of thousands of Ivorians sought refuge in neighbouring countries , including 94 000 of them in Liberia alone , a country itself threatened by instability .
In order to escape this spiral of instability and migration , I think that we need to emphasise , above all , the preventive aspect .
By this I am primarily thinking of preventing conflicts .
We must also consider promoting democracy and human rights , as well as , of course , improving the economic situation in the long term .
Then again , in my view , we need to make better use of the instruments we have available as part of the global approach to migration in order to encourage synergy between migration and development .
The issue of migration must automatically feature in the dialogue with Europe 's partners .
Efforts must also be stepped up in supporting development projects in the countries of origin and transit , which improve living conditions and these countries ' ability to manage migration flows .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , everything is uncertain as regards the situation in North Africa .
We do not know the immediate outcome of the civil war in Libya , we do not know whether the new political order in the Maghreb countries and Egypt will be conducive to democracy , or whether even worse conditions will arise with regard to democracy and relations with Europe .
As for the arrival of an unstoppable stream of fugitives from the shores of Africa onto European shores and those of Lampedusa in particular , it is difficult , even in this case , to distinguish those who are fleeing from violence and fear of death , those who have , for example , escaped from prison , and those who are looking for a future that holds better things than the hunger in their country .
We can nevertheless be sure of certain things .
Firstly , human dignity must be respected in all human beings .
Secondly , the European approach is to offer hospitality to all refugees .
Thirdly , the borders of the individual states which form part of the European Union are the borders of Europe .
Fourthly , there is a duty of solidarity among all European countries that are part of the Union : this was confirmed , strengthened and made legally binding by the Treaty of Lisbon , which also governs migration policy and the management of migratory flows in an area of freedom , security and justice .
Fifthly , the instruments for coping with emergencies such as the current one are already in place , in the form of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC , Frontex and the European Asylum Support Office ( EASO ) .
The current situation is one of those situations that reveals whether Europe actually is or is not a reality .
Commissioner , I greatly enjoyed your speech , but I think we should move from words to deeds .
I am well aware of this and I know you will act .
We hope that your proposal will be followed up .
The important thing is that words are not enough : we need deeds to make Europe a reality .
This is an opportunity to build Europe .
( EL ) Madam President , we are at a turning point .
I say this , because we need to consider how we intend to move forward , beyond the crisis facing us at the moment .
We managed , in previous years , to limit migration flows from North Africa to southern Europe , to Italy , Spain , Portugal , Malta and Greece , through bilateral agreements between these countries and the corresponding countries in North Africa , and we really did achieve significant results .
That is why there is now more pressure on Greece via Turkey , because Europe and Greece have been unable to apply similar agreements with Turkey , despite the fact that such bilateral agreements exist .
My question therefore is this : now that all this disruption has broken out , what is to become of these agreements , Commissioner ?
Could we - and should we - link these prior agreements or other future agreements to the financing we provide ?
The package of measures you announced is very good and we must help these countries .
It is our duty to help all our fellow men ; however , this must be linked with an obligation on the part of these countries to take back everyone who has arrived in Lampedusa and everyone who arrives in the immediate or more distant future in other European countries , because the greater the pressure , the more people will arrive in other countries .
While we are on the subject and as Directive 2001 / 55 / EC has been raised , perhaps we should review what we were saying a year ago ; several Members have referred to the famous reallocation that we have awaited so anxiously .
We are still waiting to apply repatriation and resettlement ; please tell us what else we should do .
Perhaps , however , we should start straight away with the internal resettlement of refugees , so as to relieve the pressure on the countries which face a real problem ?
Finally , because my time has run out , we must limit fragmentary approaches by the Member States .
Some countries , such as Germany and France , are selectively suspending returns under Dublin II to Greece .
We may face the same problem with Italy in the immediate or more distant future .
The Greek Government has come along and announced another fragmentary approach : a fence in Evros , but we have no overall solution to the problem .
This is such a vital issue that we need real solidarity and an overall strategy , Commissioner .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the original plan was for this debate to be much narrower , covering only the Provera report .
The Conference of Presidents decided to extend its scope , and so we are now discussing - and quite rightly too - current reactions to the influx of people who are , for the most part , refugees .
For we cannot call them illegal immigrants , because they are refugees - from Syria and , above all , from North Africa , which is currently engulfed in revolutionary turmoil .
Our debate is now also focusing on an overall assessment of the European Union 's current asylum and immigration policy .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) on the Provera report , however , I would like to return to this document .
I would like to raise two issues in connection with it , which , in my opinion , are absolutely vital .
Firstly , I would like to say how much I welcome the fact that the report discusses the need for greater synergy between two key pillars of European policy , namely , development and security .
The lesson we are learning today from the revolutionary events in North Africa tells us that aid provided only via official channels and distributed by the departments of dictator-led governments does not solve the social problems of people living in countries covered by EU aid policy .
EU aid must genuinely help ordinary people to solve social problems , instead of lining the pockets of dictators and those in power .
Not only economic reform , but also reform in terms of democracy and human rights should be a prerequisite for the granting of development aid .
Today , we are seeing that young people from those parts of the world in which we are interested and which are covered by our development policy not only want bread , but also freedom and democracy .
Secondly , in view of the demographic challenges facing Europe , it is becoming clear that the European Union will not cope with the problems already appearing on the horizon for the labour market without a coherent and genuinely rational immigration policy .
The only thing that can prevent the influx into Europe of the least educated and most needy migrants looking for their place in the world is a well thought-out and coherent migration policy , as previous speakers have mentioned , such as those operated by Canada and New Zealand .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in the Mediterranean basin , and the current and foreseeable migratory flows , require the adoption of a medium- and long-term strategy different from the one announced by Commissioner Malmström .
I think it is necessary to create democratic living and development conditions in African countries bordering the Mediterranean that will prevent the kind of migration we are witnessing .
I therefore believe we need a special plan in the short term - some have defined it as a Marshall Plan - to stimulate and implement a process of development in the countries of North Africa .
Only in this way can we stop and prevent future migration .
I would also like to underline the need for compensatory measures in the areas involved .
All the speakers talked of Lampedusa , but I would like to invite you to reflect on what the kind of migratory process we are experiencing at present really means for an island that lives on tourism and fishing .
Tour operators have not received any bookings for months but only cancellations .
Europe must show its support with appropriate compensatory measures .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak as a representative of Southern Italy and as a proud European , in the conviction that Member States should contribute to building a solid and lasting Union .
Finding us unprepared for an emergency only 70 miles from our shores reflects the weaknesses of our 27-member system and the need to develop a greater sense of accountability and solidarity .
An individualistic approach is likely to weaken Europe and set back the process of integration we have so painstakingly built over recent decades .
Every corner of this Europe is Europe .
Lampedusa is also Europe and this applies in all fields and in all policies .
It is absurd to see that this emergency is being dealt with by only two member countries .
We have chosen to join together to become stronger and , as in the best marriages , the union should be for better or for worse .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your words .
We are bound to offer our full support when you speak of solidarity between Member States and when you emphasise that the Commission will call on Member States to be fully accountable to asylum seekers .
Thank you because you have reassured us that everything that has been lacking will now come to pass .
Through our vote tomorrow , we wish to give strength to your actions , give strength to your words , giving you a full mandate to ensure that what has been lacking will now come to pass .
Unfortunately , not all European governments are adopting the same approach .
Some consider the maritime borders of Italy to be the borders of Italy and not Europe and state in no uncertain terms that they do not wish to share the burden that only Italy and Southern Italy are shouldering .
We therefore fully endorse your speech , but we endorse it in the belief that , through the strong action of the Commission before the Council , the solidarity of Member States with Italy should be real and substantial and all 27 Member States should demonstrate their accountability and their ownership of this emergency .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome your speech and the list of measures announced , and will not enter into the legal and regulatory debate on temporary protection of migrants and the application of Article 80 of the Treaty .
As we speak , unseaworthy vessels continue to sail the Mediterranean to the Italian coast , their passengers often paying with their lives .
Despite the recent transfers , Lampedusa remains in a situation of absolute emergency and people are still streaming into the tent city of Manduria .
Italy continues to play its part in taking in these desperate people , while other countries are remarkable only for the number of expulsions taking place through their police stations .
Our government is in Tunis attempting to limit to this flow , but we cannot continue to go it alone .
We need the European Union , we need assistance and we need the political role of Europe to plan a new neighbourhood policy and a more efficient strategy on migration , starting from the failure of the Dublin system and the observation that Lampedusa is not only the border of Italy but also that of Europe .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as an elected representative from Southern Italy , I join the chorus of fellow MEPs who have preceded me in calling for appropriate action to address the critical situation faced by citizens and migrants in Lampedusa .
The health and sanitation situation on the island has exceeded all limits of decency .
I appeal to the sense of responsibility of the Italian Government to ensure it adopts all measures available to it , and call on the European Commission to implement the measures provided for in the EU Directive on temporary protection for immigrants .
The next European Council of Ministers of the Interior , scheduled for 11 April , must take appropriate measures to ensure that neither the migrants nor the citizens of Lampedusa are left in a desperate condition .
We therefore need to initiate a serious debate on the European Neighbourhood Policy which will focus on initiatives to support the path to democracy , especially in the countries of the southern shores of the Mediterranean .
I congratulate Mr Provera .
( PT ) Madam President , we know that , in order to solve immigration problems , there is a need to support the development of immigrants ' countries of origin , without outside interference , but with concrete action promoting solidarity , respect for human rights and the defence of peace , whether in Tunisia , Egypt , Libya or any other country .
Nevertheless , this is not what is happening , a sad example of which is the situation in Lampedusa .
There is an urgent need for serious measures ; solidarity measures ; measures that will bring this tragedy to an end .
I would like , Commissioner , to draw particular attention to the situation of immigrant women .
There is a need to guarantee such women the right to their own passport and residency permit , which is also important for combating human trafficking , in particular , that of women and children ; support for the resettlement of refugees also needs to be linked to this .
Finally , I challenge the Commission to review the Return Directive as soon as possible : a directive that is against immigrants fleeing war , hunger and misery , whose only wish is to be happy with their families , and who deserve our solidarity .
( EL ) Madam President , Mr Provera has done an excellent job and I congratulate him .
His report takes a realistic view of the problem and his proposal on sharing the burden of immigration is a necessary solution .
I therefore propose that we broker an agreement that will improve and update the Dublin Regulation .
Events illustrate that we will not resolve the question of immigration and that it will continue .
We cannot eliminate it , but we must manage it .
Greece , Italy and Spain cannot deal with it alone , because these countries are under severe pressure .
We have failed to address the problem since 1990 .
We consider that it does not exist , we leave the Member States to their fate and these poor people are being exploited , as are the natives of Europe suffering this burden .
We must not forget that there are 7 million unemployed in Europe today , 3 million of whom are 19 to 24 years old .
( RO ) Madam President , in his memoirs entitled ' How Stalinism was born ' , Stalin 's former assistant , Boris Bazhanov , recounts a scene which occurred in the Kremlin in December 1923 .
In a discussion with his comrades , the Georgian murderer said something which would cause a stir . It is not important who votes in the party and how .
What is of paramount importance is who counts the votes .
As a result , it will come as no surprise to us , for instance , that Nursultan Nazarbayev was recently re-elected in Kazakhstan with more than 95 % of the votes .
It is the same story in Romania where absolutely every election is rigged .
This charade for democracy is orchestrated by the local mafia under the direct protection of the US Embassy in Romania , which actually decides what is better for the Romanian people .
Indeed , the WikiLeaks telegrams highlight that , unfortunately , Romania has become a fourth-hand outpost of the CIA , which is demonising Stalin , but using his methods .
What a disgrace !
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at this point of the debate , practically everything has been said , and perhaps that is exactly the point .
We continue to talk and , as we speak , the landings are continuing and people are dying at sea and crowding in inhumane conditions on the Italian and Maltese shores , which are not the shores of Italy and Malta , but the border of Europe , gateway to our European Union , through which any of our 27 Member States can be reached .
The time for talk is over , we are told by our citizens and the migrants who sought freedom and found themselves locked in closed camps .
It is time to act , Commissioner .
I call on you ; we call on you to take the lead as early as tomorrow , after our vote , and to send a request to the Council for the implementation of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC and jointly establish a true strategy for the future of the Mediterranean , because at stake is not only Europe 's credibility but also its immediate fate .
( RO ) Madam President , this debate is taking place at a critical time for the future of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
In this context , I believe that the incidents which Italy has encountered in Lampedusa highlight the need to devise an EU migration policy focused on the following areas .
Firstly , the EU should focus on the causes of migration flows .
By this I mean the precarious economic situation and unstable political climate in the countries of origin .
By creating jobs and increasing investments in these countries , the Union would encourage their citizens to become involved in their own community .
Secondly , I believe that migrants ' rights need to be protected .
It is the duty of the Frontex agency , in particular , to implement the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the other international treaties in this area .
Madam President , the debate this evening has been characterised by the use of the word ' solidarity ' .
All too often in this Chamber , Members speak in their own national interests , but it might be better if more of us spoke about concerns in other countries , to show solidarity .
The reason I asked for the floor was that I was very struck by the numbers used by my colleague , Simon Busuttil , of 800 people arriving into Malta being the equivalent of 120 000 arriving into France on one single day .
The problems of Malta and of Lampedusa are European Union problems .
I talked extensively about the idea of solidarity during the Lisbon Treaty debate .
We need to debate the concept of solidarity in this Parliament because I fear that solidarity is sundered in the European Union at the moment , not just on this difficult issue , but on many others .
It is time that we , as a Parliament , grappled with it and put European Union solidarity back on the map .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , this is indeed a challenging situation .
North Africa is , of course , facing a challenge .
The people there are now trying , especially in Tunisia and Egypt , to build new countries - democratic countries where there is respect for fundamental rights and the rule of law .
They are preparing for elections later this summer .
We should do everything to support them in this fantastic journey .
The Commission is , as you know , preparing a revised strategy for the neighbourhood and it will be presented to the Council .
It will contain support for democracy , support for economic development , growth and job opportunities , and there will also be an element of mobility .
This is a challenge for which we should provide our support .
We also have a challenge in Libya , where the increased violence is creating a very insecure situation and forcing many people to flee .
It is a challenge for European migration policy .
In the long term , we need to develop a more global approach to this , very much in line with Mr Provera 's report , the input of which will be taken into account .
In the short term , we , of course , need to conclude the asylum package .
Believe me , Mrs Keller , we are trying to do that .
With the help of the European Parliament and the efforts of the different rapporteurs to get the package together and conclude the negotiation with the Parliament , I still hope that we can finalise this before the end of the year .
There is a challenging facing Lampedusa and Malta .
I would like to reject some allegations that the Commission , or ' Brussels ' , has not been engaged in helping Italy .
We have , in fact , offered assistance to Italy .
For the remaining period under the current long-term budget , there is EUR 171 million in the national envelope for Italy .
Some of that money has not yet been used for Italy , and we have been working with the Italian authorities on an almost daily basis to see how programme financing can be reallocated so that it can be used to address the situation in Lampedusa .
We have also offered Italy assistance to reimburse some of the costs of internal transfers of migrants .
We have the Frontex Hermes operation , but I would like to remind you that Frontex depends on the contribution of the Member States , and that will be running out in a very short time .
We have the answer : we have Europol in place .
We are engaged in talks with Tunisia to seek a solution on an organised , dignified , voluntary return of those people who are not in need of international protection .
We are helping Tunisia to fight the trafficking networks and seeing how we can assist it in building up border control .
This is part of a larger mobility partnership .
Most of the refugees are in Tunisia and Egypt .
As I said , more than 400 000 people have left Libya .
Most of these people have been repatriated .
They are mainly Tunisians and Egyptians , but they also come from about 30 different countries , mainly in Africa .
There are also people from Bangladesh , Iraq , Afghanistan , etc .
Most of these people have been repatriated through European assistance , with the Member States working in a true spirit of solidarity with Tunisia and Egypt .
But there are some people remaining . I visited these refugee camps only a few days ago .
The Tunisians are doing impressive work together with international organisations , such as the UNHCR .
But there are a few people there , a few thousand , who are stranded .
They cannot return home .
We need to assist these people .
They need to be resettled in Europe .
It is very difficult for me to explain to these Somalis that you cannot come to Europe because we have not agreed on delegated or implemented acts .
So please , I urge you and the Council to come to an agreement on this , because we could really fulfil the aim of the European resettlement programme and help those people , because they have nowhere to go .
We are also seeing refugees coming to Europe now - to Lampedusa and to Malta .
I realise that Malta , of course , with the size of the island , is under enormous pressure .
We might see more people coming .
Many of these people might be in need of international protection .
As long as the violence goes on in Libya , the risk of more people having to flee will increase .
These people are indeed a European challenge .
They will probably need shelter .
We have certain funds .
We have certain agencies .
We have certain policies to try to assist these people .
As I said , we are considering the possibility of using the temporary protection mechanism .
This can be activated when there is a mass influx of people who are unable to return .
But for this to be activated , it needs a qualified majority in the Council .
Today , that majority does not exist .
We are , of course , monitoring this very closely and we will bring it back to the Council next week .
But before we activate this mechanism , I am calling - and I will continue to call - on Member States to put solidarity into action : not only to come out with beautiful words , but to act .
We need to find solutions to assist Italy and Malta and possibly other countries who will be under pressure .
I urge Member States to do this .
There are solidarity funds available for European countries who respond to this appeal .
This will all be discussed at the Justice and Home Affairs Council next week .
I will be happy to report back to you after that .
Thank you very much , Madam President , for a very important debate .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like some clarification from Commissioner Malmström .
The Commissioner said activation of Directive 2001 / 55 / EC will be discussed within Council .
You will discuss it next week with Council because , if I understand correctly , we currently lack a qualified majority .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , maybe I was unclear there .
Everything that I presented to you , including some experiences from Egypt and Tunisia , will be discussed at the Council next week .
Of course , the situation in North Africa is the main point on the agenda .
There is a reference in my speech to this temporary protection mechanism , but I do not know if there will be a decision or anything like that .
It is very much up to the Presidents as to how they want to monitor this , but we are monitoring this situation on an hourly basis .
I just wanted to say that to date , there is no such thing as a qualified majority to activate this protection mechanism .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , before I come to the report , I would like to respond to Mr Meyer and Mr Tavares .

I really respect the opinions of everyone , but it seems to me that their views on Lampedusa and what is happening in Lampedusa are hardly generous .
I wanted to inform them that 12 000 people arrived in Lampedusa within the space of three nights .
Lampedusa is a small island with 6 000 inhabitants and 12 000 people arrived suddenly in three nights , increasing the population to 20 000 .
I think it is very difficult for any country to accept such a large number of people arriving in such a short space of time on a small island which has no facilities for such a great number of arrivals .
There are currently 1 400 migrants on Lampedusa .
Much has been done , and as soon as sea conditions permitted , the migrants were transferred to other centres , primarily in the south of the country .
This brings us to the report .
I wanted to thank the shadow rapporteurs of the different political parties who , with their different sensibilities , have contributed very effectively to this report .
They made a fundamental contribution , in absolute transparency , in the same spirit that inspired us all at the beginning .
I also thank Commissioner Malmström for the enthusiasm she has shown for the concept of burden sharing , which should influence her work within the Commission and thus within Council .
If she continues to show the same enthusiasm , I think the results will follow .
I end by saying that the situation is very difficult to sum up .
Insofar as a summing up is possible , I would like to say that any policy will be ineffective and incomplete as long as huge differences persist between the levels of development in the North and South of the world , as long as huge differences persist in the quality of democratic institutions , and as long as there are vast differences in respect for human rights .
We must take action as part of a major policy of strategic cooperation and aid that will have an impact on the structural causes that led to these huge inequalities between North and South .
If we solve those structural causes , the rest will follow and the world we all live in will probably be a better place .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 5 April 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I am highly critical of the action that the EU is taking with regard to migration .
The different interests of Germany , France , Spain and the other Member States , divided between Northern and Southern Europe , are placing Italy in a very awkward situation .
The Italian Government would do well to procrastinate less and act more , rejecting migrants until Europe comes up with a genuine common immigration policy .
The European Union needs a common asylum policy and to ensure that the principles of solidarity and burden sharing do not remain mere promises on paper .
This would be the situation if Italy were to take on the burden of a situation that is changing the face of North Africa and the entire Mediterranean region .
Italy can no longer accept Libyans , Tunisians and Egyptians until France , Germany and Austria cease rejecting anyone who comes from North Africa through their territory .
Until Brussels coordinates the management of migration flows with the governments in Paris , Berlin and Vienna , as well as Rome and the other Member States , Italy would do well to adopt a much more uncompromising stance than it is doing at present .
The report on migration has a solution for preventing migration flows .
The rapporteur believes that we should prevent migration by investing in the countries that are the source of migration flows .
In a time of economic and financial crisis , however , it is not possible for the EU to ' finance ' the third world on a massive scale , at the expense of maintaining the living standards of European citizens .
There have been , there are and there will continue to be enormous economic differences between the EU and Africa .
If these differences were erased , and third world citizens no longer had any reason to migrate to the EU , it would be because we had contributed to a decline in standards in EU countries .
We must not delude ourselves that migration results only from violations of fundamental human rights .
A large percentage of migrants come to the EU only for a ' better ' life .
Sociological research shows that the greater the percentage of migrants in the EU , the more dissatisfied local people are with their way of life .
If the number of migrants exceeds a certain percentage , they lose interest in becoming part of European society and , on the contrary , create their own society within the EU .
The EU should focus migration policy exclusively on violations of human rights .
The financial and economic differences between migrant countries and the EU should not be a reason for providing funding to these countries .
The policy on preventing migration must be combined with a policy on the prevention of migration at the EU 's external borders .
The events in North Africa have resulted in a new migration flow on Europe 's southern border .
While we ponder solutions to this acute problem , we also need to examine its causes .
The fall of the Arab dictatorships may be one of the major turning points in global politics since the collapse of the Iron Curtain some 20 years ago .
It is , above all , a tremendous chance for democracy and civil rights .
Like all revolutions , this one also entails a risk .
At its most critical , it is visible when dictators who abuse their powers threaten their own citizens , as is happening in Libya .
Europe and its allies cannot and should not just sit idly by while there is unrest on its borders .
We have one common mission : we need to do all we can to protect the lives of innocent citizens , including women and children , when no one else can .
The democratisation of North Africa , a respect for human rights , and the emerging economic growth associated with these are the best way to stem the human tide on Europe 's southern border .
For weeks now , thousands of migrants have been landing on the shores of the Mediterranean and , in particular , in Malta and Lampedusa , fleeing the situation in their country , where unprecedented political instability reigns .
Frontex has rightly launched Operation Hermes to help the Italian authorities cope with this mass influx of migrants to their shores .
The management of this humanitarian crisis must not be left to the Italian authorities alone .
The control of the EU 's external borders must be a joint effort , because it is a joint challenge .
This mass influx of third-country nationals will result in waves of illegal migrants entering many Member States .
We need only see how the French authorities are intercepting every day hundreds of illegal migrants arriving straight from Italy .
We know full well that those asylum seekers include many economic migrants who ' slip ' into these mixed migratory flows .
Moreover , the European effort must be stepped up .
The Member States must provide Frontex with the resources it needs to carry out its missions .
We also need to cooperate more with the Tunisian authorities .
Tunisia must fulfil its readmission obligations .
in writing . - The situation in Libya at present is very uncertain .
What is certain , however , is that it has brought about a humanitarian crisis .
As this report describes , armed conflicts , especially when they involve human rights abuses , give rise to huge increases in migratory flows to neighbouring countries .
In view of the massive proportions these could lead to , the EU 's Frontex programme cannot be the best tool to deal with such levels of migration .
The EU must , as of now , set up and plan a proper response , including a detailed burden-sharing action plan to help refugees resettle in a coordinated manner .
This should be based on the solidarity clause contained in Article 80 of the TFEU .
One could quibble about what particular number of refugees could be defined as an ' emergency ' .
However , we need to have a detailed plan laid out , with clear thresholds on a country-by-country basis , so that EU governments and the Commission are both ready and well prepared to deal with an imminent crisis .
As a Maltese MEP , it is very disappointing that the Commission is apparently so under-prepared to deal with a crisis that has long been inevitable .
The motion for a resolution highlights a very significant and important matter .
It not only focuses on the problem of equal treatment for women and men in rural areas , but also points directly to the need to create equal opportunities for women living in rural areas , similar to those enjoyed on a daily basis by women living in urban centres .
I think that we have paid too little attention in Parliament thus far to the social and professional development of women in rural areas .
Women living in rural areas come up against many obstacles every day , both economic and infrastructure-related , which , to a significant extent , limit their opportunities in terms of access to education , health protection and , most importantly , the labour market .
After all , not many job offers are targeted at rural areas , mainly due to the fact that these areas are significantly less developed in economic terms .
That is why it is so important to support rural development policies by improving access to advanced infrastructure , or by means of opportunities to benefit from highly developed information and communications technologies .
I am sure that the Members of the European Parliament can also do a great deal to ensure that rural areas catch up with the benefits of civilisation .
We are , after all , able to organise various kinds of training or workshops , during which we can provide real help in accessing EU funds earmarked for the development of rural areas .
One-minute speeches ( Rule 150 )
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( GA ) Madam President , it must be the aim of the European Union to greatly reduce the incidence of fatalities and serious injuries and to improve road safety .
I do not accept the need to wait until 2033 for the European Driving Licence to be put into effect .
At present , there is just a European model for the driving licence but what is meant by that , really ?
We want to protect road users , if there is the political will to do so , and I firmly believe that modern technology now available can shorten the period for putting Directive 2006 / 126 / EC into effect .
We cannot wait any longer - that is extremely important .
The Commission must do something concrete about this .
( HU ) Madam President , democracy , freedom , solidarity and Christian ideals are the common European values that I believe in .
These were also avowed by Count János Eszterházy , a Slovakian Hungarian politician , who was condemned on trumped up charges by the Communists in 1947 and died a martyr 's death in Mírov prison in 1957 .
Apart from his countless other merits , he was the only politician who , as a Member of Parliament , condemned and voted against the deportation of the Jews in the Parliament of the fascist Slovakian state in 1942 .
His only crime was to stand up without fail for the Hungarians of Slovakia who , together with the German-speaking citizens , were vilified en masse , and made stateless and displaced under the shameful Beneš decrees .
The EU should be ashamed that these inhumane decrees legitimising state terror are still in force , and the rehabilitation of János Eszterházy , as well as hundreds of thousands of citizens deprived of their human dignity , is still awaited .
I call on my honourable fellow Members to have deeper concern about protecting our common European values .
( RO ) Madam President , this year , the separatist demonstrations organised by the Hungarian extremists in Transylvania to celebrate Hungary 's national day were marked by a worrying display of radicalism , especially due to the support and declarations from senior representatives of the Hungarian State and one of the European Parliament 's vice-presidents .
The Hungarian celebration on 15 March jeopardises from one year to the next the good understanding between Romanians and Hungarians .
In this situation , provocative gestures , such as the recent action by a Hungarian extremist who symbolically hanged the hero of the Transylvanian Romanians ' struggle in 1848 for their national rights , only serve to threaten peaceful coexistence .
I strongly condemn these displays of extremism .
I call on the Romanian authorities to swap political complicity for legal measures .
I also appeal to the European forums to take action to halt the escalation of ethnic hatred and territorial separatism in a region where the wounds of the past have a unique opportunity to be closed with the help of European values .
( LV ) Madam President , I should like to pose you a question .
Do you think it is possible to close French schools in Belgium ?
Or , let us say , German schools in France ?
You are right : it is not possible .
Yet in Latvia , where more than 40 % of the population is Russian-speaking , it is possible .
Today , in the Latvian Parliament , nationalist and Nazi members wish to hold a referendum on the closure of Russian schools in Latvia .
At the same time , OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities , Knut Vollebaek , arrives in Latvia and announces that he can be proud of integration in Latvia Do you think that I am joking ?
You are mistaken .
What , moreover , do you think will happen if Russian schools are closed in Latvia ?
I shall tell you - a civil war will break out in Latvia .
If the European Parliament does not react today to this overt radical initiative , by tomorrow , it will already be too late . Thank you .
( ES ) Madam President , the nuclear crisis in Japan must not be exploited for manipulative purposes : the public is expecting us to respond and to act .
The first thing is for the announced safety tests to be carried out quickly and transparently , and for States to be required to close obsolete or unsafe plants .
The first tests should be carried out at first-generation plants , which use the same technology as Fukushima .
They are at the end of their useful lives and are technically obsolete .
This is why I am asking you to support the request from all the institutions of the Basque Country to urgently close one such plant : the one in Santa María de Garoña .
More than 2 million people live within a radius of 80 km of it .
Moreover , more work needs to be done on prevention from an urban planning and civil protection perspective , on safety in terms of deciding where to site these kinds of facilities , and on drafting a European protocol , to enable us to take effective , well ordered and rapid joint action to deal with large-scale catastrophes .
Madam President , the Commission 's Secretary-General , Catherine Day , recently described the Irish bank bailout as ' tough but sustainable ' .
This is not a bailout but a sell-out : a sell-out , at EU insistence , to bondholders - senior , junior , secured , unsecured - every type , category and class of bondholder , while Irish taxpayers shoulder intolerable debt .
The cost of the bank bailout is EUR 70 billion , not to mention the EUR 200 billion in emergency funding from the ECB .
How is a small island of 4.4 million people supposed to cope with this madness ?
The debt burden for every man , woman and child in Ireland is roughly EUR 160 000 just to bail out the banks , and that is not including the interest .
A little comparison : if France - population 62 million - were faced with an equivalent banking crisis , the debt of French citizens would be EUR 1 trillion .
Would the Commission describe that as ' tough but sustainable ' ?
Finally , Catherine Day was also wrong when she said that this is not a crisis of the euro .
If the European Commission does not recognise that and act on it , then the future of the eurozone , and not just that of Ireland , is bleak .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the current international economic crisis , Catalonia is showing very positive signs , such as a 16 % increase in exports last year , but also very negative symptoms such as youth unemployment in excess of 40 % .
One of the main reasons for these difficulties is the loss of tax revenue suffered by our country each year , which is equivalent to more than 10 % of gross domestic product , a figure that is much higher than the contribution of the richest Länder to the entire Federal Republic of Germany .
The economic strangulation of Catalonia hits one of the main economic drivers in Southern Europe and , for this reason , is a problem for the European Union as a whole .
( PL ) Madam President , the Republic of Lithuania has recently adopted an Education Act which changes the education system in such a way that there are fears that a significant number - at least half , and maybe more - of the Polish schools in Lithuania may be closed .
This is a further example of discrimination against the Polish national minority which has lived in the country for centuries , going back many generations .
After the introduction of a ban on writing Polish names using the Polish spelling and a ban on the use of Polish place names , and even instances of Poles being penalised for using their own language , we are dealing with a further instance of discrimination , this time affecting education .
This is all the more lamentable since there is no conflict between the peoples of the two countries , and yet the Lithuanian authorities are irresponsibly igniting and fuelling such a conflict , which may have extremely adverse effects .
We concern ourselves with violations of human rights in various places around the world , and yet such regrettable developments are taking place right here in the European Union .
It is high time that the European Union looked into this matter .
It is a disgrace , not only for Lithuania , but for the European Union as a whole . Thank you .
( EL ) Madam President , the Turkish Prime Minister commented on the Oomen-Ruijten report on Turkey 's progress towards accession by stating that the report is unbalanced and that he personally considers those who drafted it to be unbalanced .
A few days later , Turkish Cypriot trade union leaders rallying outside the European Parliament in Brussels chanted that the Turkish political leadership does not only insult the MEPs who voted in favour of Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's report ; it also insults the Turkish Cypriots who turned out in force in occupied Cyprus to protest against the repression exerted over them by the 40 000 Turkish troops and countless numbers of Turkish settlers .
Speaking at the rally , Turkish Cypriot politician , Izzet Izcan , said that Ankara was violating international law by changing the entire demographic structure by moving people from Turkey , thereby putting the very existence of the Turkish Cypriot community at risk and emphasised that anyone who respects human rights , such as the European Union , cannot brook such violations .
Shall we , as the European Parliament , brook this violation , Madam President ?
I call on you to convey this protest by the Turkish Cypriots both to the Council and to the Commission , so that they can take appropriate action before it is too late .
( EL ) Madam President , North Africa is up in flames following the political developments in Egypt , Tunisia and Libya .
This crisis is sucking in other countries in the Middle East , with unfortunate , politically dubious and ambiguous consequences .
At the same time , Turkey is being given considerable autonomy by decision makers in the West , with clashes between Ankara and Israel and tighter relations between Turkey , Iran and Brazil .
Turkey is also gaining autonomy from US policies for the Middle East and from European commitments on future accession to the European Union .
There is continuing instability in the countries of former Yugoslavia which is feeding nationalistic groups .
Finally , according to reliable international statistics , the Muslim populations which currently number 1.6 billion will rise to 2.2 billion by 2030 , whereas the population of Europe will fall by 50 million .
My question is this : do European leaders understand that the destabilisation of the South will have an adverse impact both on the euro and on the geopolitical stability of the security system in the West ?
Madam President , I had intended to speak on the impact of the financial crisis in the Republic of Ireland on the economy in Northern Ireland .
Instead , it is with deep regret that I inform this House of the callous and brutal murder of a member of the Police Service of Northern Ireland .
Twenty-five-year-old Constable Ronan Kerr died at the hands of Republican terrorists on Saturday afternoon .
Constable Kerr , a Catholic police officer , was murdered when a booby-trap bomb planted under his car exploded on Saturday as he left for work .
He died at the scene .
I call on this House to condemn this atrocity and to call for an end to such violent acts at the hands of Irish Republican terrorists intent on dragging Northern Ireland back to its darker days and derailing the political process .
Since 2007 , dissident Republican terrorists have planted dozens of booby-trap bombs under the private cars of police officers .
Thankfully , most of these have failed to detonate .
I am sure that you will also join with me in calling for all information regarding this murder to be given to the police .
There are people in the local community who have information about Constable Kerr 's brutal murder .
They need to come forward and bring these murderers to justice , not shield them from it .
They need to do it for the future of our country and out of respect for a brave police officer and his grieving mother and family .
I am also appalled at the lack of respect that this speech has been given by some Members of this House .
( EL ) Madam President , in ratifying the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , the 27 Member States have committed to equal rights , equal treatment and equal opportunities , thereby ensuring that these citizens can participate fully in society .
However , as we have seen , this does not apply to everyone .
Around 30 million blind people living in Europe face huge difficulties in everyday activities , such as shopping , because they have to rely on other people to tell them what is inside the packaging .
I should therefore like to call on the Commission to open broad consultation with interested bodies on the adoption of a voluntary product labelling system in Braille and , at the same time , to call on my fellow Members here to support it by signing written statement 14 .
( EL ) Madam President , the conclusions of the last summit provided anything but reassurance .
The clear provision for the facility for a Member State to restructure debt post-2013 is a straightforward departure from the European Union 's original position when the crisis broke , that debt restructuring would be precluded at all costs .
Already in Greece , the debate by distinguished economists at international level and the markets has taken off again .
What happened to change this position ?
Every effort was made , no cost was spared ; perhaps we just ran out of steam .
The truth is that the forecasts and estimates made are not being verified .
The recession is getting worse in Greece instead of better , government spending is at -9 % , when it should be at + 8.5 % based on the memorandum for 2011 and , worst of all , unemployment has already topped 15 % .
There is only one answer to this : growth .
Is there any sign of growth ?
No , there is not ; we need policies for growth , not reversals and talk about restructuring .
( HU ) Madam President , the Hungarian EU Presidency has reached half-time , so it is worth reviewing the achievements to date .
A major success is that agreement in principle was reached recently in the Council about the package of six legislative proposals to strengthen economic governance .
The rapid adoption of the new legislation by Parliament may greatly improve the competitiveness of the European economy .
The energy summit in February also brought a real breakthrough .
As a result of the strengthening of the common energy market and infrastructural development , a common European energy policy may be created at last .
Apart from this , agreements of key importance have been reached with regard to the common agricultural policy and cohesion policy as well .
Naturally , there are still open questions , such as the EU Roma strategy .
Through adopting this , the EU will , at last , accept official responsibility as well for closing the gap for the Roma .
Ladies and gentlemen , the success of the Hungarian Presidency also means success for Europe .
For precisely this reason , I ask you to continue to support the achievement of common objectives through your votes .
Thank you for the floor , Madam President .
Madam President , like Mrs Dodds , I had intended to speak about the economy , but the terrible , callous murder of a young Catholic police officer in Northern Ireland has sadly changed that .
I think it is important that this House realises the enormity of this tragedy for the island of Ireland , and for the family affected by it .
Mr Kerr had only finished his initial training in December ; he was only 25 and a bomb exploded under his car .
I was very touched by the comments of his mother yesterday on Mothers ' Day , when she urged Catholics not to be deterred from joining the Police Service of Northern Ireland at a time when we are striving , as she said , for a neutral police force for the good of our country .
She urged all Catholics not to be deterred by this murder .
She said we all need to stand up and be counted and to strive for equality .
Again I will quote her words in her sadness : ' We do not want to go back into the dark days again of fear and terror .
We were so proud of Ronan and all that he stood for .
Don 't let his death be in vain ' .
Those who murdered him have still not admitted to it .
Those who know the persons or others who committed this murder have a duty to come and to give evidence to the Police Service of Northern Ireland .
Europe has supported the peace process , and it is our duty to continue to do that .
( RO ) Madam President , Romania has a law stipulating that teachers ' salaries should be increased , because they are very low .
This law was approved and voted on in the Romanian Parliament , but it is not enforced in any way at all .
Teachers have won their rights in court , based on definitive legal judgments , but the government is unwilling to enforce this law .
As a result , it is devising a new law which places a ceiling on teachers ' salaries .
This is not only a danger to democracy and an unhealthy way for the democratic institutions of a state to operate .
It goes far beyond this .
It jeopardises the objectives of the Europe 2020 agenda .
We are all aware that in order to effect a sustainable recovery from the crisis , we need education and skills .
In order to have an economy based on knowledge and research , we need young people who are very well trained , teachers who are very well paid and a strong , effective education system .
( RO ) Madam President , as a result of the incompetent administration and disastrous policy of economic vandalism pursued by the Băsescu-Boc regime , Romania 's healthcare system , especially the health insurance sector , has reached subsistence level .
Both the medical staff who work in this system and the patients who ought to benefit from it have reached the point where they are being treated beneath the level of decency and human dignity .
There are solutions for improving and remedying this situation , but they are being ignored by the current government .
The foundations were recently established for cooperation between family doctor trade union organisations and the Health Committee of the Chamber of Deputies , in the hope of achieving a better outcome at the future discussions with the Ministry of Health and the National Health Insurance Office .
I wanted to draw the European Parliament 's attention to this situation as , if these actions supported by the Romanian Parliament also fail , this will add further evidence to the catalogue of abuses of power in Romania , where the democratic principle of the separation of powers of state has ceased to apply .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to echo the concerns expressed last week by Crown Prince Felipe de Borbón , who carries the historic title of my region - the Principality of Asturias - when he received the Prince of Wales in Madrid .
Prince Felipe quite rightly called on the governments of Spain and the United Kingdom to resolve the damaging Gibraltar conflict .
This is an important reminder that I welcome , as I say , from the European Parliament .
With Spain and the United Kingdom being exemplarily democratic Member States , Britain 's continued occupation of the rock in the 21st century is intolerable .
No occupation of a sovereign state by another is acceptable under law .
The occupation of northern Cyprus - a region I have recently visited - in violation of the territorial integrity of Cyprus , is also clearly unacceptable .
( SK ) Madam President , the European Union wants to become the most competitive economy in the world .
In order to achieve this , we must invest in our future , and in my opinion , our young people and their education are our future .
It is said that whoever wants something looks for reasons , and whoever does not want something looks for ways to avoid finding reasons .
In my opinion , the European Union is currently looking for reasons to say why we cannot put more funding into education , and we are often very fond of pointing out that we have a crisis and must deal with its consequences .
As we are now discussing the next seven-year period in the EU and future funding and budgets , I think we should be asking an unambiguous question : how much do we intend to invest in education and in our future ?
We also certainly need to hear what the Council and the Commission want to do in this area .
Likewise , we cannot , of course , tolerate what is happening in some Member States , which are transferring funding from education into other areas , as is taking place in my own country , for example .
In my opinion , this is not right .
We must also realise that investing in the future is the only way to achieve what we really want to achieve .
Madam President , I want to denounce today an act of aggression against one of the pillars of the European Union : the internal market and the free circulation of goods and people .
Recently , the Catalan Meat Industry Federation and certain Catalan newspapers have reported that , in France , trucks coming from Catalonia have been attacked and damaged by French farmers .
The meat products some trucks were carrying were completely destroyed by French pickets .
These acts of aggression have been repeated twice since the beginning of 2011 .
The last incident happened just a few weeks ago , when French pickets stopped another lorry full of meat from Catalonia , assaulted the driver and then sprayed diesel over 20 000 kilos of fresh meat .
This pressure by some French farmers ' unions , destroying products coming from outside France , has had a very rapid impact on clients of the Catalan meat industry , as a result of which its sales have dropped by 50 % .
I have tabled a parliamentary written question to the Commission in the hope that the European Union will stop this unacceptable aggression .
( HU ) Madam President , in Europe , cultural diversity is a value which all of us must take action to defend .
However , this has not always been the case .
On our continent , there are numerous unique cultures which are threatened with extinction .
The Csango Hungarians in the Romanian region of Moldova are one such endangered community as well .
Recommendation 1521 / 2001 of the Council of Europe urges saving this Csango minority culture , while outlining specific measures .
Although there have been steps forward in the matter over the last decade as a result of the recommendation , the situation is far from satisfactory .
The Council of Europe does not have at its disposal the European legislation or a mechanism of accountability that makes compliance with this possible and which ensures the effective functioning of the European Union .
The Council of Europe is ahead of the EU in many issues concerning the provision of human rights at a high level , but its recommendation and its treaties cannot achieve the desired effect .
If the European Union takes the principle of honouring cultural and linguistic diversity seriously , which Article 3 of the EU Treaty also advocates , everything must be done to ensure that this principle is enforced in actual cases .
Let us start with the Csango Hungarian culture in Moldova .
( ES ) Madam President , in January , the European Commission approved the strategy to tackle early school dropout as a key contribution to the Europe 2020 strategy to fight the school dropout problem across the entire European Union and reduce rates by at least 10 % .
Strangely , this strategy does not make any reference to disabled people , and this is why I would like to use this minute to make an appeal , since the education ministers of all the Member States will be meeting in Brussels on 2 and 4 May to discuss the global strategies around this issue .
I would like to ask that the issue of disabled people be included within this strategy , because it is of fundamental importance for this group of people all over Europe to receive continuous education and therefore to be able to access the labour market .
Article 24 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities states that disabled people are not , under any circumstances , to be excluded from the general education system .
The debate is closed .
Role of women in agriculture and rural areas ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Jeggle , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas .
Madam President , Commissioner , as Parliament 's rapporteur for the own-initiative report on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas , it was my aim to conduct a broad public debate in order to give more visibility and weight to the important multi-functional role of women in rural areas .
It remains a key task of European rural policy to achieve equivalent living conditions in all regions , preventing the one-sided development of heavily populated urban areas , so that , even in rural areas , people can look forward to staying put and making a successful life .
The focus of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) over recent decades has been on the positive economic development of agriculture and rural areas .
In future , it will be geared increasingly to shaping and furthering future-oriented rural areas .
This will require fresh efforts and new strategies by all concerned .
It will be more necessary than ever to take account of the needs of women in rural areas and to utilise their potential .
Experience shows that , in rural areas most particularly , quality of life and economic strength are linked to the presence of women and their involvement in a wide range of activities .
It has become apparent in recent years that significant advances for rural societies generally result from support for women and women 's projects .
Findings to that effect have been gleaned from experience with such support under the second pillar of the CAP and various other EU funding schemes in all regions of Europe .
However , women also have an essential role to play in agriculture .
This is a sector where women have made a substantial contribution in recent years to business diversification and adjustment to the market , thereby advancing the practical outworking of the sector 's multi-functionality .
In addition to their own food production , agricultural businesses also offer innovative products and services .
The types of economic potential represented here can be utilised to an even greater extent .
In this context , there are opportunities to provide practical support measures for women in agriculture .
Greater account must be taken of the wide range of vocational skills , interests and achievements of women .
To that end , we call , in particular , for women to have a full share in the resources that underpin farming as a way of life and a type of business .
Women farmers want a share in rights and duties that is commensurate with their co-responsibility for the farm business , including through the appropriate representation of interests on agricultural bodies .
Ensuring adequate social cover for all women who work in agriculture is essential .
Following an intensive dialogue , we succeeded , in our vote in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , in adopting the report with only one vote against .
No amendments have been tabled for tomorrow 's vote in plenary .
That indicates to me that we have found a very good compromise that is acceptable to all groups .
A unanimous vote would give the report the necessary weight for it - I hope - to receive sufficient consideration in the Commission and the Council .
I would like to thank my fellow Members , especially the shadow rapporteurs , for their truly excellent cooperation .
The important role of women in agriculture and rural areas must not be overlooked in the forthcoming debate on the future of the CAP post 2013 .
I am confident that our report will provide an important basis for this essential debate and that it will also make a positive contribution to the forthcoming financial debate .
Madam President , I congratulate Elisabeth Jeggle for her good work in this report and for her continued work in this area over the number of years I have known her .
It is a compliment to her work that there are no amendments tabled to this important report .
In the short time I have , I want to draw attention to several paragraphs in it .
I welcome paragraph 4 about the importance of an adequate budget for agriculture in general , and paragraph 10 , about new technologies in rural areas and the need to widen the access to broadband .
I think paragraph 34 is particularly important .
Women ought to be adequately represented in all political , economic and social bodies in the agriculture sector so that decision-making processes are informed by both male and female perspectives .
That is really important , and I regret to say that the face of farm organisations is unfortunately all too male .
We do need to look at that issue .
Lastly , the Commission needs to be aware that the problem for male and female farmers at the moment is the uncertainty over the debate on CAP reform .
I worry that some farmers are trying to second guess the outcome of those reforms and that they may be taking on additional costs , which will be a burden to them .
I would ask you to bring that message to the Commission .
( RO ) Madam President , the main concern of women in rural areas is the lack of jobs .
The lack of jobs means low incomes for the elderly , which , in turn , increases the risk of poverty .
In addition , children 's education and healthcare services in rural areas are the lifeblood of these communities .
The precarious nature of the basic infrastructure in the countryside means that entrepreneurs show less interest in developing farms and production units in these areas .
I urge Member States to use the Structural Funds to remedy the lack of basic infrastructure in rural areas and to implement policies for improving access to the public infrastructure for everyone .
I call on the Commission and Member States to abide by their commitment to improve the broadband infrastructure in rural areas as a means of boosting their competitiveness .
Rural tourism based on family tourist enterprises creates jobs , makes it possible to combine family obligations with work , and encourages the rural population to remain in the countryside .
Madam President , I welcome this timely report from Elisabeth Jeggle and thank her for her good cooperation .
Not many people realise that 42 % of those engaged regularly in agriculture are women , and that three out of every ten holdings in the EU are managed by women .
In order for women and families to remain in the countryside and make their contribution to achieving the objectives of the EU 2020 strategy through agriculture , there must be a range of services and facilities for normal everyday life .
These services should include such things as healthcare and care services , education , leisure , transport and broadband .
It is crucial that all services are not just market-oriented .
There also needs to be proper social insurance for women working in agriculture so that their future and their pensions can be guaranteed .
It is also important for women 's entrepreneurial skills to be facilitated and , across the board , for women to be involved in decision making at local and regional level , in farm organisations and , indeed , in all decision-making bodies .
That will have a huge impact and will help ensure women 's future role in agriculture .
( PT ) Madam President , the situation of women in agriculture and the rural sphere reflects and is being damaged by the deep crisis into which current policies , such as the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and others , have plunged rural areas .
Women represent 42 % of agricultural workers in all countries of the European Union .
The great majority of these women work on family farms .
They are thus particularly affected by the closure of hundreds of thousands of small and medium-sized farms and by the process of destruction of family farming that has resulted from successive CAP reforms .
They are also , as in other areas of activity , hit particularly hard by unemployment , insecure jobs , low wages and poverty .
All of this is exacerbated by the antisocial policies imposed under the pretext of the crisis .
Fine words and declarations of good intentions are therefore not enough .
A break with these policies is required , ascribing value to the roles of women , to their rights and to equality , and ascribing value to and strengthening , among other things , the network of services relating to rural resources , health , education and family assistance .
It is also necessary to make cultural and leisure activities available , and to combat the various asymmetries and desertification .
( RO ) Madam President , I personally believe that the most important sections in the report are those about living conditions in the countryside , and I would like to make a few remarks on this point .
Firstly , there is the important role played by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development in modernising villages .
This fund must be financed adequately and as part of the future common agricultural policy to help narrow the disparities between rural and urban areas .
Secondly , I believe that we need to start , especially in the new Member States , with modernising the basic physical infrastructure .
This must remain , without fail , a component of the EAFRD .
My last comment concerns the ageing of the rural population .
I would like to emphasise in connection with this point the importance of the programmes aimed , on the one hand , at the early retirement of farmers and farm workers and , on the other , at setting up young farmers in business .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate Mrs Jeggle for the approach she has adopted in this report .
I feel that it is vital to recognise the significant role played by women in agriculture , both in primary production and in the diversification of economic activities on farms and in rural areas .
I believe that we need to draw attention to the high level of poverty and isolation which affects women in the countryside , thereby emphasising the need for effective measures to guarantee equal opportunities for women in agriculture as a main objective of the common agricultural policy .
In this context , it is essential to improve the quality of life of women living in rural areas by providing them with the easiest possible access to education and vocational training , lifelong learning , effective local public healthcare services , not to mention to the infrastructure and services for supporting children and families .
I should emphasise that improving equal opportunities for women in rural areas involves promoting their role more actively , both in farming and in other areas of economic activity , including in protecting agriculture 's multi-functionality .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would first like to thank the rapporteur and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , as it was important to put this topic on the table .

The Commission is very conscious of the essential role women play in agriculture and in rural areas .
It can see that this is a task for the rural development policy .
The rural development regulation provides for support in a number of areas which are important for women in rural areas .
The setting up and development of micro-enterprises , adding value to agricultural projects and seeking sales outlets for them are only a few examples .
The rural development policy also foresees possibilities to help men and women to balance family and professional life .
For example , under the basic services measure , social facilities like day care centres for children or elderly people can be supported .
In addition , local transport services and small-scale infrastructure are eligible for support .
The situation in rural areas is very diverse across Member States , including as regards possibilities and requirements for women .
Member States and regions have to carefully analyse the situation and design tailor-made measures linked to local conditions , taking account of the specific problems women face .
For example , Member States can give preference to women with regard to certain measures .
In addition , Member States can use financial engineering to set up guarantee funds in order to help women to get access to credit .
Women should also play an important role in the LEADER Programme , where they should bring in their specific interests and their specific potential in order to mobilise the development potential of an area .
The Commission agrees that it would be useful to have more data on the situation of women .
However , especially in the light of Member States ' call for simplification , it would prove difficult to convince them of additional reporting burdens .
But for those data for which it is possible , statistics should be presented and analysed , broken down by gender .
The Commission will include , where available , data on women in its progress report on the implementation of the strategic guidelines for rural development .
One very important factor in taking women forward in agriculture and rural areas is the exchange of experience .
In this context , I would like to draw your attention to the European Network for Rural Development and its constituent national networks .
They can be used to learn from each other 's best practices and it would be desirable if more women 's associations made use of these existing networks in order to connect women in different rural areas with each other .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 5 April 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I come from Romania where a high proportion of the population live in the countryside .
This is precisely why I am aware that it is absolutely imperative for us to focus greater attention on the status of women in these areas , taking into account the specific opportunities and challenges .
As a member of the Committee on Culture and Education and of the Committee on Regional Development , I want to stress the need to provide a vocational training system which will offer women adequate training both as producers and entrepreneurs , especially so that we can therefore meet the Europe 2020 strategy targets .
This can also be achieved by providing farmers with better access to broadband Internet services .
Supporting entrepreneurial initiative among women can provide them with incomes supporting a stable way of life , thereby giving them economic independence .
This will allow us to eliminate the impact of social exclusion and poverty , which have a disproportionate effect on women .
In this very same context , we are also talking about the future reform of the common agricultural policy , as part of which we will need to give greater consideration to the role and needs of women in rural areas .
Making living in the countryside and farming more attractive remains a challenge , but it can offer women in these areas real opportunities for economic and personal development .
It is men who most frequently choose careers in the agricultural sector , but women have been present in rural areas since time immemorial and , unfortunately , their contribution has always been underestimated .
Their consistent actions and long-term approach to many issues help improve the quality of life and work in rural areas .
They are , however , very frequently not represented during the resource planning stage , and taking female farmers ' needs into account in this respect could bring many benefits to rural communities .
We should ensure that professional development opportunities are open to women in agriculture by providing real support in the form of education or also careers advice .
It is important to promote rural areas to women as an attractive place to work , where it is possible to realise both family and professional plans .
EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in the new Member States ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mrs Marinescu , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the efficiency and effectiveness of EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in the new Member States .
Madam President , the accession treaties of the three Member States , Slovakia , Bulgaria and Lithuania , included the request to decommission a number of nuclear reactors which no longer met the safety conditions and could not be upgraded in a cost-effective manner .
The aim of the financial assistance provided by the European Union was not to cover the entire decommissioning cost .
The assistance was intended for measures in the areas of decommissioning , maintaining and monitoring reactors after shutdown , waste treatment , waste and spent fuel storage and decontamination , and dismantling work , as well as in the energy sector ( for the replacement of the production capacity of the decommissioned units , improving energy supply security and energy efficiency , and other measures contributing to the necessary restructuring and upgrading of the energy infrastructure ) and dealing with the social consequences ( providing support for plant staff in maintaining a high level of safety after closure and retraining staff for new decommissioning tasks ) .
Due to the fact that financial assistance was decided without any ceiling being specified , which even continued after decommissioning plans and strategies were drawn up , new , additional financial support could be provided .
The European Union has provided significant sums of money in funding this activity , amounting to roughly EUR 2.8 billion between 1999 and now .
The report calls for the following aspects to be clarified in the future evaluations carried out by the European Commission and the Court of Auditors of the European Union : whether the funds allocated by the European Union were used to ensure safe decommissioning ; whether decommissioning guarantees the safe storage of nuclear waste ; whether there was sufficient coordination between the three existing programmes so that the experience accumulated was used effectively and the model was followed , based on projects prepared and funded previously in order to achieve a reduction in costs ; whether the current plans and strategies are complete or whether it is still possible to add new activities and provide additional funds later on ; whether additional sums still need to be allocated to energy projects or whether attention needs to be focused on decommissioning projects ; and whether financing for these activities still needs to be provided from EU funds .
( SK ) Madam President , the early decommissioning of nuclear reactors in the three EU candidate countries of Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria prevented the creation of appropriate national funds to cover all the costs connected with decommissioning the plants , and Community assistance was therefore essential for coping with the substantial financial and economic burden .
Expert studies show , however , that the costs for taking the plants out of operation have already exceeded the level of planned assistance from the EU , and have probably exceeded the original estimates as well , although the actual decommissioning is still in the initial phase .
The decommissioning will therefore have to carry on , ladies and gentlemen , even after the end of the financial perspective covering the period up to 2013 , and I therefore consider it necessary to consider releasing further funds for the projects to decommission these three nuclear plants .
( RO ) Madam President , the European Union has 143 nuclear power plant units and , according to the data published by the Energy DG in March for 2010 , nuclear energy accounts for roughly 28 % of the European Union 's energy mix .
The events in Japan have sounded an alarm bell regarding the risks associated with nuclear power plants .
Shutting down nuclear power plant units early and decommissioning them is a major financial and economic burden .
This is why the European Union can provide financial assistance to the Member States affected , by which I mean Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria .
The lack of funding for decommissioning measures will delay this process , which would pose a threat to the environment and human health .
We urge the relevant national bodies to finalise their detailed decommissioning plans , as well as the Commission to report on this process , clearly describe the scope of the EU funding in these cases and provide a detailed long-term financial plan for the decommissioning projects .
( LT ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate my fellow Member and thank her for her cooperation in preparing this important report .
When they joined the European Union , three Member States made commitments that were complex both economically and socially : to close their nuclear power plants for the first time , without having the required financial capacity or experience .
The European Union really did show solidarity by committing itself to providing the required financial assistance , not just to fund decommissioning , but also to contribute to the development of alternative energy projects and towards mitigating the negative social impact of decommissioning .
I agree that some issues still need to be addressed , such as the allocation of money to carry out specific decommissioning work , and Member States ' complex administrative structures , which are perhaps preventing the allocated funding from being absorbed effectively .
I believe that the European Commission should play a greater coordinating role in order to ensure the timely and safe closure of these nuclear reactors , to guarantee transparency as regards the use of funds , and to encourage these countries to develop alternative energy and create new jobs .
( PT ) Madam President , nearly half of European Union Member States have nuclear plants within their territory .
Many of the reactors in operation are relatively old , which creates an acute need for some of these reactors to be dismantled for reasons of safety , and of defending and safeguarding public health and the environment .
In the case of new Member States confronted with the requirement to decommission a number of plants , it seems only right to us that they be able to expect EU support to adequately and safely complete their decommissioning processes .
These processes should include the necessary maintenance and supervision following closure ; the processing , storage and decontamination of waste ; the environmental upgrading of installations ; and support in replacing the energy capacity of decommissioned plants , paying particular attention to environmental sustainability and energy efficiency .
As the report rightly states , the social consequences of this process should be taken fully into account , guaranteeing the safeguarding of workers ' jobs , together with all safety conditions before , during and after decommissioning .
( SK ) Madam President , the Marinescu report talks about the effectiveness and efficiency of EU funding spent on decommissioning Soviet-style nuclear reactors .
The Slovak Republic completely rebuilt its nuclear plant at Jaslovské Bohunice after the accident at Chernobyl , fitting the most up-to-date safety equipment from specialised French and German firms .
Following completion of the extensive modernisation , inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency stated that the Jaslovské Bohunice nuclear plant was ready for more than 30 years of safe operation .
Nevertheless , for the peace and assurance of the citizens of neighbouring Austria , the Slovak Republic agreed during EU accession talks to the early decommissioning of the V1 and V2 reactors at Jaslovské Bohunice , which were fitted out to the highest standards .
I see the symbolic contribution of the EU to the costs of taking these reactors out of production only as an attempt to compensate at least partly for the loss suffered by the Slovak Republic , which has been deprived of a powerful and efficient source of clean power , and not as a real contribution towards the removal of this plant .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission very much welcomes Parliament 's own-initiative report on the efficient and effective EU funding of decommissioning of nuclear power plants in the new Member States .
Nuclear safety is , and will remain , an absolute priority for the EU , and this is why the Commission attaches great importance to efforts that facilitate the safe decommissioning of nuclear reactor units that have been deemed not to be upgradeable to the necessary safety standards .
Let me first say that we share with Parliament many of the views expressed in its report .
We agree with the need for Member States to provide detailed decommissioning plans , as well as sound long-term financial planning .
We also deem it essential for the funds , for the most part , to be allocated to decommissioning activities and for the Commission to have an important role to play in ensuring strict monitoring of the use of the funds .
The Commission believes in a strict application of the ' polluter pays ' principle , so we share the opinion of Parliament that it is up to the operators of the nuclear plant to ensure that financial resources for decommissioning are already allocated during the operational life of the plants .
Decommissioning must be made as safe as possible , and sound , transparent and supervised management of decommissioning funds is crucial for this .
It can also be noted , however , that the report focuses on the efficiency and effectiveness of EU funding in the area of decommissioning .
The Commission was glad to see , in various parts of the report , that there is full recognition that the main objective of the EU funding was , first and foremost , to ensure that the reactor units were closed and remained so for nuclear safety reasons .
We believe that having met this objective is an essential element to be taken into account when assessing the efficiency and effectiveness of EU funding .
The Commission considers it important to clarify that EU support was never intended to cover the full cost of decommissioning , nor to compensate for all the economic consequences .
EU support was aimed merely at contributing to compensation for the early stages of closure .
The Commission also underlines that it is the Member State that bears full responsibility for the decommissioning of its nuclear installations .
Providing detailed long-term planning is the responsibility of the Member States , which are equally responsible for establishing precise timetables and cost estimates for the completion of decommissioning .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and Parliament for this timely debate on an issue which , in the context of Fukushima , has become more pertinent .
Safe and complete decommissioning is a key element of nuclear safety , for which we aim at the highest standards .
Parliament 's report constitutes a valuable contribution to the discussion that the Commission will have with the three Member States concerned in view of assessing possible financial EU support beyond 2013 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 5 April 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( EL ) The nuclear threat , as one of the consequences of the terrible earthquake in Japan and the tsunami that followed , makes the debate of the report by the Committee on Budgetary Control extremely topical .
At the same time , however , it highlights the fact that the EU is monitoring and giving practical support , in the form of financial aid , to the necessary efforts to decommission nuclear power plants .
The aim of these efforts is to ensure that nuclear power plants function properly and safely , so that we never see another Chernobyl or Fukushima and , at the same time , to address the impact of closure and decommissioning by meeting the energy requirements of the countries in which they operate .
These efforts , which are accompanied by considerable financial support in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria , illustrate just how seriously the EU takes the question of nuclear safety .
This is a carefully designed programme which started in 1999 .
The aim of this financial support is also to help improve the environment and modernise energy production , transmission and distribution , and to strengthen the security of energy supply .
Evaluating the return on the resources made available and respect for their sound and transparent management are the factors that will guarantee that the objective is attained .
The natural disaster in Japan and the nuclear disaster that followed in its wake have drawn attention to the importance of the topic .
The effects of the disaster , as with Chernobyl , could last for decades and be a sad , unwanted legacy for generations to come .
This case has also demonstrated that energy wastage must be reduced and the emphasis gradually placed on renewable energy .
Today 's report criticises on several points the financing of nuclear power plant closures in new Member States as regards transparency and implementation .
In addition to the closure of the power plants specified in the report , I believe that it is extremely important to inspect all European nuclear power plants and , if need be , make them safer in order to prevent a similar disaster in the future .
For this reason as well , I ask my fellow Members to discuss the motion for a resolution recently submitted by myself and my Austrian fellow Member in the interest of nuclear energy safety in the Danube region , as part of and within the scope of joint European cooperation .
European international investment policy ( short presentation )
The next item is the report by Mr Arif , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the future European international investment policy - .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by sincerely thanking all those with whom I have had the opportunity to work on this issue .
All the contributions have helped in the drafting of this report and , thanks to the cooperation of all the political groups , and I am especially grateful to the shadow rapporteurs , we have on the table today a consistent text that sends out a powerful message .
Indeed , we are at a turning point in European investment policy and at a time when we have to seize the new power conferred on us by the Treaty of Lisbon in order to meet a dual challenge .
Firstly , that of providing European businesses with the tools they need for high quality foreign investment that is protected by a legal framework providing long-term support .
Secondly , Europe must strengthen its position as the world 's leading beneficiary of foreign direct investment and give itself the means to control that investment so as to encourage sustainable development that creates high quality employment .
By voting on this report , the first official expression of our institution since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force , Parliament is fully assuming its role as a new colegislator in trade regulatory matters and is voicing its priorities at a time when the first investment protection negotiations are about to begin .
This expression is essential , because it is intended to relay the concerns of the citizens , who are showing a growing interest in trade matters and whom we must support .
In a world , today , where conflicts also take place in a trade context , protecting those businesses of ours that invest abroad must become a priority .
International agreements have been created to protect investors from harsh , unjustified expropriations and hidden laws aimed simply at eliminating them from this or that market .
This primary objective must be maintained .
Although Europe is one of the most open markets in the world , a balance must be restored with our main partners so that European businesses can benefit from a level playing field .
This is the proposal made in this report , which stresses the need for future agreements to include standards relating to non-discrimination , fair and equitable treatment , and protection against direct and indirect expropriation .
However , those standards must be defined in such a way as to prevent any misinterpretation .
Some businesses have , in fact , used the vague wording in first-generation investment agreements to protect their interests beyond what is legitimate , for example , by attacking new social and environmental laws that harm their interests .
Appearing before international arbitrators and with no transparency or possibility of appeal , they have demanded considerable compensation by claiming that those laws are on a par with indirect expropriation .
Europe , which , in the future , will receive ever more investment , particularly from emerging countries , must guard against such abuses .
That is the idea behind the reforms undertaken by the United States and Canada , two countries whose governments and authorities have suffered several setbacks in international arbitration cases and which have radically overhauled their investment agreement model .
By proposing new definitions of protection standards , the report strikes a fair balance between the protection of investors ' rights and the right of public authorities to regulate .
This also means including in all future agreements specific clauses laying down the possibility for public authorities to legislate and regulate in the areas of national security , the environment , public health , workers ' and consumers ' rights , industrial policy and cultural diversity .
Lastly , increased protection for investors must be accompanied by more responsible behaviour , particularly in developing countries , where the social and environmental laws are less binding .
That is why the report mentions that social and environmental clauses should be included in all free trade agreements signed by the Union .
Furthermore , we must go beyond naming and shaming and include in all future agreements a set of clear corporate social responsibility rules with which businesses must comply and which are based on guidelines set by the OECD .
If our aim here really is to shape the contours of a new European investment policy , then I call in this report for it to be exemplary and to promote investment which is sustainable , respects the environment and encourages good quality working conditions in Europe and in third countries alike .
That is why this report , by the power vested in it by Wednesday 's vote , must serve as a reference for all future negotiations conducted by the Commission .
( RO ) Madam President , according to Articles 206 and 207 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , foreign direct investment is an exclusive competence of the EU .
The Commission has already compiled a list of countries which will be privileged partners for the negotiation of the first investment agreements : Canada , China , India , Mercosur , Russia and Singapore .
We call on the Commission , Parliament and Member States to devise an integrated and coherent investment policy which will promote high quality investments and make a positive contribution to economic progress and sustainable development worldwide .
We call for the European Union 's future policy to promote sustainable investments which respect the environment and encourage suitable working conditions in the businesses targeted by investment .
We urge the Commission to ensure reciprocity when negotiating market access with its main trade partners from the developed countries and the major emerging economies .
Madam President , as rapporteur for air transport agreements between the European Union and third countries , such as Canada and Brazil , I would like to ask the rapporteur and the Commissioner how the link will be ensured between gradual access to the market and airlines and these international investment agreements .
( SK ) Madam President , in the report on future European international investment policy , the rapporteur has drawn attention to many open questions regarding potential EU agreements .
The first job of the EU is to protect the public interest of EU citizens , whom it represents in the areas entrusted to it by the Member States .
However , the state-protected public interest often collides with the interests of aggressive foreign investors , who are frequently more skilful in international arbitration than the countries defending the interests of their citizens .
The examples mentioned in the report of Argentina , the US and Canada provide concrete proof of this .
There is , therefore , a real need to define the principles of protection precisely in order to prevent them from being interpreted incorrectly by various investors .
However , this important and as yet unresolved question continues to be the international responsibility of the EU , particularly from a financial perspective , as it is not clear who would bear the financial burden of a judicial dispute lost by the EU .
The Council of the European Union has not yet given a proper answer to this question .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's report on the future European international investment policy .
It is an important step that paves the way for the implementation of the new EU exclusive competence on investment .
As you know , investment is a new frontier for the common commercial policy .
We should seize the opportunity - we are in absolute agreement with Parliament on this - to build together an integrated and coherent investment policy that promotes investments and makes a positive contribution both to economic growth and sustainable development .
The Commission also fully shares Parliament 's statement that investor protection should remain the first priority of the European investment policy .
We believe that the new policy should serve the purpose of assuring all European investors that they are able to operate in an open and properly and fairly regulated business environment , not only within the internal market , but also when operating in third countries .
I also take note of Parliament 's recommendation that the EU should draw on Member States ' best practices found in their bilateral investment treaties .
Indeed , the thrust of the Union 's action in this area should be to deliver better results than those obtained by Member States individually .
While aiming at high levels of protection for our investors , we should not compromise other objectives , such as the public capacity to regulate or coherence with other EU policies .
The right of states and of the EU to take the measures necessary to achieve legitimate public policy objectives is a standing rule of the common commercial policy .
It will equally apply to our investment policy .
The dispute settlement regime and the related financial responsibility are also very important issues and we need to further reflect on them .
Our objective , as mentioned in the communication , is to ensure transparency , consistency of rulings and make the system as productive as possible .
We also need to address a number of issues which arise because of the EU 's status under international law .
We will take into account Parliament 's views , as expressed in the report , when we analyse possible options and further ideas for a comprehensive approach to these issues .
We will carefully consider all recommendations put forward in Parliament 's report , while progressively developing and implementing our investment policy .
The Commission has already tabled proposals for investment negotiating directives for Canada , India and Singapore .
We want to seize opportunities for ongoing wider trade negotiations and to engage in comprehensive investment negotiations with those countries .
Parliament 's opinion is therefore very timely , to guide the Commission and the Council when we define final respective negotiation directives .
Last but not least , I would like to assure you that , as the development of a comprehensive European investment policy is now a joint responsibility of all the institutions , the Commission will stand ready to cooperate with Parliament and the Council while respecting the division of competences among all the institutions involved .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 6 April 2011 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The enlargement , by the Treaty of Lisbon , of the EU 's sphere of competence to include foreign direct investment means that a true European policy on this matter can finally be envisaged .
At this stage of developing the policy , the priority is to provide as much certainty as possible both to investments and to investors .
Therefore , the shift from a national competence to a European one should not , under any circumstances , disrupt the proper implementation of the 1 200 or so agreements in force between the Member States and third countries .
Again , for the sake of legal certainty and predictability , the EU must now devise an effective , transparent dispute settlement mechanism that is accessible to all investors , including the smallest ones ( SMEs for example ) .
The mechanisms integrated into the most recent bilateral trade agreements are a good foundation , but they only concern disputes between a state and the EU .
Provisions suitable for a potential dispute between the EU and a company must be established .
Lastly , the EU must seize this opportunity to go further : it must include in future agreements not only clauses facilitating the establishment of investors in these countries , but also basic provisions relating to social and environmental standards .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 05 )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Conclusions of the European Council meeting ( 24-25 March 2011 ) ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the President of the European Council : Conclusions of the European Council meeting ( 24-25 March 2011 ) .
The President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy , will take the floor .
President of the European Council . - Mr President , President of the European Commission , honourable Members , within the space of 49 days , I have chaired 3 meetings of the European Council and a Summit of Heads of State and Government of the eurozone .
These facts illustrate the great and urgent challenges our Union is facing , both on the economic and on the diplomatic front .
It also neatly illustrates that meetings of the European Council are not just an event : they are part of a process .
Indeed , in the meeting on which I am reporting today - that of 24 and 25 March - we duly approved a significant set of economic measures that have been prepared and discussed over the last year , we stepped up our action with regard to ongoing events in Libya and we initiated our response to the catastrophic events in Japan .
Allow me to take each of those issues in turn .
On economic issues , we took forward a comprehensive package of measures .
Under the impulse of earlier meetings , including the informal eurozone summit of 11 March , we were able to bring together almost all the strengths of this endeavour .
Of course , approving measures and procedures to deal with the crisis does not in itself take you immediately out of the crisis .
This will require perseverance and sustained effort .
I will not repeat all the decisions we took in detail .
You will find them in the conclusions .
However , let me summarise six key points .
Number one : we agreed on the Treaty amendment needed to give full legal certainty to the permanent Stability Mechanism .
In its resolution of 15 December , Parliament called for a light Treaty change that provides a legal basis for such a mechanism , rather than resorting to a profound amendment of the Treaty .
We followed that advice , and I was delighted when Parliament endorsed the proposed Treaty amendment by such an overwhelming majority on 23 March .
I am especially glad that we were able to reassure Parliament about some of the concerns that had been raised in this context .
I would like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Brok and Mr Gualtieri , for working so closely with me to achieve this result .
Number two : we reached a detailed agreement on the size , scope and mode of operation for the future Stability Mechanism and on improving the temporary facility .
Number three : we endorsed the position of the Council on the six legislative proposals on budgetary and macroeconomic surveillance ahead of negotiations with Parliament .
I know you are working hard on this ; indeed , I met your rapporteurs and will be meeting your coordinators this afternoon .
All those concerned understand the need to conclude by June .
Number four : we started the European Semester .
It is an exercise in which we follow up the implementation of the EU 2020 Strategy , the Stability and Growth Pact and macroeconomic surveillance .
The European Council in June will draw the necessary conclusions .
I will personally see to it that this does not sink into the sands of a bureaucratic process .
Number five : we agreed that credible stress tests for the banks will take place soon .
The task is double : the banks must do the test and governments must be ready to deal with the outcome of the tests .
Number six : we provided for a new quality of economic coordination .
We call it the Euro Plus Pact for two reasons : firstly because it is about what eurozone countries want to do more - they share one currency and wish to undertake supplementary efforts on top of existing EU commitments and arrangements ; and secondly because it is also open to the others .
That is why I am glad that six non-euro countries have already announced that they will join the Pact .
They are Denmark , Poland , Latvia , Lithuania , Bulgaria and Romania .
It remains open for any of the four remaining Member States to join later on .
Let me say once again that the political commitment of the Euro Plus Pact comes on top of all the other measures in the package to improve Member States ' economic performance : the stronger Stability and Growth Pact on fiscal surveillance , the new macroeconomic surveillance and implementation of the crucial EU 2020 Strategy on structural reforms to achieve economic growth .
The commitments in terms of competitiveness , public finances and pensions , employment and so on must be translated into the national reform and stability programmes .
They will also be evaluated annually at the highest level .
I have a final remark on the economy .
Some people fear this work is about dismantling the welfare states and social protection .
Not at all .
As I said to the social partners at the Tripartite Social Summit , it is to save these fundamental aspects of the European model .
We want to make sure that our economies are competitive enough to create jobs and to sustain the welfare of all our citizens and that is what our work is about .
These , then , were the main elements of our global economic package to help us come out of the crisis .
As I said , they are the result of a long process , not a single meeting .
It was on 25 March 2010 that the European Council decided to improve European economic governance , launching the Task Force that I had the honour to chair .
One year later , we are getting new rules , new instruments and more ambitious policies .
It was , and remains , an effort of all institutions , including this Parliament and all the Member States .
It was not always easy , not always without drama , but the political will has been unflinching , our sense of direction is clear and significant results are there .
Not all our problems are over .
They are the result of past mistakes and a lack of appropriate instruments both at the European and at the national level .
But we now have every chance of dealing with them and not repeating them .
I should now like to turn to the situation in Libya , which was , of course , something we discussed on 24 and 25 March .
We showed common determination .
I know that some among you had doubts , but we worked hard to secure concrete results .
Two weeks previously , at an extraordinary meeting of the European Council on 11 March , we had adopted a clear line on Libya .
Without that clear European position , the subsequent actions would not have been possible .
We decided that , to safeguard the safety of the civilian population , Member States could examine all necessary options , provided that there is a demonstrable need , a clear legal basis and support from the region .
Those three conditions were quickly met .
The clear need was obvious when the regime stepped up the violence against its own people .
The legal base was provided when the UN Security Council agreed the landmark resolution on Libya a few days after the European Council meeting .
Regional support was immediately forthcoming from the Arab League .
The actions undertaken by a coalition of European , Arab and North American countries implementing the UN resolution have helped protect the civilian population of Libya .
A massive bloodbath has been avoided .
Thousands of lives have been saved .
This is the most important result and deserves the highest attention , more so than the decision-making process .
The wood is more important than the trees .
We all know that the decision to take military action was not easy .
There are , quite naturally , questions and hesitations .
That is perfectly normal in issues of war and peace .
But any difficulties that we have experienced over that aspect of the Libyan crisis should not mask for one moment the full track record of the European Union .
From the beginning of the crisis , the European Union was at the forefront .
It was the first to impose sanctions , the first to impose a travel ban on leading figures in the regime , the first to freeze Libyan assets and the first to recognise the Interim Transitional National Council as a valid interlocutor , at the request of this Parliament .
The Union also coordinated rescue efforts for EU citizens and has provided , and continues to provide , substantial humanitarian aid .
The political objectives we set on 11 March remain unchanged .
Gaddafi must go .
We want a political transition led by the Libyans themselves and based on broad-based political dialogue .
We stand ready to help a new Libya , both economically and in building its new institutions .
We are also following the events in the rest of the region closely .
Knowing that the situation is different in each country , we express our utmost concern at the situation in Syria , Yemen and Bahrain .
We strongly condemn the escalation of violence and we support political and social reforms in our southern neighbourhood .
We also have to change our policy , and I will be discussing this later today with several MEPs responsible for this region within Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs .
On the positive side , we noted the smooth conduct of the constitutional referendum in Egypt two weeks ago .
Allow me to say a few words on Côte d 'Ivoire as well .
It was not on the agenda of the most recent European Council , but we adopted conclusions in December and have been closely following developments there ever since .
First of all , we condemn the violence , particularly violence against civilians , in the strongest possible terms .
This must stop on all sides .
Secondly , the current situation is a clear result of the lack of respect for democracy .
Democracy is not only about elections , but also respect for the outcome of the elections .
The international community was clear about the results of the presidential elections in Côte d 'Ivoire last year .
We must be consistent in our position .
Finally , on Japan , turning to the accumulation of tragedies that had hit Japan , we as the European Council expressed our sympathy and solidarity for the Japanese people and our condolences for the thousands of victims .
We must not forget them , even while other aspects of the drama in Japan are retaining our attention .
We are ready as a Union to assist in any way we can .
In these tragic days , as true friends of Japan , we reiterate the strategic importance of the EU-Japan relationship .
As we know , the effects of the events go beyond Japan , and that is why the European Union is drawing all the lessons fully .
We are paying close attention to the consequences for the global economy and to the nuclear aspects .
That is a top priority .
We therefore decided that the safety of all of our nuclear plants should be urgently reviewed in the ' stress tests ' on safety .
The Commission will report to the European Council on the stress tests before the end of the year .
It will review existing EU rules on the safety of nuclear installations and propose improvements wherever necessary .
In Europe , we want the highest standard for nuclear safety , because ensuring the safety of nuclear plants cannot stop at our borders .
We encourage and support neighbouring countries to do similar stress tests .
A worldwide review of nuclear plants would be best .
Mr President , honourable Members , that concludes my summary of what we agreed at this , the third meeting of the European Council this year .
Much of it paves the way for further work in this Parliament , be it through legislative procedures or through Parliament 's general right of scrutiny over the common foreign and security policy .
I look forward to hearing your views .
Mr President , President of the European Council , honourable Members , the President of the European Council has given us a presentation on all the decisions made at last week 's meeting .
I would like to share my reading of these with you , and to talk to you especially about the next stages .
I think it is fair to say that some very important structural decisions were made for the sake of greater financial stability in the euro area and greater economic coordination .
This is a real turning point for European economic governance , especially if we look back at the road we have come down to get to this point .
At last we have laid proper , solid foundations for the economic component of our economic and monetary union .
I think it will now have a more stable basis .
We now have a framework which will enable us to respond together to any crises that may occur .
And last but not least , in assessing the results of this Council , we should not overlook the fact that the framework is in keeping with the provisions of the Treaty and adheres to a Community approach .
As we all know , that was not a foregone conclusion .
The Commission was at the forefront of the joint response to the economic crisis and the vision for Europe in 2020 .
It received vital support from this Parliament , and once again I would like to thank you for this .
The stance that Parliament and the Commission have taken together to defend the Community approach have been acknowledged and have played an important part in obtaining these results .
Our new economic architecture is now largely in place , therefore .
However in itself , it is not a guarantee : political leaders will now need to make some important decisions in order to live up to it .
Under this new framework , we will need to be determined in implementing without further delay the necessary public finance consolidation and structural reform priorities for growth that this European Council confirmed , based on the Commission 's annual growth survey .
I am confident that our determination over the coming weeks and months will be as strong as , if not stronger than , the determination we have shown until now in establishing the various components of our joint response to the crisis in a cohesive and coordinated way : the European semester , the Euro Plus Pact , the new strengthened economic governance framework and the steps we have taken in a spirit of solidarity and responsibility to maintain the euro area 's financial stability .
I do not mind telling you that the Commission would have liked to have gone further in several areas of economic governance , especially in relation to the euro area 's new financial stability mechanism .
For example , we would have liked greater flexibility .
Nonetheless , I think we can say that we have succeeded in securing a mechanism that is anchored in the Treaty , with a strong role for the Commission and monitoring by this Parliament .
The result we have obtained is significant and the approval for the amendment to the Treaty , which was so widely supported by this House , contributed to this .
Honourable Members , the new governance structures must now be put into action to address the economic situation .
The truth is that we are still in a difficult climate .
The ball is now more in the courts of the Member States , which must finalise their national reform programmes and their stability , or convergence , programmes
The Commission will be waiting to receive concrete , ambitious proposals from each Member State for moving forward together towards the major Europe 2020 Strategy objectives : more jobs , more investment in education , training , research and innovation and a bolder approach to combating poverty and social exclusion .
We are also waiting for them to present the measures they will be taking to correct the continuing macroeconomic imbalances and to improve competitiveness and growth for jobs .
As soon as we receive these documents , we will be able to prepare our draft opinions and recommendations for each country , so that they can be adopted before the June European Council , which will mark the end of the very first European semester .
I would like to emphasise that we all share a joint responsibility and it is important that everyone takes full ownership of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
The Europe 2020 Strategy remains the fundamental framework for Europe 's reforms for growth and employment .
Paragraph 6 of the European Council Conclusions could be mentioned in this respect .
It makes the following very clear point : ' In implementing these policies , and in order to ensure wide ownership , close cooperation will be maintained with the European Parliament and other EU institutions and advisory bodies ( ESC , CoR ) , with the full involvement of national parliaments , social partners , regions and other stakeholders ' .
I want to stress this point because as you know , one of the most frequent criticisms of the Lisbon Strategy was precisely a lack of ownership of the European economy reform programme .
I hope that this time we will have benefited from the lessons we can learn from this process and will genuinely work hard on growth for employment at both European and national levels .
As regards economic governance reform , it is now Parliament 's task to progress towards final approval of the six proposals in the legislative package , and I hope that we will reach a bold result as quickly as possible .
This is vital if the whole governance system is to be in place .
I think , therefore , that we have many reasons to be pleased with the outcomes of the last European Council , but also many reasons to keep on working hard from now on , since the economic climate is still difficult and unpredictable , especially in terms of the social aspects , about which we are all very concerned .
Over the next few weeks , the Commission will also be presenting its proposals on the Single Market Act .
I am delighted that the Council devoted so much time to discussing the future of the single market and that it emphasised the vital role played by the single market in stimulating growth and employment and promoting competitiveness , by highlighting among other things the importance of easing the regulatory burden on SMEs in particular .
We want to free up the single market 's potential for growth .
I would also like to draw attention at this point to the fact that the consolidation of public finances is not an end in itself , but a means to the end of stimulating fair , sustainable growth and generating jobs .
While we are on the subject of fair growth , it is important to emphasise that the European Council also gave its verdict on the possibility of levying a tax on international financial transactions .
I confirmed the Commission 's intention to put forward some proposals concerning taxation of the financial sector .
Indeed , we believe that everyone should contribute towards dealing with the crisis .
Honourable Members , as you know , the Council also discussed the situation in the southern Mediterranean and in Libya in particular .
The President of the Council has given us a very detailed report .
I would simply like to mention that I had a meeting with the Tunisian Prime Minister yesterday .
I reiterated our support for the democratic revolution and our readiness to help the Tunisian people in their quest for freedom , justice and social progress .
I also mentioned in this context the matter of migration , which Tunisia and the EU must tackle jointly in a constructive spirit and one of genuine partnership , since it is a partnership for democracy and shared prosperity that we have proposed and that has been very well received by the European Council .
There is another subject that the European Council dealt with , namely the crisis in Japan , in particular the nuclear situation .
I also had a fairly substantial telephone conversation yesterday with the Japanese Prime Minister , who thanked the European Union for its actions .
I reiterated our solidarity and told him that we would continue to stand alongside Japan .
We also discussed the nuclear question .
Prime Minister Kan informed me about the situation in Japan and the latest safety developments and signalled his readiness to cooperate with us in relation to the work to be done on nuclear safety in Europe and the rest of the world .
There is obviously mounting public anxiety over the nuclear issue .
We must address these anxieties and guarantee maximum nuclear safety .
We must also act with complete transparency .
' Stress tests ' will therefore be carried out in nuclear power plants in Europe and the results will be made public .
The Council has asked the Commission and the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group to decide on the scope and practical details of these tests , which will be carried out by independent national authorities .
The Commission will also examine the regulatory framework on safety in nuclear power plants and by the end of the year will suggest any improvements that may prove to be necessary .
Mr President , honourable Members , we must not disappoint the hopes that have been pinned on our capacity to act together for Europe 's common good .
This is what the Commission seeks to do on a daily basis , knowing that we can count on Parliament 's support , and we will continue to do it and to perform our new duties to the full .
Mr President , President of the European Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentleman , the last European Council has set our countries on the right track .
By increasing the capacity of the Solidarity Fund and deciding to make it permanent , the 27 have once again demonstrated their commitment to the euro and the importance they place on solidarity between the more financially stable countries and those facing temporary difficulties .
At the same time , the decision to seal a euro pact between eurozone countries , and further afield , is indicative of the political will of European leaders to draw lessons from the financial crisis .
The fact that we share a currency forces us to be more coherent in our economic and social choices .
The time when countries could set an atypical rate of taxation or specific social rules without first consulting their partners is long gone .
The reason for this is simple : all countries should benefit from the solidarity of their eurozone partners .
Yet our people will only accept this solidarity if they think that everyone is putting the same effort into managing public funds .
In this respect , the euro pact is a major step forwards towards the convergence of our economies .
My group strongly supports it , but demands - and I shall continue to demand - that it is implemented in the context of the Community method , under the auspices of the Commission , Mr President .
You are taking the right steps , you have done some good work , but more needs to be done within this Community method under the auspices of the Commission .
That is how we will build Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , you know how stubborn I can be and I will repeat it as many times as necessary here so that no one forgets .
Europe sets itself apart from the rest of the world with its model of the social market economy , a model which our fellow citizens are quite rightly proud of and which is based on the principle of solidarity , but one which is difficult to preserve in the face of globalisation .
The question is knowing how to ensure its future is sustainable by striking a happy medium between the nanny state favoured by socialists , which we have seen almost bankrupt us , and that of excessive liberalism , the dangers of which we have seen with the financial crisis .
Three things are needed to achieve this .
Firstly , all our countries need to reduce their deficit ; secondly , they need to adopt comparable budgetary , fiscal and social rules ; and , thirdly , they need to invest together in innovation to boost growth , which to date is clearly inadequate .
Indeed , we can only preserve and strengthen our model if we invest in growth sectors : green energy , nanotechnologies , biotechnologies , and so on .
Given our limited financial room for manoeuvre , the best way to meet the growth challenge and achieve economies of scale is to pool our skills as well as our capital .
Without massive investment in innovation , without a genuine European plan , we are denying ourselves the ability to keep up with our competitors .
Ladies and gentlemen , while our Heads of State or Government were meeting , 10 days ago , the Fukushima power station continued to be an issue of global concern and the insurgents in Libya were looking to Europe for strong action .
On these two matters , our countries and the European Union have shown a great sense of responsibility .
We have in fact offered Japan our nuclear expertise in what is an extremely difficult and worrying situation for that country , and also for the international community at large .
There will no doubt be a pre-Fukushima and a post-Fukushima .
Although unfortunately not there yet , my group wants the post-Fukushima to be a period of reflection and action , firstly to ensure that the rules governing nuclear safety are significantly tightened and , secondly , to further our efforts in the field of green energy .
I agree with your approach to Côte d 'Ivoire , Mr President .
Turning lastly to the Mediterranean , I welcome the European Council 's repeated call for Colonel Gaddafi to relinquish power , allowing for a new page in this country 's history .
What I want is for all our countries to come together and discuss a neighbourhood policy as ambitious and successful for the South as the one they were able to make in the 1990s for the East .
( Applause )


on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , if one listens attentively to the speeches of Mr Van Rompuy and Mr Barroso , one might be reminded of a famous German song whose words go something like ' All hands on deck , but the ship is a wreck ' .
There is no problem - everything is fine .
We have solved every difficulty to everyone 's complete satisfaction .
I for one am unable to fathom your reports in relation to the European Council .
I can fully understand that you did not wish to come here with a negative report .
If I were President of the European Council I would probably also be anxious to portray this permanent Congress of Vienna in the most dazzling terms .
You mentioned Libya .
What you failed to mention was the deep differences between Europe 's two largest governments on this issue .
There is no consensus between France and Germany on the Libyan question .
The differences within the European Union with regard to one of the key international issues is an indication that not everything is under control .
Mr Van Rompuy , we would have been better served if the results of this Council meeting had been available to us in 2010 .
If we had wanted to prevent the downward spiral of the last year , particularly in the euro area , then we should have taken the steps now implemented as long ago as spring 2010 .
We need to ask ourselves why these steps were not taken in spring 2010 ?
The answer is that in the European Council , the institution headed up by you , it is not the Community method , community spirit and shared objectives that determine what is discussed and agreed , but rather that national tactical interests ultimately play a greater role than common European interests .
This is a particular problem for Europe .
I would have liked to have heard something from you , Mr Barroso , explaining for example how it is that the party that you belong to and once led and that made you Prime Minister of Portugal has now caused a Portuguese government to fall which was implementing precisely the measures demanded by you and the Commissioner sitting next to you .
( Applause )
We cannot accuse you of being responsible for this , after all you are no longer the party leader .
However , I would have expected a clear statement from the Head of the Commission about jockeying at national political level and its negative impact on the European Union - after all the collapse of the Portuguese Government coincided precisely with the moment that the government resolved to do exactly what the stability framework required of it .
This is no way to take Europe forward .
Something that worries me greatly and that neither of you has mentioned is that we are always faced with exactly the same scenario prior to a European Council meeting .
The Heads of State or Government have hardly agreed a measure to stabilise the euro or a particular member of the euro area in its draft conclusions , when some ratings agency in the City of London or in New York downgrades this country , always with the same result , namely triggering a wave of speculation against the euro .
When will we finally have the courage to say : ' Europe is no longer going to be dictated to by these speculators ' ?
( Applause )
What do we tell the banks ?
Mr Barroso , I am very pleased to hear you say that you have a proposal for the financial transaction tax .
At present the European Central Bank is lending money at 1 % to the same banks that then lend this money to Member States of the euro area at 10 % .
Nothing changes : those who caused the crisis continue to profit most from the crisis .
That is why we need a financial transaction tax , so that we can make sure that these banks carry some of the cost of this financial crisis .
Mr Barroso , you mentioned Europe 2020 - more employment , more investment , more research and training , more environmental protection - it all sounds just great : except that this is all to be achieved with less and less public investment .
One result is that Europe 2020 and the Lisbon process are extremely positive developments , however they are bound to fail if we only cut budgets unilaterally in the context of Europe 's economic development .
What we need is the courage to make public investments .
Take a look at the level of investment in the emerging states .
Look at the level of public investment in India .
Look at Brazil .
Look at the other continents and the public funds invested there .
Europe is cutting back to death , which is why we should declare a method of attaining our goals , namely the Europe 2020 objectives , as the legally binding basis in the ' six-pack ' for economic governance .
Governments will then undertake finally to do what they have been loudly promising , only to prevent development with their budgetary cuts - also achieved by cutting the EU budget itself .
For this reason , Mr Barroso , I expect you and , more particularly , your Budget Commissioner Mr Lewandowski to produce a committed and ambitious draft budget for the EU that actually facilitates the developments that it demands .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank Mr Van Rompuy for this report on the Council , but let us be honest , I do not think that the crisis is over , and I do not believe that , with the measures we are taking now , it can be over .
There is a heavy thunderstorm on our doorstep .
What we have done in the European Union so far is to use stop-gaps : measures which may be necessary but are not in fact solving the crisis .
We have given EUR 110 billion to Greece and EUR 67 billion to Ireland , and I am not including the EUR 24 billion for the Irish banks that we have just decided to provide .
For the moment we have EUR 76 billion in government bonds which the ECB has purchased .
I can tell you that it will continue to do that , because the emergency fund is not allowed to go on the secondary markets .
This means that it will continue to do so .
On top of that , the ECB has accepted EUR 100 billion of collateral to give liquidity to the banks in Europe .
In total , that is EUR 400 billion that we have invested in this crisis in recent months .
That is three times the budget of the European Union !
And the worst is still to come .
On Thursday there will probably be an increase in interest rates in Europe -from 1 % to 1.25 % - which may worsen the situation .
It is necessary to combat inflation , but on the other hand this is making the situation worse .
So that is the situation : EUR 400 billion that we have invested .
And have we solved the crisis ?
No , we have not solved the crisis .
What is necessary is a really bold and in-depth approach and we do not have that for the moment .
In this regard I would like to quote Nout Wellink , the President of the Dutch national bank , who published his annual report a few days ago .
He says three things about the outcome of our decisions and those of the Council in recent weeks .
He says that the budget rules are not tight enough , the economic governance package is too little and the pact for the euro is in fact too weak because there is no mechanism to enforce it .
I am not the one saying this , I am quoting Nout Wellink , President of the Dutch national bank , who is repeating exactly what Mr Trichet said last week .
The third thing he mentioned is that financial supervision is being conducted on too national a basis .
I think Nout Wellink is right .
We can even add a number of other elements .
The first is the EFSF and the ESM .
The permanent and temporary rescue funds cannot work because they have a unanimity rule .
If we keep this rule , it means that the entire eurozone will from now on be hijacked by eurosceptic governments and by eurosceptic political parties .
Finally - and this is my message for today - we still have to clean up the European banks .
The problem has not been solved and the economic recovery in Europe will not start if we do not first of all deal with that problem .
Not only do they have the old products from the financial crisis still in their portfolios , but they now also have a number of bonds in their portfolios from problematic countries whose ratings are going down every day and at least every week .

What I am asking is that Mr Barroso and Mr Trichet come forward as quickly as possible with a global response on that issue , namely a bolder Stability Pact - and Parliament is working on that - and economic governance .
Is there real economic governance ?
What we have now is an intergovernmental approach without a sanction mechanism and that will not work .
It has not worked in the past and it will not work in the future .
We must come forward with a proposal to abolish the unanimity rule in the rescue funds , because it cannot work .
We are in fact giving all the power to the countries and the parties who are against the system .
Finally , we have to come forward with a plan for the European banking sector .
We will not have economic recovery before you have put on the table a European mechanism to clean up the banks .
We all know that will take money .
Recapitalise the European banks , finance investment in Europe - as has been requested by Mr Schulz - and at the same time cover the bad public finances of a number of our Member States .
How will we do that ?
Where is the money ?
The only way to find the money is to create a real European bond market , and we know it .
Creating a European bond market is the only way out of the crisis .
I would like to say to Mr Barroso that now is the time for him to deliver .
Time is running out and it is not only with a pact for the euro that we will solve the problems .
Mr President , President of the European Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I must confess , Mr Van Rompuy , that Mr Schulz has quoted a little German song to you .
The direct equivalent in French is known as ' Tout va très bien , Madame la Marquise , il n 'y a pas de problème ' .
I have to say I am astonished at how things are presented here .
We should not be taken for fools .
Even if we like listening to you , we do read the papers now and again , so we do know what happened at this Council .
Do not be telling us little stories .
We know what the problems are .
We are not here to waste our time .
I would like to say one thing to you and to Mr Barroso .
You harp on about ' stability , growth , employment , competitiveness ' .
That much is true .
But do you know how that comes across to our citizens ?
What they see are ' inequalities , a feeling of injustice , insecurity ' .
That is how it translates for them .
And if the European Union does not change its ways , does not try to respond to this feeling of injustice , this feeling of inequality or the reality of inequality , the reality of insecurity , well the people will hear ' competitiveness ' and understand it as ' they are going to hit us again ' .
That is where the real problem lies for us , because citizens will see the mechanisms to bail out the banks , which might I add are necessary , and think ' well it is alright for the banks ' .
Look at the banks ' profits .
Look at the massive pay packets .
People will say : ' This is totally insane !
All that money is spent and yet it is the citizens and national budgets that will suffer as inequalities are heightened only further . '
In recent years , all the statistics point to the fact that inequalities are growing .
If we fail to address this problem , citizens will turn their backs on us , fuelling the extreme right anti-European wave across Europe .
And they would have good reason to : because we are not capable of responding to this feeling of inequality , injustice and insecurity .
So , if we do not respond , we will not succeed .
As far as Eurobonds are concerned , as mentioned by Mr Verhofstadt , what we need to tell citizens and what we need to mobilise is indeed a defence fund , but if we have no investment fund , if we can show no real evidence of wanting to get the machinery going again - and that is why we need Eurobonds not only for defence but also for investment - well , if we do not go down that road , citizens will fail to understand anything and in particular this policy .
Some things therefore need to be said : regarding inequalities , why is not possible for certain social measures that citizens actually understand to be adopted in Europe today ?
For example , deciding on a minimum wage across Europe , not necessarily the same level , but merely introducing the concept of a minimum wage .
It is unbelievable that in a country such as Germany , with all its talk of economic rebalancing , there is no mention , no talk of this problem .
It is unbelievable that Germany , one of the few more profitable countries in Europe today , is incapable of introducing a minimum wage for its citizens .
It is something that should be raised in the context of the economic and social governance of Europe .
Turning to Libya now .
What Mr Schulz said was right , albeit dramatic .
You have a country such as Germany hiding while the other countries try and find solutions .
On this point only do I agree , and only just .
What I would like when we now discuss a neighbourhood policy is for us to take stock of the many past blunders we have made in respect of this neighbourhood policy .
What were our relations like with Mr Gaddafi before the bombing began ?
What relations did European countries have with Mr Gaddafi , Mr Ben Ali , Mr Mubarak ?

Let us finally make an assessment of what those articles on human rights , in the association agreements , meant to us .
Zilch !
Nothing !
If we are not going to make this assessment , well then we should stop lying to ourselves .
Did the European Council devote even five minutes ' thought to what we failed to do previously in our policy on the Mediterranean ?
Did you think about that ?
I have not read anything in the papers .
I have heard nothing about what you said on this matter .
If only the European Council were capable of a bit of self-criticism over its past failings .
And finally , I turn to Japan .
The problem is that the best form of nuclear safety is to phase it out .
There is no zero risk when it comes to nuclear power .
This cannot be achieved overnight , but if we do not phase out nuclear power , we will never be safe .
The problem is nothing to do with stress testing one incident .
The problem , as stated by Mr Lacoste , the head of France 's Nuclear Safety Authority , is the cumulative effect of several possible incidents - something which , unbelievably until now , has never been looked at .
That is what has happened in Japan .
It is not just one incident , it is the accumulation of four or five incidents , plus human error , that have led to this situation
Mathematically speaking , it is not possible to guarantee this safety .
If we Europeans do not speak out ... it will not be phased out overnight , but if we do not phase out nuclear power , we must stop talking about nuclear safety .
There is no such thing as nuclear safety .
Mr President , the most important topic at the recent European Council was the economy and the stability of the eurozone .
You are well aware that most of the MEPs in the group of the European Conservatives and Reformists are from countries outside the eurozone , and most are from countries that have not even joined the pact for the euro .
However , this does not mean that we want the eurozone to fail .
On the contrary , we want a stable and prosperous European Union , including the eurozone .
We want responsible national governments which will end debt , reform the structure of public spending and embark on fiscal reforms , thereby bringing about a restoration of the financial discipline we consider to be correct .
What we do not consider to be correct and what bothers us is the hidden agenda promoted here by some Member States and partly by the Commission and some groups of MEPs as well .
It is an attempt to take advantage of the crisis for a further transfer of sovereignty .
It is an attempt to go further towards fiscal and tax harmonisation .
It is an attempt to take a further step towards the creation of fiscal union , and therefore towards full political union .
We say ' no ' to such a union .
We do not support such a union .
I have been sitting here since 2004 , and whenever there is a problem I hear the same old phrase : ' We need more Europe , we need a more Community-based approach ' .
I say that is not what we need .
It is the attempt to solve everything at the European level that has got us into this mess - and how will we tackle it ?
At the European level again . I am asking you to understand , at last , that the current model of European integration has run out of steam .
You need to stop living in the 50-year old dream of post-war European integration from the last century .
The European paradigm has changed , and the sooner some of you come to terms with that , the better it will be .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , my Group finds the results of the Council meeting inadequate .
Firstly , let us consider economic policy .
We have articulated our thoughts on the agreed guidelines in the area of economic policy in a hearing held last week .
What we need is to overcome the neo-liberal practice of profit and competition fixing , evident in terms such as ' flexicurity ' , adjustment of retirement age , and so on .
We believe that there is a need for democratically legitimised , controlled economic policy management that will prevent tax , wage and environmental dumping practices through appropriate common minimum standards that will provide effective regulation for the financial markets and prohibit the privatisation of profits , while at the same time passing on the risks to the public at large .
My second point relates to our southern neighbourhood and Libya in particular .
The EU Member States have become involved in a macabre situation in North Africa , particularly in Libya .
We have already heard some criticism here .
I would just like to emphasise one point : the dictator Gaddafi is using weapons purchased from us against the demonstrators and rebels .
He is under fire from NATO troops apparently in order to protect those fighting for freedom and democracy , who are also using European and US weaponry .
I would like to know the point of the existing code of honour in relation to arms dealing if such a situation can exist ?
Where is the support for freedom , human rights and the fight against social injustice in specific cases such as Lampedusa , where hundreds of refugees are arriving from North Africa every day ?
I fear that the newly cobbled together neighbourhood concept is more about European interests than an appropriate response to the needs of the partner countries .
My third point relates to Japan .
We still have time to discuss Japan this afternoon and tomorrow .
Here too we fail to recognise a coherent European approach , at least as far as safety controls , the so-called stress tests , are concerned .
I am not surprised that our citizens are asking with justified scepticism what exactly the European Union 's position is on this issue .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I would like to go back to the matter of Libya if I may .
When did the political class and the great and the good suddenly catch up with the fact that Colonel Gaddafi is an evil man ?
When , since that wonderful photograph with you embracing him , Mr President , did you suddenly come to realise that he was a " wrong 'un ” ?
I can tell you that the victims of Lockerbie in Scotland and the victims of IRA atrocities in my country knew very well what sort of scoundrel this man was .
But he has got oil and he has got money so you all turned a blind eye , didn 't you ?
Well , the chickens have come home to roost .
The most absurd figure in all this is the British Prime Minister , who stands there rattling his empty scabbard - having disestablished the Royal Navy , having disestablished the Royal Air Force - making threats from the sidelines , with no aircraft carriers , nothing , and calls himself a Conservative but is just a superannuated schoolboy whistling in the dark .
We talk a great deal about violence against the people , we talk a lot about democracy .
And yet we have had a homicidal baboon in Zimbabwe for years now , and we do not do anything about it , do we ?
We do not care because there is no money and there is no oil .
That is so typical of this place : full of hypocrisy and humbug .
( NL ) Mr Barroso , you will get your way .
There will be a permanent support fund for the euro , a fund that will support Member States that have plundered their national exchequers and that will transfer the risks to those Member States that keep their own houses in order .
Most economists agree with us that this fund will not rescue the euro any more than the arrangements under the Stability and Growth Pact were able to .
It is a soft agreement that rewards weak and fraudulent Member States with easy credit .
Where will that money come from ?
How is the fund to be made up ?
On paper , every Member State will contribute to the fund , including Ireland , Greece and Portugal .
Yet these countries do not have any money .
What it comes down to is that those Member States that have kept their own houses in order will end up paying .
Dutch citizens will end up picking up the tab for weak Member States such as Greece and Portugal - your country , Mr Barroso - and that , Mr President , is unacceptable .
That is not solidarity , it is rewarding the bad behaviour of a number of weak Member States at the expense of hard-working Dutch , German and Belgian citizens .
The euro cannot be rescued in this way .
Instead , these countries should be removed from it .
Greece must get the drachma back and Portugal must re-introduce the escudo .
Some countries must accept that they will have to leave the euro area and they have themselves entirely to blame for that .
( DE ) Mr President , the results of the summit meeting were an important interim step , however the true test is yet to come .
If these results are handled like everything else , including the Stability and Growth Pact , and if the Member States do not adhere to them , then they are not worth the paper they are printed on .
That is why I cannot share the optimism of the two Presidents that the crisis is over .
I believe we are only now facing into the real test .
It is more than two and a half years since the collapse of Lehmann Brothers and where are we now ?
It has taken us two and a half years to reach this point .
The responsible Commissioner rejected the proposals for a financial market transaction tax the last time they were brought forward .
I want to see results .
When I think back to the last parliamentary term , I recall that this House passed 12 resolutions on measures in relation to the financial markets and that the responsible Commissioner for the Internal Market - who thankfully is no longer in office - rejected them all .
That is the reality .
The Commission did not provide leadership in resolving the problem .
However , we found that national self-interest needs to be overcome at Council level too and that Parliament needed to fortify the Commission in its role in amending the Constitution .
There is absolutely no reason to rest on one 's laurels .
I must concur with Mr Verhofstadt .
Budgetary consolidation is too lax , governance too non-committal , the euro pact too weak and national interest still too strong .
If we do not have the courage to demand greater commitment to Europe from national governments , then we will never achieve a meaningful , lasting solution .
Mr Barroso , I was critical when the Greek Members of my group voted against the programme for Greece .
I certainly do not agree with Mr Schulz .
If a socialist head of government is voted out of office , this is prima facie a good thing .
However , in the Portuguese case your party also voted against the programme .
Things like this should not be allowed to happen in Europe .
I would ask everyone to play their part in ensuring that this partisan national attitude has no future as we work to solve this problem .
( PT ) Madam President , President Van Rompuy , President Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , there is a question that the European public is asking : will the European Council make the necessary choices and will they be the right ones to get us through the crisis ?
Many Europeans may think that the choices are along the right lines , but are slow and not very ambitious .
Those who have seen the documentary Inside Job will be angered by such greed and lack of scruples , and will be asking : if credit rating agencies ( CRAs ) operate in this way , what is Europe doing towards establishing independent and reliable CRAs ?
President Barroso said not long ago that , if a Member State can avoid having recourse to outside aid , then it should do so , as outside aid is costly .
That is also the opinion of the Portuguese Government .
Portugal does not need outside aid : it only needs financing for its economy and its families at reasonable interest rates .
However , as CRAs serve the interests of speculators , the result of the enormous sacrifices that the Portuguese are making is going directly into the pockets of these speculators .
Is this European justice ?
Do political decision-makers not realise that we are going through a crisis of the euro area ; I repeat , of the euro area : that attacks on the sovereign debt of some countries could undermine the euro , and jeopardise the single currency and the European project itself ?
This is a European problem , which requires a European solution .
If we are to come through the crisis , we need more Europe rather than less Europe ; we need to measure up to our past and to the challenges of the future ; we need to give confidence and hope to the European public , without whom there is no European project .
( FR ) Mr President , President of the European Council , President of the Commission , you have painted a rosy picture of these talks .
There are some positive aspects , but I have no need to go over them again .
I do , however , have one concern that goes beyond technical detail and what you have told us .
I am talking about the North-South divide that is currently taking root in the European Union .
As was the case just moments ago , we have heard people claim that some are right and others are wrong , that some are good while others are bad , and they seem to have forgotten about interdependence .
This is serious .
What is more , by refusing to deal with the issue of the banks , which Mr Verhofstadt mentioned , I think that a number of countries in the North , who preach a great deal to countries in the South , are viewed by many as refusing to see what their own responsibilities are .
I therefore believe that if there is one task that falls to you , President of the European Council , and to you too , Mr Barroso , it is to prevent this divide from growing and becoming entrenched at all costs .
We need solutions that are acceptable to everyone .
We need to ensure that everyone shoulders their responsibilities .
One last point : I find the European Council extremely inward-looking .
The whole of this discussion has taken place as if the euro were of no global importance .
There is nothing about external representation of the euro area in the IMF .
France , which is currently chairing the G20 , wants to promote the idea of global monetary reform and there is no proposal , like that of the Eurobonds which we are trying to push , that would attempt to make the euro a truly global currency .

( FR ) Mr Van Rompuy , I have a great deal of respect for you as a person and for your work , but I must tell you that you have not really convinced me .
You say that workers should not worry , that we are working for them .
When I read the section on competitiveness in the ' Euro Plus Pact ' , as you call it , my understanding is that it talks about wage cuts , about greater flexibility and less security .
Nothing is said about productivity or our resources .
Nothing is said about energy productivity .
What I am saying is that we will never win the race against China when it comes to cheap labour .
By contrast , China is well on course to beat us when it comes to energy efficiency and resource efficiency .
What , then , will be left for Europe in terms of competitiveness if we cannot compete in those areas ?
You are telling us that those on benefits should not worry .
Yet when balancing public finances , a reasonable objective , you say that cuts need to be made .
Forty per cent of public spending goes on welfare and you are telling us not to worry .
You also tell us that revenue is being taken care of .
Let us talk about revenue .
The CCCTB , the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base , is a real joke .
You talk about it in the conditional tense ; you say that it should in any case be neutral in terms of revenue .
Therefore no extra euros will be gained from it , and what is more , companies will be able to choose , anyway .
I have never seen anyone choose the most expensive fiscal option .
On the other hand , if anyone should be free from worry it is the banks ' shareholders and creditors .
You talk to us about stress tests .
Those last year were a joke .
I do not know whether we will see the same tasteless joke this year .
What we can be sure of , however , even if these stress tests are serious , after all , is where the funds for the banks will come from .
Will they come from their shareholders or from us , the taxpayers ?
Be serious !
Anyway , they obviously have nothing to worry about .
Finally , nothing has been said of the elephant in the room , namely the absolute unsustainability of the Greek debt and the Irish debt .
You know , no matter how much you want to skirt the issue , there is no way they can pay it back .
And the later we restructure , the more painful the exercise .
It is never going to be a pleasant exercise , but if you wait it will cost us dearly .
( Applause )
Madam President , every time the EU is confronted with a specific problem , it falls into the trap of devising a complex , bureaucratic , heavy-handed solution which is often completely disproportionate to the severity of the issue .
This is the mistake that we are now making with regard to the current financial crisis : it is serious , it does require action , but many of the proposed solutions will have far-reaching and , in my view , highly damaging effects for the long-term future of Europe .
The opportunity is being seized on by many to launch plans for permanent economic governance , with intervention and control as its guiding principles .
The solution , we are told , is firstly to abuse the existing rules such as Article 122 of the Treaty , which was never intended for the bailouts that it has been used to pay for - my hope is that some country will have the courage to challenge this in the European Courts - and to impose more limitations on our Member States , which in reality means constraining the democratic choice of many of the electorates .
If you look at the case of Ireland , that country has tried its very best to stabilise its banking system - stabilisation , incidentally , which is desperately needed by banks and institutions in other Member States , which would otherwise be terribly exposed - and Ireland 's reward for that is to face demands from other Member States to increase its own rates of corporation tax in order to compete with the bloated situations in other countries .
It is unjust and it is undemocratic .
( GA ) Madam President , what kind of thinking brings the Council and the Commission to believe that the policies imposed on Ireland will not increase debt or that this will not be the result of the implementation of those or similar policies across the EU ?
The measures agreed at the summit will force all Member States to be confined to an economic logic that is to the detriment of the people - a logic in which cuts are necessary and which deprives Member States of the ability to promote growth .
The policies being imposed on Ireland by the EU and the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) mean savage cuts , loss of jobs , and a significant reduction in public services .
Ireland 's debt burden is not sustainable .
Unless bondholders are made to shoulder some of the deficit burden , Ireland will default in the future .
Madam President , the Euro Plus Pact aims at strengthening and enhancing European competitiveness , but how can we achieve a European added value economy when our labour market is being violated by illegal immigration and our European products are being replaced by contraband products imported from labour-intensive countries in the East ?
The sooner we identify and protect our geographical and economic products from the European Union the better .
So my proposal is that we incorporate the identification and protection of the economic and geographical borders of Europe within the Euro Pact , otherwise we will not be able to achieve a competitive Europe within a very strongly aggressive competitive global economy .
( NL ) Madam President , if the crisis in Libya illustrates anything well , in my opinion it is primarily the total lack of a serious European geopolitical strategy to secure European interests .
It is , after all , a sad truth that we are there predominantly as a result of a domestic political agenda on the part of President Sarkozy , who allowed himself a kind of Falklands moment .
In any case it is still strange that those - including some in this Chamber - who so fiercely and righteously rage against the absolute evil that is Colonel Gaddafi were all too happy , up until very recently , to get photographed , all smiles , at the side of the Libyan dictator , who they received with military honour .
All I want to say is that it is easier to fire on Gaddafi today than to provide an answer to the enormous questions that will arise .
To mention just one of these , are we going to further arm the rebels - the collective term for a diverse bunch of people , some of whom by European standards have not yet mentally outgrown the Middle Ages - and if so , what guarantee do we have that such weapons would not be used to plunge the country into greater chaos , as happened in Iran after the Shah was expelled ?
Personally , I would like these European efforts and muscle to be somewhat more visible in the military guarding of our own external borders .
A silent war is also being fought at the moment , a frightening harbinger of an immigration invasion that no one talks about .
We need European muscle to deal with this , too .
( NL ) Madam President , decisions were taken at the most recent European Council that were still unthinkable a year ago and I would therefore like to offer my sincere thanks to Mr Van Rompuy and Mr Barroso .


It is an important step , but it is also a step on a very difficult road that we have to go down in order to restore confidence in the euro and in our economy so as to get out of this crisis by promoting economic growth and jobs .
This House - you said it - has a co-legislative role in respect of the legislative package to strengthen economic governance .
We want to see more ambition in the package and you should enter into discussions with Parliament in the forthcoming period in that regard .
We believe that we need stronger and more ambitious financial support that builds on the Commission 's proposals .
You have already heard various Members say that we want to see a more robust Stability and Growth Pact with a reverse voting mechanism .
Secondly , much stronger socio-economic coordination is needed .
That involves more than the ' commitments ' of the Euro Plus Pact , as the principles of our social market economy are anchored in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
It involves a greater commitment to elaborating on those principles in order to promote growth and jobs for our citizens .
We want to anchor these objectives in the national reform programmes - and I have heard Mr Barroso talk about this - and we should bring forward proposals to that effect .
You have said this , and indeed emphasised it , with a view to having these points already concluded on obtaining an agreement in June .
As far as we are concerned you can already get to work on getting the Council moving , at least in relation to these points , which would then make an agreement in June possible .
Madam President , I have to ask some frank questions of the European Quartet - the Troika plus the Council .
Are you serious about saving the eurozone and the European project ?
The bank stress tests have just concluded , based on the most pessimistic scenarios in Ireland .
The new Irish Government has drawn a line under the Irish banking debacle .
It has , to everyone 's surprise in Ireland , decided that there will be no haircuts for senior bond holders in the Allied Irish Bank and the Bank of Ireland .
But what is the European quid pro quo ?
Why is the European Central Bank silent on essential medium-term funding for Irish banks ?
Why are President Sarkozy and Chancellor Merkel insisting on the destruction of the Irish industrial base in return for a cut in the bail-out interest rate ?
Why are some Member States blocking progress on the European financial transaction tax and the eurobonds ?
Why is the European budget being cut ?
The short answer is short-term electoral calculations and doctrinaire economics .
The Irish economic crisis is an integral part of the European crisis .
The failure of the Irish economy would not only be a failure for Europe , but would be a failure of Europe .
Debt sustainability for Ireland is critical for Ireland and Europe and the Quartet must get real on this issue .
What we need from the Quartet now is imagination and vision in its ongoing negotiations with Ireland .
I want you to mark my words .
Ireland is a democracy , just like France , just like Germany , just like Finland : we govern at the will of the people .
Ireland 's electorate has accepted severe austerity through gritted teeth and seething anger .
They need to see fair play in Europe , otherwise quite soon the window of tolerance currently opened to the Irish Government will shut with a bang .
( SV ) Madam President , let me start with something positive .
I could focus on the problems that those decisions you have taken in the Council will entail and they certainly will entail problems , but the positive aspect is nevertheless that you have made progress when it comes to economic governance and the macroeconomic aspect .
My fellow Member from Ireland just mentioned how concerned people are in this country .
Their problems are related to the fact that so far we have not had any appreciation whatsoever of the macroeconomic aspect .
This is something that we will be able to have in future thanks to this economic governance package .
In this regard , I think the Council has gone in the right direction .
However , what I feel to be a little worrying is the fact that the Council seems to lack the will to change its own decision-making culture .
It still wants the opportunity to utilise different types of political arrangements , something we could perhaps call horse trading .
However , if you do not change your decision-making culture , I fear that in future you will not be able to take the necessary decisions when you are facing difficult considerations on the basis of the recommendations that I nevertheless believe that the Commission will be able to produce .
This is a challenge that the Council must take seriously and get to grips with .
This is also illustrated rather well by the tendency that we saw during the Council meeting when my own Member State , Finland , was also being rather awkward with regard to a different issue - in that case the stability mechanisms .
As a Finn , I regret that .
Not all Finns think like this , but it is a good illustration of the fact that the decision-making culture in the Council needs to change .
( PL ) Madam President , the new structure of public finances in the European Union was based on an attempt to strengthen healthy financial rules and public expenditure and on an entirely unhealthy desire to limit the tax sovereignty of the Member States .
I doubt very much that the Euro Plus countries would be in a position jointly to impose strict rules on themselves in the field of public expenditure , since they could not do so individually .
On the other hand , I am in no doubt that standardising the tax base is an effective step towards a tax union , which has only one objective - the elimination of tax competition within the European Union .
The French politicians Mr Sarkozy and Mrs Lagarde have revealed their true intentions by insisting for weeks on raising tax rates in Ireland , under the pretext of the fight against the crisis .
Raising tax rates in the European Union to standard levels regardless of the Member State is however a recipe for prolonging the crisis , not for mitigating it .
Thank you very much .
To those Members who wish to avail of the ' catch-the-eye ' procedure , I would say that we already have approximately 20 speeches and that I do not believe we shall have enough time before the vote .
However , you are still welcome to try .
Madam President , on 19 January , in answer to Joe Higgins , Mr Barroso declared here in this Chamber that Europe is trying to support Ireland .
With the abject capitulation of the new Fine Gael / Labour Government to the interests of the bondholders , it is clear that it is not the Council or the Commission that are doing the supporting , but it is the working class in Ireland and in Europe , which is being forced to support European banks and speculators through paying for their losses .
The proposals for economic governance represent an attempt to entrench cutbacks and wage cuts .
The scoreboard on austerity , and the proposals for fines of hundreds of millions of euro , are designed to ensure that , regardless of mass opposition , working people pay for the crisis .
This European shock doctrine will be facilitated by a change to the Treaties , on which the establishment in Europe and Ireland are determined to avoid a referendum .
The Socialist Party and the Left in Ireland will demand a referendum on this proposal for permanent austerity .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this Council meeting looked at three highly important matters : the environmental and nuclear disaster that has struck Japan , the financial crisis that is sweeping across Europe and the situation in the Maghreb .
On the first point , despite being supportive of a population that has been so badly hit , we cannot agree to revise trade agreements to the detriment of our own businesses .
Instead , we are in favour of humanitarian intervention , providing equipment , people and money .
Thinking that the financial crisis is over is pure fantasy .
It is essential to set out a package of assistance to help Member States escape the current situation , thereby ensuring stability across the whole euro area .
We also support the reduction of regulatory and bureaucratic burdens , as well as the promotion of trade with third countries -as long as it brings mutual benefits .
We think the European Union has given a terrible account of itself on the Maghreb issue , since each Member State acted independently and Baroness Ashton , the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , did not know how to manage the crisis .
In particular , the European Union has abandoned Italy to an uncontrolled invasion of illegal migrants .
( DE ) Madam President , the people of Europe are becoming more and more anxious .
There are two topics that are particular cause for concern .
The first is that we continue to take an inconsistent line in dealing with the economic crisis and the difficulties of the euro .
It is also a fact that the Council and the Commission are lagging behind events .
We need to be realistic : we need a debt haircut , at least in Greece and probably also in Portugal .
There is no escaping this .
The longer we take to address this issue , the more it will cost , not just in financial terms , but also in terms of the general credibility of the European project .
Events in Greece will serve to arouse emotions .
We were part of a special delegation to the country : the underlying attitude is that the EU is responsible for the problems in Greece because of a lack of clear communication and because the necessary steps , which are already obvious , are not being taken .
The second topic is nuclear power .
The so-called stress tests being prepared will only make sense and credibility in a cohesive Europe will only be restored if these stress tests are performed according to stringent criteria and not according to the weak criteria of the IAO , if genuinely independent experts are consulted and if the events and the entire process is presented to the public in an appropriate and understandable way .
( IT ) Madam President , President of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in my political worldview , ideals need to be reconciled with interests .
In what is perhaps a slightly orderly and naive view of the European Institutions , I think the European Institutions represent our ideals while , for many reasons , our governments represent our interests .
There is therefore a game to be played .
What is striking is that it seems to me that in some situations the team representing ideals refuses to play the game .
Some weeks ago , when Parliament proposed to recognise , or rather proposed that the Commission should recommend to the Council that it recognise the Provisional Libyan Council , Baroness Ashton said that it was not within her mandate .
Yesterday , after a wonderful presentation , when it came down to proposing a strategy to the Council that would make the crisis related to migration flows a European issue , Mrs Malmström said that she rejected the idea because she thinks it will not win majority backing in the Council .
How is the ' ideals team ' going to win the game if our players refuse to shoot at goal because they think the goalkeeper is too good ?
I think this is a fundamental point for an historical understanding of the task to which we are called .
I would therefore like to make this observation : who are our attacking players ?
They are the European Institutions : Parliament , the Commission and even you , Mr Van Rompuy , because I think that you do not represent the Council in the sense that you defend its interests but you are the man that can make the Council understand which ideals to focus on .
I therefore simply ask : if you are our attacking players , pass the ball around , attack , score goals and - as we say about this kind of game - make us dream .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that the establishment of a permanent stability mechanism is an important achievement that provides the foundations for the political commitment to defend the euro at all costs .
Therefore , despite not inconsiderable reservations about the methods and intergovernmental nature of the fund , Parliament supported this watershed moment and has focused on ensuring a solid link between the European Stability Mechanism ( ESM ) and the EU Institutions .
In this vein , the reference in the European Council 's conclusions to a regulation establishing the procedures to define the conditional requirements is important and we now expect the Commission to come up with a suitable proposal .
Even though this is a positive result , it is difficult to consider it adequate .
The problem is the basic direction of European economic governance .
We persist in treating the symptoms of the illness instead of its causes .
Deficits are the effect and not the cause of the crisis .
Thinking that we can cure the illness by limiting ourselves to cutting deficits with one hand and refinancing banks with the other is sheer make-believe : it risks deepening the crisis and making the very task of the permanent stability mechanism unsustainable .
If we want to treat the illness and not merely the symptoms , then we need to tackle a number of basic problems .
We talk about strengthening European competitiveness . Rightly so , but which model of competitiveness are we pursuing ?
We cannot bring in a model for recovery driven solely by exports to third countries , because this will accentuate imbalances .
In order to be more competitive in external trade , we also need to stimulate high-quality internal demand .
We must therefore deal with the issue of the banks and the system for providing credit to the economy in order to direct European savings toward long-term investments .
We need to equip ourselves with instruments such as Eurobonds , the tax on financial transactions and a budget worthy of the name , in order to make large-scale public investment at a European level that can provide a kick-start for private investment .
Finally , we need to think of the European social model as a resource instead of a burden .
Madam President , the Euro Plus Pact might be useful , but it must not be used as an excuse for weakness in the legislative package .
A strong commitment to the single market is key to competitiveness in the EU and therefore the euro area .
That is welcome , but single market initiatives remain in the framework of the Treaty and the 27 .
The ESM facility , I fear , lacks flexibility and is unsustainable for recovery with a two-and-a-half to three per cent risk premium .
I understand the need for discipline and risk provision , but these rescue mechanisms are not for money-making , especially when there is self interest beyond eurozone stability , such as several Member State banks being supported by Irish taxpayers , as has been mentioned .
We have not solved the banking crisis , nor will we by being faint-hearted .
Germany , even , has not recapitalised its own banks nor recognised impaired assets and also relies on the indulgence of everyone else in the EU and worldwide to allow silent participations as core capital , otherwise stress tests will be failed .
So , President of the Commission , President of the Council , let us have some vision , some humility , some honest self appraisal ; the very least you can do is to treat risk premiums as collateral and give them back when the risk is gone .
Small-mindedness will not save the euro and the markets know that .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is in fact not within the remit of the politicians to use taxpayers ' money to rescue the banks or to provide states with artificial liquidity .
The real function of politics is to establish the legal framework to ensure that such a situation never arises .
You now need to do the wrong thing because you have failed for decades to do the right thing .
You now intend getting to the root of the problem , which is something that we welcome .
However , as far as can be foreseen , it would seem that you are once again working at the wrong level with the wrong resources and within the wrong framework because you are trying to deal with the issue outside of the Treaties .
Happily we have succeeded in bringing part of the dealings within the scope of the Community method , however there is still a lack of classic top-down policy .
In this area above all others there is a need for every policy to be democratically debated , legitimised and checked .
You are using the wrong instruments because you are taking the money from the taxpayer to support the banks and those who speculate with the banks and other financial products .
You have still failed to take adequate steps to deal with those who have been profiting from this situation for a long time .
This means that you are continuing to foster an imbalance in European society that weakens approval for this policy , rather than strengthening it .
You are placing a burden on the public coffers and budgets on the one hand and protecting private assets on the other .
This does nothing to resolve the actual problems , but simply remedies some of the symptoms .
( NL ) Madam President , for years , many Member States operated a budgetary policy that seemed just too good to be true .
Running up debts was not seen as a problem as it was felt that economic growth would melt them away like the sun melts the ice .
Many private individuals felt the same way .
They bought expensive houses far beyond what they could afford .
The rising value of those properties was supposed to save them , but this house of cards collapsed .
The debt crisis is being tackled with new debts .
The European Central Bank has bought up billions worth of government bonds issued by Portugal , Ireland and Greece .
The economies of these countries will now have to be under the whip and grow like crazy on a consistent basis for many years in order to pull through .
Madam President , that will not succeed .
These economies are shrinking alarmingly .
This is setting a course straight for bankruptcy .
It is therefore time for Crisis Strategy 2.0 .
We must allow the bankrupt countries to return to their former currencies in conjunction with a vigorous devaluation and a partial write-off of their debts .
The situation could then be re-examined in a year or 10 .
( PT ) Madam President , it is amazing but also revealing of the paths that this European Union is following , that the main spokespersons for the Council and the Commission have ignored the severe social crisis being experienced by a number of European Union countries , specifically in the euro area .
Where are the answers for the nearly 100 million people in poverty in this European Union , including more than 20 million workers on low wages and with insecure jobs , which contributes to the scandalously high profits of big business and finance ?
Where are the answers for the nearly 25 million unemployed , the majority of whom are women and young people , and to whom a dignified present and the possibility of building a future that could ensure the very development of our countries are denied ?
Yet again , the sole concern of the Council 's decisions has been the defence of the interests of big business and finance , with greater centralisation of political power in order to facilitate a greater concentration and accumulation of economic power .
All of this in order to , in the name of the crisis , call into question social and labour rights , increase the exploitation of those who are working , and exacerbate the dependence of countries with more fragile economies , such as Portugal .
Madam President , the Council deems centralised regulation of national budgetary agendas essential to aid economic recovery - in particular , the proposal of multiannual consolidation plans addressing deficit , revenue and expenditure targets to be reached within stipulated time-frames with associated penalties if obligations are not met .
The UK deficit is largely structural and must be addressed internally .
I greatly oppose any involvement from Brussels in my country 's affairs , considering the mess made in Greece and Ireland , which are likely to need further bail-outs .
Portugal would rather turn to Brazil , suggesting Lisbon 's reluctance to become an economic protectorate with austerity measures that stifle growth .
The Council states consolidation should be frontloaded in Member States with large deficits .
What would stop migration of citizens to stronger economies in the Union under laws of the EU 's own creation ?
The Council suggests reducing the regulatory burden .
Does this encompass legislation for which Europe has been the architect for decades , such as the Working Time Directive and extended maternity pay ?
Decentralised and less-stifled markets are vital for economic welfare , not punitive regulatory measures .
( DE ) Madam President , as we know , three explosive issues were discussed at the meeting of the European Council in which the EU decisions were , in my view , characterised by incorrigibility and a failure to grasp reality .
On the one hand , the EUR 700 billion rescue package will soon be exhausted and may also drag the EU 's net contributors into ruin .
Instead of admitting the failure of the stability mechanism in the interests of efficient crisis management , the EU has simply multiplied the risk for everyone .
On the other hand , it is open to question whether an opposition formed by former Gaddafi ministers is really interested in democracy .
I am very unnerved by the fact that the military commander of the Libyan rebels has been identified as a long-serving CIA agent .
Finally , the nuclear power plant stress tests , which are to be carried out on a voluntary basis without consequences , are further evidence of how divorced Brussels has become from reality .
However , the Commission really missed the boat when it reactivated a twenty-year-old regulation without adjusting the limits for radioactive foodstuffs .
( FR ) Madam President , President of the European Council , President of the Commission , on the Economic and Monetary Union the outcome of the European Council is impressive .
Well done !
We must , however , understand that this will present a new and formidable problem , namely political acceptance of the decisions thus taken , on two levels .
The first level being between the Member States themselves .
Ever since this Euro Plus Pact process began it has been based on purely intergovernmental consensus , at the initiative of the largest Member State .
This is fine if it is a one-off .
However , if , over a number of consecutive years , we continue down the same political path , we run the risk of heightening national tensions .
The German Chancellor has already been booed on the streets of Athens and Dublin .
This intergovernmental procedure therefore needs to be transformed gradually into a genuinely European procedure , one not just for the EU , but for Europe as a whole .
This is the thrust of the amendments adopted by Parliament , and we should thank and congratulate Mr Juncker and you , Mr Van Rompuy , for having adopted them .

The second level is acceptance in the eyes of the public in each Member State .
How would opposition parties in our countries feel if they were bound by policy directions about which they had never been consulted ?
Let us look at what happened yesterday in the Irish elections .
Let us look at the electoral debate today in Portugal .
The only way in which these recommendations can acquire political legitimacy is to ensure that national parliaments are involved from the very outset , throughout the process of the European semester , and yet the Council conclusions only mention these parliaments in passing , in the same category as regions , social partners and NGOs .
Infinitely much more is at stake .
The decisions taken mean we now have to explore a new dimension of European democracy .
( Applause )
( DE ) Madam President , the Council and Commission are quite right when they suggest that the public budgets in Europe need to be consolidated .
However , if we look at how this works and how it will continue to work in the future , then it is evident that the wrong people are being affected .
Schools are being closed , teachers are losing their jobs , researchers are finding themselves out on the street and public investments are being cut or left to stagnate .
I would like to ask Mr Van Rompuy and Mr Barroso : Is this your intention ?
Of course you will say that this is not what you want and that other areas are to be cut back .
My question then is : Where are the cuts to be made ?
My key question is as follows : If you believe that the cuts should be made elsewhere , then why is it that the draft that you propose for decision making in the ' six-pack ' for economic governance makes no distinction as to whether a country purchases tanks or weapons of war or invests in an ailing national economy , or whether it makes an investment in the future ?
Or perhaps whether it invests in a modern energy supply system and in the education and training of its children ?
Romano Prodi once famously said that these drafts are stupid .
His words are still true because this distinction between good and bad investments cannot be made .
Our only choice is to improve these drafts , because Europe cannot be governed sensibly if such distinctions are beyond us .
My last question is : Where is the income to be found that will enable us to move forward out of the crisis ?
After all , we cannot just save our way out of the problem .
Mr Barroso , we await your proposal on the financial transaction tax in Europe , something that this House has backed with a large majority .
Give Europe a chance and avoid wasting any more time with pious words .



( DE ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , Mr Van Rompuy , listening to you carefully one gets the impression that everything is ship-shape : the euro is secure , we have a new Stability and Growth Pact , we have an ESM and we have a Euro Plus Pact .
I would say this quite clearly : ' While I have heard the message , I am not sure I believe it . '
We should not lose sight of the starting point for all these deliberations and measures , namely the run-away debt of some euro Member States , the loss of competitiveness , economic distortions and , as a consequence , an increasing current account deficit that has to be financed .
It is already obvious that many Member States will not be able to meet the conditions of the new Stability and Growth Pact with the best will in the world .
The ESM will not help to overcome economic distortions because no one has seriously faced up to the idea that a euro Member State could become insolvent and because the prospect of financial aid from the ESM will lead to further laxity .
The so-called stringent regulations will prove to be relatively lightweight in practice .
The need for unanimous resolutions is resulting in the horse-trading that was a familiar fixture in the past .
Finally , the pact for the euro is much too non-committal to cause destitute countries to implement far-reaching real economic reforms .
Overall , therefore , I fear that we will not succeed in eliminating the root cause of the problem .
We shall have a permanent overdraft facility whose credit parameters will have to be increased at regular intervals .
This will turn into a bottomless pit and the citizens in the states that will have to foot the bill will find themselves duped once again .
Public confidence in Europe will decline even further as a result .
( NL ) Madam President , I have a personal question for Mr Van Rompuy .
The war in Libya goes on .
We have seen that there used to be warm relations between the Libyan leader and European leaders , who were like best mates in a playground .
Last time , I showed everyone some photographs , including of you , Mr Van Rompuy .
I believe you to be a man of integrity , an honest man , even in politics .
You are consistent .
For that reason I have foregone the photographs .
Hundreds of people were killed in Lockerbie , many of them Europeans and then we see European leaders meeting with this murderer .
When I saw you , therefore , I felt let down .
Perhaps it was precisely because you are in this job , between prime ministers and presidents and other chosen individuals .
I want to advise you , however , to keep your feet on the ground .
Europe must stand on the side of freedom .
The essence of this project is freedom , something that you and Mr Barroso , who was also very friendly with Mr Gaddafi , neglected and that leaves me feeling let down .
Madam President , so far we have dealt with the crisis but now we need to deal with the fundamental problems that caused the crisis - namely the large deficits and the weak public finances .
That is why the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact is of utmost importance , not only to reach the aims and targets but also to have credibility in the economies of Europe .
We also need to tackle the problems of the lack of competitiveness and economic growth .
That is the main task we need to deal with in order to fight poverty and create jobs , but also to secure prosperity .
Of course , Member States have a fundamental responsibility here to restructure budgets , giving priority to social security and investments in growth at the same time as deficits are reduced .
They must reform markets , including labour markets and other opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is what Member States must do - and much more - but let us also underline what the European Union as such must do .
We must have the same level of preparedness to restructure the budget of the European Union as we are demanding from Member States , ensuring that we give priority to growth and investment , research and science and open markets .
We also need to ensure that we are reforming the European market .
Seventy percent of the European economy is in the service sector , but the Services Directive is rather limited in that perspective .
The future of the European economy lies in the service sector and the knowledge economy .
There is strong demand for the Commission to put forward proposals making the internal market applicable to the whole knowledge economy .
That is the key issue in making Europe the leading knowledge economy in the world .


( FR ) Madam President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , following this crisis , what is the European Union 's most potent weapon where global competition is concerned ?
You have defined it yourselves : the EU 2020 Strategy .
Yet when I look at what you are doing in terms of economic governance , I get the impression that there is total contradiction .
Indeed , if one looks at the stability pact and economic governance , you are shifting from a coordination strategy to a supervision strategy , resulting in a Washington consensus becoming a Brussels consensus .
When you talk about structural reforms , you talk about wage cuts and an increase in the retirement age .
I am going to talk to you about the real structural reforms that we need .
We need public investment , first and foremost in education .
Did you know that during the whole period of the Lisbon Strategy , half of the Member States reduced the budget they spent on education ?
Did you penalise them for doing that ?
Are you aware that the European Union will never implement this 2020 Strategy if we do not pool investments for the future , if , when you assess the public expenditure of Member States , the only expenditure that you treat differently , where you take quality into account , is when Member States introduce capital-funded pension reforms , whereas you ignore those who are inclined to make efforts with regard to education ?
When I look at the situation in Ireland today , one thing strikes me .
Day in day out you decide to save banks ; meanwhile , the Irish are sinking .
This is not the European Union we want .
I would prefer us to ' save ' the people of Ireland rather than their banks .
What is more , in order to save the banks , you invented ' stress tests ' .
I am now under the impression that every time we come up against a problem , we introduce stress tests .
These are the new talking shops .
There is a stress test for nuclear energy , a stress test for banks ; there might even be a stress test for the Commission one day .
Perhaps we will suggest it .
I personally , however , would prefer to see the Commission take the initiative and be where it should be .
When I look at the opinions of the European Central Bank today , I get the feeling that it is more concerned about what is not included in its mandate , namely wage levels , than about the viability of our banking system and its effectiveness in bringing about the public investment we need .
This Parliament has submitted proposals on the taxation of financial transactions and on Eurobonds , but you refuse to consider them .

Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , it is time that you listened to the proposals coming from this House , to ensure that the strategy that you yourselves have adopted is a success .
( SV ) Madam President , at its recent meeting , the Council also debated the issue of the safety of nuclear power plants and European reactors .
This is a topic that is now the subject of negotiations in Parliament .
We will have a resolution that will be put to the vote on Thursday .
I believe that most European citizens probably believed that stress tests had been a matter of course as part of the safety measures with regard to nuclear power for decades .
That is not the case .
The proposal that has been adopted by the Council in its conclusions is far too weak .
We need to test not only the technology and the geography but also the safety culture and multiple risks .
We must ensure that there is openness and transparency .
It is totally unacceptable for governments and national authorities to audit themselves in this area .
There clearly needs to be independent checks , facts must be made public and full transparency must prevail under the scrutiny of the Commission .
That is the only way we can make this technology credible for the future .
We also need to renegotiate the institutional structure , which is as old as the European Union .
It must be updated .
We must have European safety standards within the system and , finally , we must ensure that the Council , too , puts forward proposals when it comes to energy efficiency , alternative energy sources and a timetable for these .
Madam President , the most important conclusion from the Council meeting was not headline-sexy .
It said that the single market has a key role to play to deliver growth .
But is this all talk ?
On economic governance , I already see colleagues wanting to water down the Stability Pact , and when it comes to supporting businesses , we are not much better .
MEPs flock to sign up to campaigns for cyclists and horse welfare , but when it came to campaigning to cut red tape for small businesses , only a third of us joined in and there was only one UK Labour signature .
The Commission promises to unlock venture capital , which is laudable , but almost laughable given that it spent all of last year trying to legislate it out of the market altogether .
It is time to walk the walk .
Nine heads of state have signed a letter on specific actions for business , trade , innovation and investment .
They call on us to choose growth .
I certainly do .
( ES ) Madam President , the European Council has adopted a series of measures covering governance , budgetary rationalisation , competitiveness and so on and I must say that they are all along the right lines .

The European Council 's 16 points are largely due to the work of President Van Rompuy and President Barroso , to whom I first of all offer my congratulations , because I do value - some of us do value - what you have done as leaders of the institutions .
However , the problem is that not only are we going through a financial crisis , we are also experiencing a crisis of confidence and a political crisis in Europe and in the European nations .
The problem is not simply one of assessing the actual economic and technical contents of the European Council .
At the same time as there are meetings of the European Council , European , national and regional elections are being held and all of these confirm our apprehensions .
Extreme positions are being adopted .
Some of these positions are currently taking refuge in forms of nationalism .
Therefore , you must be very well aware that our problem is not simply to face up to the crisis , but to face up to the political and social consequences of that crisis .
It is not simply a time when there is , as a fellow Member quite rightly said , a north-south crisis in the European Union .
These are new times and a particular feature of new times is that crises mount up and proliferate and are not resolved .
They turn up unexpectedly , both inside and outside the EU .
Moreover , these new times basically demand new ways of thinking at both individual and institutional levels , and that is the major political challenge that faces us .
Any change in one 's personal way of thinking starts with that person him or herself .
First of all , if that person is a Member of this House , he or she must say in what ways Parliament must change if it is to deal with new times .
The same goes for members of the Commission and the Council ; each and every one of us must be able to face up to this issue .
However , in any case , the main thing is not to go off course , because you are heading in the right direction .
( ES ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is the first crisis to affect the euro area , and when the crisis occurred it became clear to us that the European Union was not equipped to deal with it .
There were design faults , such as the lack of planning regarding financial assistance to countries within the euro area , inefficiency in fulfilling commitments in the areas of public finance and competitiveness and increased macroeconomic imbalances and divergence within the euro area .
We saw how steps that had been taken so as to have a European voice in the areas of foreign policy and security , were not supported in the area of the economy , despite the imperatives of globalisation .
Our economic potential could not be turned into economic leadership at world level and the imbalance between the single currency pillar and the intergovernmental economic pillars became all the more evident .
If we are to provide an adequate response , we must make progress on integration .
There is no national way out of the crisis , unless some people have got the wrong century .
That is why , on 24 and 25 March , the European Council took important , even spectacular , steps in the right direction .
The implementation of the European semester , the adoption of the permanent stability mechanism , along with the commitments made before Parliament , including the legislative package , which will have to be balanced by Parliament , are all steps in the right direction .
The Euro Plus Pact does , without a doubt , represent a step forward but much remains to be done .
The crisis is still there , there are 23 million unemployed and there are still important clouds on our horizon and major challenges to face .
That is why we need a three-dimensional pact with the citizens of Europe because there are limits to austerity policies and we need to promote a policy of growth and employment through investment in order to redefine our economic model and fulfil the objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy .
A policy of fiscal and financial sustainability requires a European framework as much in the area of sovereign debt as in the recapitalisation of financial bodies and we need a genuine European social pact to introduce improved productivity , with social standards , progress in taxation and the bringing of the welfare state up to date .
- ( CS ) Madam President , what happened at the European Council meeting on 24 and 25 March 2011 , and the contents of the text that was adopted , amounts to a narrative on the promotion of fiscal unity by the back door .
The creation of the single currency of the euro and the period of existence of this currency comprise a history of ignorance of economic laws , broken rules , lies about the size of public finance deficits and deception in national statistics .
The Stability and Growth Pact was adopted as the last chance to deal with the notorious rule-breakers , and it has been violated by everyone for years .
How could it be otherwise in the Euro Plus Pact , I wonder , given the different nature of the national economies , the different inflation levels and the different levels of unemployment ?
I consider the proposed harmonisation of the underpinnings of corporation tax to be particularly inappropriate .
( PT ) Madam President , President of the Council , President of the Commission , firstly , I would naturally like to congratulate you on the results of the Council meeting of 24 and 25 March , particularly on the consolidation of the European semester , but much more than this , on the institutionalisation of the European Stability Mechanism and on the Euro Plus Pact that came out of the euro area summit of 11 March .
I believe that these are very positive results for Europe , and it is just a shame that this process was not fully concluded on 24 and 25 March .
I believe that , if we had given this signal , if the Member States had given this signal in the Council , completing this fund reform package in full , we would be in a stronger position today for facing the next 3-4 months , and we would have partly alleviated the effects of the crisis currently being experienced in my country , Portugal , about which I also need to say something .
This is that the Portuguese Social Democratic Party ( PSD ) , which is fully integrated into the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , is absolutely and completely willing to fulfil all requirements and obligations for being part of Europe .
That is what we have been doing , even at this time , when there are difficulties with regard to short-term financing .
In contrast to what the government of the Portuguese Socialist Party ( PS ) has done , the PSD has been demonstrating its total willingness to provide Europe with the guarantees necessary in the context of this crisis .
Therefore , without bringing domestic politics into the European Parliament , I would like to signal the PSD 's commitment to and complete guarantee of the strict timetable that the country will need to adhere to following its elections on 5 June .
( HU ) Madam President , President of the Commission , President of the European Council , the agreement reached at the European Summit was the first major political success of the current Hungarian Presidency .
It is primarily a conservative success .
Its implementation depends on unity .
For this reason it is regrettable and requires explanation that four countries with conservative governments did not accept the Euro Plus Pact .
It is regrettable and turncoat behaviour to recommend something to others that we , as the Presidency , do not consider acceptable for ourselves .
Whoever stays out misses out .
A country which does not aim for a breakthrough based on knowledge and competitiveness but for cheap wages and winning the tax competition will be the poorhouse of the European Union even in the medium term .
As I have mentioned tax competition , Commission President , President of the Council , how do you explain that the Council did not discuss the issue of tax havens ?
Do you think that this is not a problem for European citizens ?
You are mistaken !
We expect much more progress from the Council and the Commission .
Permit me to also address the Japanese natural disaster and the consequent industrial disaster .
There are 12 000 dead , 17 000 missing , hundreds of thousands are homeless and millions are without work .
The European Union , which considers solidarity an asset , must help .
The disaster shook the world 's energy and raw materials markets .
It will determine the political and economic environment for a long time .
It is imperative that we improve the world 's nuclear safety .
It is imperative that we devise rules that make this possible .
It is imperative that we boost research and development investments and strengthen diversification in European energy policy .
These objectives , Commission President and President of the Council , have already been formulated in the 2020 objectives .
It is the Council 's and the Commission 's job to build the road leading here and generate the resources for this .
We wish you every success in this .
( EL ) Madam President , without wishing to underestimate the importance of recent decisions passed by the European Council , the defining quality of European decisions over the last year has been too little too late .
This is not because important steps forward have not been taken ; it is because we cannot use the past and what we did in previous times to stabilise and strengthen the euro area as our benchmark today ; our benchmark must be how efficient we are in dealing with the crisis .
Unfortunately , however , we are not efficient when it comes to the markets - just look at how the cost of borrowing has risen over the past few days for countries in the region , especially Portugal - and we are not efficient or persuasive , unfortunately , when it comes to the European public , who increasingly feels that Europe is part of the problem , not part of the solution .
The European Parliament , in two recent resolutions , and prominent figures across the entire political spectrum have pointed out that , if we want an effective and global response to the debt crisis , we need to seriously consider the possibility of a system for issuing Eurobonds .
At the same time , the majority in the European Council tells us that this cannot happen , because it would create a moral hazard for fiscally healthy countries in times of crisis .
While they cite the moral hazard in order to campaign against Eurobonds , they are creating a moral hazard at the expense of the countries with financial difficulties , by officially and unhesitatingly tabling the prospect of controlled bankruptcy and the involvement of private individuals in cost-sharing , thereby perpetuating the crisis by keeping the cost of borrowing unnecessarily high .
If we truly want private individuals to be involved and fairer cost-sharing , then we should seriously examine the question of a financial transaction tax as a matter of priority , so that some of the revenue can be used to finance the permanent mechanism .


( BG ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , Mr Van Rompuy , the crisis which we are going through at the moment confirms the need for visionaries in Europe , not only among decision makers but among ordinary citizens too .
It is sad , but true .
We wasted a lot of time and missed out on numerous opportunities during the years of growth .
Creating the single currency has undoubtedly been a success .
However , it looks like a beautiful house with a damaged roof .
We moved in when it was dry , but now the rain has come and is falling on the euro area in the form of a high deficit and debt level , with low creditworthiness .
The Euro Plus Pact and the decisions made by the Council mark a step in the right direction .
The economic semester is a measure which will provide our economies and budgets with greater coordination and resilience in financial crises .
I am pleased about and it is the right decision for 60 countries outside the euro area , including my country , Bulgaria , to join the Pact so that they can actively participate in the decision-making process on economic policies , enabling Europe to move away from different standards and principles .
I am sure that European economic policies will have to be based , sooner or later , on a Community rather than an intergovernmental method , as is the case now .
Indeed , the day is perhaps not far off when there will be a new intergovernmental conference or even a convention on economic and political governance issues in Europe .
I welcome the Council 's conclusion on the matters relating to Libya .
The European Union must be actively committed when it comes to establishing democracy after the end of the conflict and help the Libyan people create a constitutional state and civil society .
This will obviously send out a signal as well to the other countries in the region that Europe supports the legitimate demands of citizens .
Europe must also learn the lessons from the crisis in Libya and the whole Arab world .
What else can we do for our close southern neighbours ?
Can we use our experience from the Eastern Partnership in the Mediterranean region ?
Finally , Mr Van Rompuy and Mr Barroso , Europe needs operational rapid-reaction forces which can carry out missions under the European Union flag .
Increased capabilities and integration in terms of security and defence are required to achieve this objective , without , of course , duplicating or replacing NATO .

( FR ) Madam President , Mr Van Rompuy , there is one thing in your conclusions that we all clearly agree on : rigorous governance .
No one can be against that .
However , rigour should not mean zero deficit or austerity , but rather intelligent spending .
The Union 's necessary competitiveness should be improved , that goes without saying , but wage cuts and social expenditure cuts should not be the only adjustable variable .
Competitiveness is gained by investing in qualifications , research , excellence and major infrastructure .
Everyone here agrees on the fact that the Union and the euro are at a turning point .
We are faced with having to choose between , on the one hand , a model of turning in on ourselves , where each country compares its competitiveness with the neighbouring Member State , where it looks at its rating on the financial markets and at the lowest possible contribution it can make to the European budget , and , on the other hand , a model based on solidarity - the only acceptable model - in which social standards are raised , in particular by upholding the position of social dialogue and of unions , with minimum social requirements across Europe and wage-indexing mechanisms that are protected , and in which solidarity between generations is guaranteed by a pension system which provides enough to live in dignity , as Parliament has recently stated .
Member States should be free from the pressures of financial markets thanks to a European Central Bank with a strengthened role , and we should have better regulated rating agencies , a solidarity-based model which guarantees genuine social and territorial cohesion in Europe , notably through an increased European budget , with a fundamental reform of its own resources and with the introduction , at last , of the tax on financial transactions .
Your conclusions are based on a distinct ideology that says that debt and deficit are responsible for the recession , when the real cause is the irresponsibility of financial players .
Without a change in the ideological prism within the Council , we will not come out of the recession , and nor will we restore citizens ' trust .
There is a clear democratic deficit today , and if the Council and the Commission continue to make proposals that fail to take Parliament 's opinion into account , our fellow citizens will reject our project even more .
( NL ) Madam President , the last year has seen a great deal of very hard work and a number of reforms have been set in train in order to ensure that , in future , too , the European Union can remain a society in which living and working is good and just .
I am therefore happy to endorse what my fellow Members have said in praising the Presidency of the European Council .
Following on from everything that other Members have already said , there are three points that I want to bring up .
The first of these relates to labour costs as one of the factors involved in competition policy .
During the financial crisis I often heard both the Commission President and the President of the European Council talk in praising terms of automatic stabilisers .
Instead of sharp peaks and troughs these would ensure that we have a more stable economy with fewer job losses , which fits in perfectly with the social market economy that we want to be .
However , some people now fear that an all-too-heavy focus on the labour costs factor in the Euro Plus Pact could too greatly limit the leeway for these automatic stabilisers to operate .
My question , Mr Van Rompuy , is what is your view on this ?
I have a second reservation to raise in relation to the factor of labour costs .
I hear again and again from the trade unions that , in the area of wage settlement , the autonomy of the Member States and their social partners is being harmed and that we are possibly heading for a flagrant violation of the regulation of competencies under the Treaty .
My question about this is , are we really treading risky ground here , or is this fear unfounded ?
I would also like to hear your analysis , Mr Van Rompuy , as , if this double fear is unfounded , we really must banish it .
Finally , I have a question about the common framework for calculating company tax base .
In the conclusions of the spring summit , I read just one sentence - just the one - on this , and even that was without any commitment at all from the European Council in this connection .
Is the conclusion that I am to draw from this that there is still no prospect of consensus for the introduction of this common framework for calculating company tax base and that , when it comes to increased cooperation in this regard , the best we have is dreams ? Thank you in advance for your answers .
( EL ) Madam President , Mrs Podimata has covered the financial issue for me .
I shall comment on another very important issue : the issue of nuclear energy .
What has Japan taught us ?
Two things : firstly , that no one can be ever be sufficiently well-prepared for natural disasters or combinations of natural disasters and , secondly , that nuclear energy is never completely safe .
What are we doing ?
We are accusing Japan of negligence .
We are saying that it was not nuclear energy , it was Japan that was not safe .
We are saying that we shall carry out our own inspections of nuclear power plants , so that we can see which are not safe and which are and then we will develop them .
This means that we did not learn our lessons from Japan .
We are not as prepared as Japan for disasters ; we hardly even have a civil protection policy for cross-border problems , such as a nuclear accident .
We must stop calling today for new nuclear power plants to be built .
We must invest not in the development of nuclear energy , but in developing the efficiency of photovoltaic and other renewable energy sources .
The impact of nuclear energy is cross-border and the European Union is responsible for it , which is why , Mr Barroso and Mr Van Rompuy , it will be your very serious responsibility if we fail to take the necessary precautions against another accident .
Madam President , I would like to touch upon three issues .
First , I think that the Council summit meeting brought very important and positive results , given the difficulty of the situation and the context .
I welcome the formula of having an inclusive Euro Plus Pact open to those who are not yet eurozone members , as President Van Rompuy said .
At the same time , we are creating a European stability mechanism safety net .
Could we not consider that in both mechanisms in Euro Plus , which is an obligational commitment to observe certain rules of behaviour in macroeconomic and macro-financial policy , and also in ESM .
The safety net should be open so that both convergence and solidarity , which is ESM , may be inclusive and not exclusive .
My second remark concerns neighbourhood policy .
We seem to be redesigning our neighbourhood policy .
The stimulus is coming from the South , but it is important for our overall neighbourhood policy .
I hope that it will be - if we read the documents by Baroness Ashton and Mr Füle - far more society-oriented , more generous towards those societies and demanding of authorities and governments .
We should move away from short-sighted economic interests and base this policy on a human rights and democracy approach , moving from status quo policy to transition policy .
But when we create this new paradigm it should also be applicable to the East .
We should be more human rights and democracy-based and more society-oriented and less authority-oriented than we are now .
My third point concerns EU-NATO .
In Libya we have a new experience of EU and NATO cooperation , which is a relationship which we do not yet fully understand .
We also have an old experience in Afghanistan , which is not always good .
At the same time , this relationship is important .
Let us aim to be successful this time .
( LV ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we must draw a clear dividing line between the past and the future .
As far as the past is concerned , I should say that a separate solution must be found for the particular cases of Greece and Ireland .
I believe that we must allow those losses to be written off by means of a structured plan , so that these societies may get back onto their feet .
It is not correct to continue punishing the taxpayers in these countries for mistakes in fact made by the private sector , specifically by the banks .
As far as the future is concerned , we must look to what after all is our goal for Europe .
That goal is to secure stable growth .
However , in order to secure stable growth , the necessary means , and this is also what is being discussed at the Council , is to secure low levels of government debt .
What will low or little government debt ensure ?
It will ensure the confidence of the financial markets in these countries , which will in turn ensure low interest rates , so that businesses in those countries may again recover and develop .
When businesses develop , investment will follow .
With investment will come jobs , which are essential for us in Europe .
This process , namely reducing government expenditure , so that the level of debt is low , does not , moreover , exclude investment .
Several members have mentioned that investment is essential , that we cannot , as they say , ' save ourselves out ' of this crisis , that we must invest .
I can specifically cite the example of my country , Latvia , which has not only taken significant savings measures in the last two years , but this year , in 2011 , has allocated one third of the national budget to public-sector investment .
It is therefore possible .
We have to go down this road in the future , to avoid arriving where we have arrived today . Thank you for your attention .
( RO ) Madam President , the European Council took a significant step towards creating the European Stability Mechanism by adopting the decision to modify the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union .
The future mechanism will ensure a stable , consistent response to any situations where the euro area is destabilised .
It is excellent having such a mechanism .
However , it is preferable not to end up in such situations , which means that the disciplinary measures set out by the economic governance provisions should also be applied consistently .
All Member States must help maintain stability , whether they are part of the euro area or not .
This is why the creation of the Euro Plus Pact , which has also been joined by countries outside the euro area , including Romania , is an extremely positive development .
Implementing the European Semester will help coordinate European economic policy by improving competitiveness , cutting red tape , promoting education and boosting the labour force .
However , these priorities must be very quickly converted into specific domestic measures .
The success of the new European structural reforms is closely linked to strengthening the single market .
The Union needs a strategy which will help create jobs and relieve the shortages in the EU 's labour market .
I welcome the Commission 's intention to present the Single Market Act , which should be adopted by the end of 2012 .
However , I regret to say that the priority measures which will give new impetus to the single market and competitiveness do not include any mention of the need to ensure the free movement of all European workers , focusing only on the free movement of services .
( MT ) Madam President , the people fleeing the war in Libya are now coming to Europe , especially to Lampedusa and Malta .
In my country , people have two concerns .
Firstly , they do not know how many people will come .
This is a fear which cannot be countered because we do not know how many people will cross over .
Secondly , people are very concerned because of the uncertainty about Europe 's willingness to help this time round .
This is a fear we can and should address because a solidarity mechanism already exists in our legislation , in Directive No 55 of 2001 .
What we should do is use it .
The Commission appears to be giving two reasons for not having made use of it .
Firstly , that there is no majority in the Council of Ministers .
I appeal to President Barroso not to cite this as reason .
The Commission should show political leadership and take the political initiative to table a proposal for this mechanism to be activated .
The Commission is also stating that the numbers are not yet large enough .
However , we should be careful .
The number could be small in relation to Europe as a whole but very large for a single country expected to host them all on its own .
I therefore appeal directly to President Barroso to activate the solidarity mechanism and to President Van Rompuy to tell the Council of Ministers to show concrete solidarity .
Madam President , the results of the European Council could be seen as politically and institutionally satisfactory , but the message from today 's debate is that the crisis is not over .
President Barroso has said that the economic situation remains difficult and uncertain , Mr Verhofstadt has confirmed that we are filling in the holes , but that the crisis has not been solved , and President Van Rompuy has said that the problems remain .

This is the result of past mistakes and the lack of appropriate instruments .
We need to draw conclusions about how these past mistakes happened and how the staggering debt burden and deficits were created .
What was wrong with the policies of Member States and the EU institutions ?
Without thorough analysis and conclusions , that should become a commitment for all involved , we cannot avoid repeating the same mistakes .
The central issue remains enhancing competitiveness .
I hope that the Commission 's new Single Market Act will be truly ambitious .
At least the digital single market topic has made a breakthrough into EU priorities .
Last but not least , this week the new Estonian Government will be confirmed .
At the recent elections , Estonian voters demonstrated anti-European tendencies , returning the existing Government with an increased majority despite heavy cuts in the budget ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , there is much to commend the Council conclusions as we look to the future - perhaps less so when we deal with the present and the past .
I was interested in the comments made by Catherine Day , a senior Commission official , in Ireland last week when she said that the shine had gone off Ireland .
I hope that does not mean each of us individually , and I hope that , given the results of the stress tests and the very strong action of the new government , the shine will come back to Ireland .
I hope , too , that it comes back to our people , who are very depressed and disillusioned by a feeling that they carry a very heavy burden for the rest of the European Union .
I would ask those who wag their fingers in anger about incorrect behaviour by individual countries and citizens to please remember that there were others who also joined in at the party - I speak of European banks , who tried to profit from the boom that existed not just in Ireland , but elsewhere .
However , there is a ray of hope in the Irish media this morning .
I see that global finance giants are backing our economy in the wake of the stress tests , and I hope that they realise that the Irish have fixed a problem for the rest of Europe , and will show us much-needed solidarity on interest rates .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Barroso , Mr Van Rompuy , I would like to ask you a few questions .
It is good that an agreement has been reached .
It is good that the European economy and European currency will now be better protected .
But is protection enough on its own ?
Is it not necessary to go further ?
Is it not necessary to stimulate an upturn , so that we can preserve what we are protecting ?
I believe that too little is being done and that the wrong strategy is being followed .
Why is the European Union investing in the export of cucumbers , bananas and live cattle rather than in universities , places of learning and schools ?
This is something which we need to consider .
When you say that we have no money for this , then perhaps what is needed is some reorganisation .
We should consider whether we need new sources of income , in which case we need look no further than those who have always profited from this unspeakable situation .
Mr Barroso , what is the real reason for your Commission 's opposition to a financial transaction tax ?
Please answer this question for me .
You need to decide once and for all whether you are on the side of the financial industry or of our citizens .


( FR ) Madam President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , I would like to thank the chairs of the political groups for cancelling their meeting of the Conference of Presidents so that this debate could be held in plenary pursuant to Article 15 .
Concerning the stability mechanism , I would like to follow on from what Mr Lamassoure said by raising the issue of political control and specifically the issue of regulating this mechanism , and to find out who is going to grant budgetary discharge for this financial instrument .
I will conclude my speech by asking whether the moment has not come for the Commission to provide us with a comprehensive report on public support to credit institutions , and in particular on all financial flows and on sovereign debt .
Finally , I suggest that we consider the possibility of creating a European public rating agency to address the major problems we are having with private agencies , because rating a country is very different from rating a private company .

( ES ) Madam President , at the beginning of his speech , Mr Van Rompuy pointed out that within the space of 49 days there have been three decision-making European Council meetings and a summit .
In other words , what had previously been a three- or six-monthly event is now the habitual manner of governing the Union in order to provide an immediate response to immediate challenges .
However , beyond these immediate challenges lie the future horizons of the Union , and the horizons of the Union depend on our ability to compete .
What resources do we have , at the present time , to generate knowledge ?
We have few world-beating universities , we devote a smaller percentage of income to research and development than do the emerging and the developed countries and , at the same time , our businesses play a very minor role in research .
We must acquire a European dimension with coordination between European universities and with curricula which generate excellence and cooperation .
Madam President , the Presidents of the Council and the Commission spoke of the Euro Plus Pact and of the single market .
I have a question about each .
Do they agree with the President of the European Central Bank that a far larger European stability mechanism will be needed ?
If they do not agree , is it simply because true professionals can rarely admit in public what they know to be true in private ?
The only participant in the single market which implements the rules 100 % is Norway .
Since the real stress test in the crisis we face will not be of any bank or any nuclear installation , but of the solidarity of European Union Member States , do the Presidents of the Commission and Council believe that there are good chances of greater solidarity than we have seen in the past ?
- ( SK ) Madam President , one of the topics of negotiation at the Council of the European Union was the definition of the new eurozone crisis mechanism .
Even though the leaders of the governments present reached agreement on the creation of a fixed eurobond , it seems they will need to have further discussions with experts in their own countries as to its final form .
When the Slovak prime minister , Mrs Radičová , returned home from Brussels , she found that she lacked sufficient support in the national parliament for the position she had taken in the Council negotiations .
Without a proper and precise finalisation of the mechanism to regulate the bankruptcy of insolvent countries , activated within the framework of the eurozone , the proposed permanent mechanism will instead become a permanent instrument for European indebtedness .
That is why no responsible national parliament can accept it in such a form .
I would therefore like to ask you , Mr President of the Council of the European Union , to take greater account of qualified expert opinions in political proposals .
Madam President , paragraph 5 of the report from the meeting says that policy measures will be presented to correct harmful and persistent macroeconomic imbalances and improve competitiveness , but in the introduction the talk is of promoting trade with third countries .
Imports from third countries , particularly the so-called emergent economies , are the greatest single cause of trade imbalances and the inability to compete .
It would be impossible for developed economies to compete with manufactured imports from these countries without driving our wages down to their levels .
Indeed , this is hinted at in the section on page 16 , on fostering competitiveness .
It says ' there will be assessments of wage and productivity developments and competitive adjustment needs ' .
Whatever does this mean ?
It could only mean one thing .
Wages must be adjusted downwards to make goods competitive with those of the emergent economies .
While principles such as free trade are sacrosanct , the economic interests of European workers , it seems , are dispensable .
Madam President , I do not like to be in tow or obligated to anybody and neither do the Irish people - an independent race .
For that reason the recent EU-IMF bail-out hurt the Irish people badly .
However , I do not share the opinion that Europe is to blame for it .
It was largely due to Ireland 's incorporated banks , regulator and government , not the Irish people - but the Irish people are now being forced to pay the price and the burden is too large .
For that reason I would ask two things : one , the interest rate should be reduced , and I would like to thank Commissioner Rehn and President Barroso for their vibes in that regard .
Secondly , I think bondholders will have to pay a price - if not a haircut then , at the very least , they deserve a bit of a shave .
Individuals do not get a guaranteed interest-free investment and neither should bondholders .
If those two things were done then we might be able to make progress .


( FR ) Madam President , Mr Van Rompuy , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , the Council 's conclusions on economic policy and the Euro Plus Pact open up a real European Pandora 's box , out of which only problems will arise , and European citizens will have to face those problems .
The calling into question of social welfare and wage-indexing , the linking of productivity and wages , reduced purchasing power and an increase in the retirement age are just a few examples of the austerity crisis that awaits us .
I am appalled to see that the Council has clearly not learnt any lessons from the crisis .
Of course , we need a policy based on budgetary responsibility and rigour , no one is disputing that , but we should not insist that the citizens make all of the effort , since they are our only chance of coming out of this crisis on top .
You forget all too quickly the financial and banking sector , which should also contribute to these crucial efforts and should above all act more responsibly .
When will we finally see a tax on financial transactions ?
At a time when 16 million Europeans are out of work , prices are soaring and speculative shocks are shaking the continent , the Council is placing the burden of sacrifice on labour and workers instead of on capital , and that is unacceptable .

( HU ) Madam President , President Van Rompuy assessed the Euro Plus Pact as a new stage of future economic coordination , and this is indeed an entirely new period in the field of macroeconomic coordination .
Prime Minister Viktor Orbán , the President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , viewed it similarly , describing it as a pillar of the future European economic system .
At the same time , it is unfortunate that Hungary 's name was not among those listed by President Van Rompuy , because regrettably Hungary is not taking part in the Euro Plus Pact .
Very many Hungarian citizens and economists do not understand either why the Hungarian Government decided in this way , because Hungary is a small country with an open economy , and the argument that this would have obstructed tax competition is unsound since it is only about the harmonisation of the corporate tax base .
It is a shame that Hungary has missed out on this .
( DE ) Madam President , the EU is a master of procrastination .
For decades , Gaddafi was treated as a serious partner , for decades the dangers of nuclear power were swept under the carpet and now we are pumping money into a safety net that is obviously not working .
Why can people not see that the euro crisis cannot be resolved with the safety net ?
First Greece and now Portugal has been downgraded by US rating agencies and the rescue package now only benefits banks and speculators who are gambling on bankrupt euro Member States .
That is why I say it is time to end the safety net and to draw a line under the plans for Eurobonds .
If the bankrupt states remain in the euro area , this will mark the beginning of the end for the euro .
For this reason we would be better advised to use the billions earmarked for the rescue packages to stem the stream of refugees from North Africa with sustainable local projects or to secure genuine independence from nuclear energy .
This would certainly represent a better investment than simply squandering the money in the casinos of the international rating agencies .
( PT ) Madam President , those who are pushing Portugal into this supposed aid do not really want to help , rather they want to make money by sinking us and sinking the euro .
That is because in this Europe , where solidarity , cohesion and Community method have become empty words , this supposed aid is only to pay the banks that pushed us into the vortex of debt currently sucking us under , all at public expense , with the neoliberal measures of the Euro Plus Pact , with no investment to relaunch growth and employment , no Eurobonds , no financial transactions tax and no measures for dealing with the macro-economic imbalances that are destroying the euro .
In this Europe , where there are banks that are too big to fail , but states and peoples are allowed to go under , either blindness or vested interest explains the fact that the Commission and Council have given up taking action against tax havens .
Will it be possible to clean up , regulate and supervise the financial system , while allowing the black holes that are instrumental in corruption , tax fraud and evasion , and organised criminality to remain untouchable ?
- ( SK ) Madam President , I would first like to draw attention to the incorrect theme of the conclusions from the Council meeting , which is that we have economic growth and at the same we must make savings .
The obsession with fiscal consolidation in a period of crisis may prove fatal for us .
Our unequivocal priority should be to restore employment and sustainable economic growth .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is the citizens who are bearing the main brunt of the crisis .
On the one hand , they are losing jobs and are hard hit by government cost-cutting , and on top of this is the threat that the money needed for reinforcing the eurobond will come exclusively from their taxes .
It should be the players from the financial sector that take the main role in reinforcing the eurobond .
Madam President , President of the Commission , what the Union needs now is coordination of economic and social policies with the aim of stimulating employment and getting out of the crisis .
We also need a clear consensus on protecting the euro , with the private finance sector playing a part .
( DE ) Madam President , the revision of the Treaty led to the inception of the ESM .
I again appeal to everyone to observe the relevant criteria .
After all , placing another Member State and its citizens in the firing line is irresponsible in the context of the prevailing , continuing structural crisis .
The ESM can only have its justification if all states meet with their budgetary obligations and agree to implement cost-efficiencies .
The crisis in Japan has shown us just how ' safe ' nuclear power can be .
Nature is a stronger force than man can harness .
In view of the history of Chernobyl , we can only hope that the stress tests will be approached with greater caution than the limits imposed last week .
It is time to put an end to nuclear power .
So , let us finally concentrate on the renewable energies .
For example , the NorGer undersea electricity cable project could replace 60 nuclear power plants .
( LT ) Madam President , I welcome the fact that the European Council managed to reach an agreement on certain issues that are particularly important for Europe .
I would like to single out the issue of the European Semester and its importance as one of the priorities .
I believe that priority should be given to the restoration of credible Member State budgets and social justice and to fiscal sustainability , and this would create the conditions for stability and for Member State economies to recover more speedily .
It is very important for consolidation efforts to supplement structural reforms , particularly in implementing priorities in the European Union set out in the Europe 2020 Strategy .
A particularly important role should also be played by the Commission , which should monitor Member States ' actions very responsibly and follow the implementation of specific measures in accordance with national stability and convergence programmes .
Furthermore , significant concern remains as regards the attitude of the European Central Bank , the Council and the European Commission to the situation faced by commercial banks , as well as the actions of foreign rating agencies .
Madam President , honourable Members , regarding the assessment of the last European Council , I believe that the analysis I presented was fairly well balanced and fairly reasonable .
I think it is right to recognise that we have made important progress on the structure .
If we compare what we have now with what we did not have beforehand , it is undoubtedly an important step forward .
There has been , for instance , the creation of a permanent stability mechanism , which was not even provided for by the Treaty .
Furthermore , this Parliament , by an overwhelming majority , supported a limited reform of the Treaty in order to create a new instrument , an instrument which did not even exist before .
Therefore , let us be intellectually honest in our assessment .
I believe there has been substantial progress in terms of the reaction to the crisis , in terms of lessons learnt with regard to the shortcomings we have seen in the past , whether at instrument level or policy level .
However at the same time , I said , very clearly in fact , that this might not be enough .
It is one thing to have the structure , the architecture , but it is another to have the policies to be applied .
Indeed , the real test will be to see , after this , what governments , and also our institutions , will be able to deliver in terms of substance .
Substance is more important than instruments .
At the same time however , I have told you , with great transparency I think , that when we talk about ambition , the Commission would have preferred to have gone further in some areas .
We highlighted for instance the fact that for the permanent stability mechanism , we were in favour of more flexibility .
Unfortunately it was not possible to reach a consensus for this higher level of ambition .
Having said that , I think it would be a mistake to reject the gains we have achieved .
Staying on the subject of ambition , I would like to emphasise this important aspect , because some have suggested that the Commission should submit other proposals .
Practically everything you have said , the Commission has already proposed .
On 9 May 2010 , the Commission - myself and Commissionner Rehn - tabled a legislative proposal relating to a wholly Community-based approach to the stability mechanism .
We proposed the pooling , for instance , of debt management , what are referred to as joint and several guarantees .
This was rejected by our Member States .
Not by you , but obtaining the Member States ' approval is essential , Mr Verhofstadt .
We presented the text at the euro area summit .
It was rejected by a large majority of Member States .
That is the reality .
On the specific matter of unanimity or majority rule for the permanent stability mechanism , I myself suggested the latter ; I insisted , in the presence of the President of the European Council and certain Heads of State or Government , that they should accept a qualified majority rule .
However , it was rejected .
Consequently , one can always insist , but the clauses need to be clear and you need to know exactly who to address your requests to .
The Commission has made ambitious proposals , for instance in relation to stress tests ; it is the European Commission and the European Central Bank who have proposed credible and transparent tests for the European Bank .
Concerning Eurobonds , the Commission has been talking about Eurobonds for at least 30 years I think .
This was rejected by some of our Member States .
I myself suggested here - and I can tell you that I will do the same for the financial perspective - that we could now at least have project bonds for financing investments at draft European budget level .
We will see at that point who will be there to support this approach in favour of European investment .
And maybe then , some of you could convince us with your own European parties to support this more ambitious approach to the financial perspective .
This may be an opportunity for us to work even more closely .
That is all on the issue of ambition at European level .
( Applause )
Even regarding the social issue , which I now wish to talk to you about , the Commission went to great lengths to ensure that the 2020 Strategy places more emphasis on social aspects , as well as on education .
It was not easy , however .
Some governments were saying that , in line with the principle of subsidiarity , it was not up to Europe or the European Union to take direct action on social aspects and education .
Let us now try , within the framework of the 2020 Strategy - where it was nonetheless possible to reach a certain consensus on the inclusion , for instance , of the fight against poverty and social exclusion - to develop this policy , and also to encourage investment , particularly in education and innovation .
However , in that respect , let me tell you something that you may not be aware of .
The Commission suggested , some time ago - two years ago I think - that emergency food aid be provided for some Europeans , because there are now people in Europe , too , who do not have enough to eat .
Recently , I , together with Joseph Daul , Chair of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , visited the food bank here in the Bas-Rhin .
There are poverty-related problems in Europe .
Well , did you know that two governments took the Commission to the Court of Justice because the Commission had put in place a mechanism for helping the poorest in Europe ?
That is the situation .
Let us be absolutely clear .
The Commission is in favour of a Europe that is more ambitious with regard to governance ; it is in favour of fair growth and of more social justice at European level .
However , at the same time , we need to have Parliament and the Member States on board .
And we have to fight for that .
Therefore , in my opinion , to criticise the Commission really would be to choose the wrong target , since it spearheaded the fight for a more social , fairer Europe and for much more credible governance .
At the same time , let us be absolutely clear on this as well .
I do not think it helps Europe to say that the current problem is Europe 's problem , as if the responsibility did not lie at all with certain governments , which let their debt reach unsustainable levels or their banks have growth several times that of their gross domestic product .
Governments are also partly responsible .
That responsibility is essential .
That is why we must now find solutions based on solidarity , but also act responsibly .
That is why , for instance , I am proud that the Commission and I have supported the proposal aimed at lowering the interest rates paid by Greece , and we are doing the same thing now for Ireland .
We think that this is the right thing to do , not only to avoid imposing extremely heavy costs on our Greek and Irish fellow citizens , but also to ensure that the debt is sustainable .
Consequently , it is in that spirit of solidarity and responsibility that we can find common answers that will also enable us , I hope , to avoid a problem that some of you have alluded to and which concerns me , namely the problem of a certain division in Europe , in particular a division between North and South , between centre and periphery .
I think that the Europe that we want to build is a Europe of solidarity , not a first-class and second-class Europe , but a Europe with which all Europeans can identify .
I have already defended , in word and in deed , the financial transaction tax in the G20 on behalf of the European Union .
This was rejected by a huge number of our G20 partners .
The question that we are now discussing is whether , at European level , we can - or we should - have a financial transaction tax or not .
Let us be honest , once again .
Several Member States fundamentally oppose it .
They will not agree .
What I said at the last European Council was that the Commission is now making impact assessments of different options for the financial sector and will soon come forward with proposals .
It was very important that the Commission made that announcement to the European Council because at least in the conclusions of the European Council there is a commitment to look at the proposals that the Commission will put forward for financial taxation .
I believe that , in terms of justice , it is important that the financial sector - and to a large extent at least some of the behaviour in the financial sector was at the origin of this crisis - also contributes to the response to the crisis .
I think this is basic in terms of fairness .
That is my own position and , I have no doubt , the position of the Commission .
I will come forward with proposals on this matter .
The same goes for the CCCTB .
There is some opposition in some quarters in the Council , but the Commission has put forward the proposal and we will fight for it because we believe the CCCTB is important for the completion of the single market .
This is exactly the approach we are defending .
We have been discussing process and instruments for a very long time .
Now is the time to put process and instruments at the service of the substance .
Process and instruments are important , but they are at the service of the substance and cannot substitute for it .
The challenge we need to resolve is our economic renewal .
The truth is that , in order to be able to invest , we need confidence .
Confidence depends on our capacity to modernise , to innovate and to become more sustainable and more competitive .
Let us not confuse cause and effect .
Investment will be attracted if we implement Europe 2020 quickly and decisively , and if we pursue our goals of a Europe that is sustainable and competitive in the spirit of solidarity and also in solidarity with all the Member States , including Portugal .
( FR ) Mr Schulz , you know very well that in my capacity as President of the Commission , I cannot interfere in Portuguese domestic policy .
If one day you cease being Chair of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and you have other duties , I am sure that you will carry out those new duties completely independently and that you will not interfere in your group 's internal matters .
However , at the same time , I have to tell you that a political crisis in Portugal has not made things any easier , since Portugal was already in a rather difficult situation .
Despite this , we the European institutions also need to respect national democracy and the decisions of national parliaments , and we now hope that Portugal will find the best way out of this .
In any case , the Commission stands by Portugal in helping it find the best solutions in accordance , of course , with the commitments it has made and with certain responsibilities it has towards its European partners .
I believe that it is in this spirit of active solidarity and responsibility that we can tackle the crisis .
It is true that there have been rather pessimistic views expressed here today .
Moreover , as Europeans ' elected representatives , you reflect the dominant feeling in Europe .
While it is only natural that we are concerned , I think that we should have the political courage and perceptiveness to show confidence in our European project , because I do not believe that we will be able to restore confidence in Europe by being pessimistic .
The Commission is ready to carry on working enthusiastically with you , with the European Council , with the Council , with all the institutions , towards a stronger , more sustainable , fairer and more competitive Europe .
( Applause )
Madam President , honourable Members , I am pleased to be able to speak to such a full House , the fullest since I became President of the Council ,
( Applause )
but I have the impression that you have not just come here to listen to me .
First of all , I would like to thank you for all your comments , both positive and negative .
I was struck all the more because , within the European Council , we have to have unanimity , and we try to have unanimity between all your colleagues , from all your parties , Prime Ministers and Heads of State .
There are Socialists , Christian Democrats , Conservatives , Liberals , all belonging to your political families , and every time , we try and secure agreements between them .
Someone said earlier that I must be the idealist around here , the dream maker .
I do not think that is my role , but what I try to do , at least , wherever possible - and the President of the Commission can testify to this - is to act in such a way that in most cases , we end up with a convergence between the Commission proposals and the outcome of the European Council .
Let me mention the example of the task force , where the Commission proposals were the basis of the task force on economic governance , and where the outcome is very close to the Commission proposals .
And I will try , we will try with Parliament , to improve these proposals still further .
My role , then , is to seek a consensus , but one that is also based as far as possible on the Community , and I think that in some crucial areas , I have succeeded in doing that .
Now to the ' Euro Plus Pact ' - you know , the short paper that served as a starting point for our discussions , and the final Euro Plus Pact document - many of you , even those who belong to sceptical political groups , have said that their country should join the Euro Plus Pact .
This is probably because it is not so bad after all .
We have succeeded in reaching a compromise between ambitious objectives , so that economies remain competitive and public finances remain sustainable , and implementation at national level , because in most cases , the decisions we must take are national ones .
My second observation concerns methodology , if you will .
Many criticisms in relation to Europe are justified in terms of substance , but are not in line with the Treaty .
For example , the whole nuclear policy , the Energy Mix , comes under national jurisdiction and there is nothing I can do to change that .
Even safety and security of nuclear installations come for the most part under national jurisdiction .
There are Community competences , European competences , and in the conclusions of the European Council , we tried to promote them as much as possible .
I do not think that the Commission has ever had such an important role in nuclear security as it has since the European Council of a few days ago .
However , we still need to work within the framework of the Treaty .
People have talked about minimum wages in some countries , but that is a national competence .
People have talked about inequalities , job insecurity , injustice , yet in most cases , these are measures that are part of a national framework .
However , I would like to add that many measures which need to be taken now regarding competitiveness and public finances are measures that national governments ought in fact to have taken , even without European pressure .
Europe is exerting additional pressure because there is , for 17 countries at least , a Community currency that needs defending .
In most countries , however , the required measures need to be taken for the country 's own interest , for its own nationals , to safeguard its own future .
And Europe is bringing additional pressure to bear .
Therefore let us not level any unfounded accusations against the European Union .
Are our governance measures too weak ?
Well , the Council will work with the European Parliament to improve economic governance and , as in other cases , I am certain that compromises will be found .
It may be that there is a governor of a central bank of one of the 17 countries who has a number of criticisms in relation to economic governance , but I can quote other governors or bank directors of countries close to the Netherlands who have an altogether different opinion .
If necessary , I can give you the names and the quotations : that is the easiest way to work .
As for the current crisis , honourable Members , there is the future , and there are instruments on which important decisions have been taken , but there is of course the past .
As I have already said , the past needs to be managed .
Even with the best instruments that we can come up with - the facility , the stability mechanism , changing the Treaty , economic governance , the pact - we will not solve the problems of the countries that are struggling , we will not solve the problems of the banks that are still under pressure .
So there is the future and there is the past .
Concerning the past , there was a lack of policy in some Member States and at European level .
We need to be self-critical there .
However , what we need to ensure and will ensure , and we have already taken the necessary measures , is that this crisis does not happen again in the future .
In the meantime , as I have already said , we have to manage the legacy of the past , both regarding certain countries that you know about and which are in the programme - such as Greece and Ireland - and regarding other countries where we are taking measures to prevent them from going into the programme .
Could we have taken those measures a year ago ?
No !
Have there been major errors in the past ?
We undermined the Stability and Growth Pact seven or eight years ago .
If we had not done that , we would have had much more effective instruments and we could have prevented many crises .
With regard to economic growth , honourable Members , since 2010 it has averaged 2 % , which is the average for the decade between 1999 and 2008 .
We had economic growth in 2010 , and it is averaging 2 % in 2011 .
Should we do more ?
Of course we should .
Are public investments the only instrument ?
Not at all !
The internal market , the single market is extremely important .
It must be developed further .
There are Commission proposals on the table , and they will be discussed again in a few weeks , at the June European Council , and we will return to this matter again in the autumn .
Finally , on the subject of Libya , many criticisms can be levelled at us .
However , without Europe , without European leadership , there would have been a bloodbath in Libya .
Without Europe , there would have been massacres .
Some of you have been very critical of the European Union .
Yet we acted in time !
And without Europe , nothing would have been done at global level , at United Nations level .
After all the criticisms that have been voiced , I believe that we also have the right to hear that truth .
Did we get things wrong in the past ?
Did we adopt the right policies ?
No !
Did we correct our mistakes ?
Yes !
And the European Union deserves credit for correcting them .
( Applause )
I should like to say one last thing in my own language .
( NL ) I just listened to Mr Eppink , who declared that he felt let down .
I , too , feel let down by so much intellectual dishonesty .
I will not go into it further , but for Mr Eppink to stand there waving a photograph knowing full well that I was there in my official capacity and that that was not my personal conviction , well , I have to say that I feel very let down by him .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to make a personal observation at the end of this debate .
I am speaking not just for myself , but on behalf of many of my colleagues who were here the whole time and who followed this debate .
In all my time here at the European Parliament I have rarely felt as badly treated as today in the interplay between you and Mr Barroso .
I want to be very clear on this .
Mr Barroso , you have told us : ' The initiatives open to me , which have the support of the vast majority in this house , fail because the Member States reject them . '
Let me offer you a word of advice : place your initiatives on the table in the form of draft legislation .
That way you will get a majority in this House and the Council will no longer have any hiding space .
( Applause )
I would ask you to please stop hiding behind the Council .
To you , Mr Van Rompuy , I would say this : you tell us that you have succeeded in reaching compromises between socialists , liberals , conservatives and Christian democrats at Council level .
The Council is made up of sovereign ministers of state and prime ministers .
Here we witness a President of the Council trying to turn the Treaty of Lisbon in the opposite direction .
The result of the Treaty of Lisbon is that the Council of Heads of State or Government is drawing more and more power to itself , while at the same time saying : ' our decisions are made on a unanimous basis . '
This was not what the Treaty of Lisbon was about .
Lisbon wanted majority decision-making to be the norm within the EU .
You are misinterpreting the Treaty of Lisbon .
( Applause )
For this reason it is high time for the European Parliament to take the matter in hand itself and to defend the Community method .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( NL ) The EU has made a quantum leap forward in recent weeks in relation to economic integration .
The Euro Plus Pact puts us on track for ramped-up cooperation that still has respect for the traditions of social consultation as they exist in the Member States .
Of course , the work in this respect must not stop .
We now have to get phase 2 up and running and pave the way for European investment projects that will also enable us to make our Europe 2020 agenda a reality .
Commission President Barroso has promised that he will bring forward a proposal on the introduction of a financial transactions tax .
We must harness these funds in order to make vitally necessary cross-border investments , specifically in energy infrastructure , backed up by European project bonds and money for public / private partnerships .
That is the only way to convince the citizens that Europe , more than ever , is their guarantee of a prosperous future .
The last European Council meeting , which took place on 24 and 25 March , focused on the major economic and diplomatic challenges that the European Union is currently facing : the issues of Libya and Japan .
Despite there being signs of economic recovery , the situation remains difficult , and the end of the economic crisis still seems a long way off .
This may be seen in the case of Portugal , which has unfortunately ended up having to join Ireland and Greece in requesting economic and financial aid .
It is therefore important to adopt the necessary economic and financial measures for dealing with the crisis , for preventing cases of indebtedness like in Greece , Ireland and Portugal being repeated , and for strengthening economic governance within the EU and ensuring job creation .
A package of six measures has been adopted , which from the start appear to me to be positive and to have quite ambitious expectations , such as the establishment of a European Stability Mechanism , the Euro Plus Pact , and so on .
I hope that these can be implemented as quickly as possible , so that they can begin to produce the results that are so necessary and hoped for .
in writing . - ( RO ) The Euro Plus Pact and European Stability Mechanism will provide Member States with the financial assistance they need in return for closer coordination of their economic policies .
Both proposals offer therefore a constructive pair of measures , especially in view of the proposal for coordinating taxation policies , which is an essential reform in a union of states seeking to share the same currency .
Furthermore , the European Stability Mechanism , thanks to its intervention facility of EUR 500 billion , operates like a European Monetary Fund , authorised to borrow money and purchase bonds directly from states , while countering financial speculation at the same time .
However , certain proposals in the Pact are unworkable .
Fiscal austerity and making the labour market extremely flexible will delay economic growth , keep unemployment at high levels and create labour instability .
I think that gradual fiscal consolidation and safeguarding the European social model are needed to lay the foundations for sound economic growth .
in writing . - Much has been said in this plenary session on the effect of the bailout package on the Republic of Ireland .
However , it must be recognised that this crisis also has a huge knock-on effect on my own constituency of Northern Ireland , which shares a land border with the Republic .
There is a large quantity of cross border movement in terms of finance , services and people for employment purposes .
Banking institutions from the Republic of Ireland also have a considerable stake in Northern Ireland .
Therefore the liquidity problem these banks are now facing are directly impacting on businesses in Northern Ireland , particularly SMEs , in terms of access to financing .
At a time when SMEs are struggling to survive an already dire economic climate , this is only helping to depress a difficult situation .
At present , 30 per cent of everything manufactured or produced in Northern Ireland goes directly to market in the Republic of Ireland .
Therefore a weak market in the Republic has direct and serious ramifications for business and employment in my constituency .
In light of this serious situation I call on President Barroso to acknowledge this and use the taskforce to look at ways to improve the situation we now find ourselves in .
in writing . - ( PT ) The last European Council meeting took a set of decisions that , if they are implemented , will constitute an unusual , violent and dangerous attack on the workers and peoples of Europe , given substance within the renamed ' Euro Plus Pact ' .
It has surely been renamed in order to conceal its true authors - Germany and France - given that the previous name , the ' competitiveness pact ' , would immediately give them away .
Alongside so-called ' economic governance ' , this is an attack on Member States that are in a more vulnerable position from an economic and social point of view , with this being a veritable sentence of economic dependence and backwardness .
Both instruments are linked to the announced amendment - using the simplified procedure and without holding any referenda - to the Treaty of Lisbon , with the aim of introducing the so-called ' conditionality ' associated with the European Stability Mechanism .
According to the Council 's conclusions , this is ' strict policy conditionality under a macro-economic adjustment programme ' , a process that will be developed and implemented jointly by the European Commission , the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund .
Essentially , we are going through a process of concentration of political and economic power , now not only in the hands of a directorate of powers in the service of big business and finance , but also in the hands of the very institutions of international capital .
in writing . - ( HU ) It is important that in a difficult , critical period in the life of the whole of Europe we appraise the objectives ahead of us and the positive changes made towards them together .
The current Hungarian Presidency has scored a striking success for the second time in the areas of economic governance , the stability mechanism and the European Semester .
In the series of talks that took place in the context of its last meeting at the end of March , the European Council managed to agree on the limited amendment of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union as well , the purpose of which was to enhance the stability of the euro area and the euro .
At the Council meeting the Hungarian Presidency voted in favour of a rational , responsible economic policy that can be abided by , and apart from the institutionalisation of the European Semester , also strengthened the stability mechanism .
However , we need to point out that the elements of economic governance are not to be confused in any way with the Euro Plus Pact , which is an intergovernmental agreement at its current stage .
Although it is possible that the Pact is good , the single internal market cannot be regulated by non-contractual intergovernmental agreements .
Due to an unclarified point in the Pact concerning tax harmonisation , Hungary does not wish to apply the agreement in its entirety for the time being because we have an interest in enhancing our competitive advantage , and through this in real job creation in the long term and economic growth .
in writing . - ( LV ) I take considerable pleasure from the fact that 23 EU Member States have been able to agree on a package of measures for safeguarding financial stability and promoting growth - the Euro Plus Pact .
Also of importance is the agreement that has been reached on structural reform and fiscal consolidation and the final resolution on the amendments to the Treaty of Lisbon for the establishment of the European Stability Mechanism .
All countries must implement fiscal consolidation measures and measures aimed at preventing macroeconomic disequilibrium .
Structural reforms to promote employment and social inclusion must also be implemented .
They must be defined according to each country 's particular situation .
The participation of 23 European countries in this pact leads us to hope that these measures will encourage economic growth .
This is a step in the right direction and a sensible response to those economic challenges .
This pact fits splendidly with the work of Parliament and the Commission on improvements to the single market and the three reports that we are approving in Parliament this week .
We must take even bolder decisions .
Member State governments must not seize the pretext of the electoral cycle in order to put off taking important but unpopular decisions .
The European Council that took place on 24-25 March made a number of decisions which I believe to be important and which could not be put off any longer .
I think that the most important decision in connection with European economic policy is the Euro Plus Pact , which provides a common agenda and common objectives .
The four main objectives are : promoting competitiveness , promoting employment , increasing the sustainability of public sector funding and restoring financial stability .
As a result of this pact , several other Member States have joined the euro area ; for example , Latvia , Lithuania , Poland , Denmark , Romania and Bulgaria .
I think that it is extremely important at the present time to reach common agreements involving the application of equal rules as well as common mechanisms for achieving the desired objectives .
I especially want to recognise those Member States who are not members of the euro area but who have still joined this pact .
It is to be hoped that the application of common rules will be accompanied by the harmonisation of national perceptions , and this particularly relates to the sustainability of public sector funding with a view to preventing the situations that engulfed Greece and Ireland from arising in the future .
At the same time , we cannot just stop at these decisions , as they will only provide short-term results .
It is necessary to develop solutions for making future investments , whether through eurobonds or through other solutions . Thank you .
in writing . - ( PL ) The recent European Council summit marks the opening of a new phase - one of greater economic coordination and convergence in the EU and the euro area .
The Euro Plus Pact adopted by the Heads of State or Government , with the involvement of the countries in the euro area and Bulgaria , Denmark , Lithuania , Latvia , Poland and Romania , provides us with a real chance of achieving the objectives set out in it , or in other words supporting competitiveness , employment , the stability of public finances and financial stability in general .
It is worth highlighting the fact that the Pact does not specify the political or economic measures to be used in order to achieve these objectives , which means that it will still be up to the individual Member States to choose suitable means of doing so .
There can be no doubt that the success or failure of the Pact will be determined by the genuine involvement of the Member States and how effectively their progress is monitored .
When it comes to economic coordination , the EU can no longer afford a failure such as that suffered by the Stability and Growth Pact .
Consent was also given at the summit to the inclusion in the Treaty of a provision establishing a permanent European Stability Mechanism , mobilised with the joint agreement of the Member States in the event that it is necessary to ensure the stability of the euro area as a whole .
This is a very important decision , particularly in light of the recent problems faced by countries in the euro area .
A permanent mechanism enshrined in the Treaty will act as a solid guarantee in the event of similar problems in the future , thus also reducing the risk of speculative attacks on the European currency .
I also welcome the fact that the mechanism has been opened up for Member States outside the euro area .
in writing . - ( PL ) We will only be able to combat the crisis effectively if we work together , avoiding any division into countries which belong to the euro area and those which remain outside it .
It is hard to imagine a more competitive EU being built without the participation of countries such as the United Kingdom , Sweden or Poland , so I welcome the news that the Euro Plus Pact has been adopted .
To begin with , our impression was that the euro area planned not only to reform itself , but what is more to introduce reforms outside EU structures , which was a cause of some concern to MEPs .
These fears were however successfully dispelled , and an uncompromising stance was taken on Parliament 's behalf .
The only regrettable thing is that the Member States did not adopt it in its entirety , particularly with regard to the European Stability Mechanism , which in our opinion should be open to countries outside the euro area from the outset .
1 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Poland - Podkarpackie - Manufacture of machinery (
2 .
Migration flows arising from instability : scope and role of EU foreign policy (
3 .
Role of women in agriculture and rural areas (
4 .
EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in the new Member States (
5 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Czech Republic - UNILEVER (
6 .
Dual-use items and technology (
- Before the final vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the vote has produced a result that may be the subject of debate , however we are now very close to the position of the Council and , with the agreement of the shadow rapporteurs , I would ask that the final vote should be postponed because it is very probable that we shall be able to reach complete agreement with the Council .
7 .
Officially supported export credits (
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , I would like to announce that the GUE / NGL Group wishes to withdraw the roll-call vote on both parts of amendment 10 .
Mr President , as in the previous vote , the shadow rapporteurs and myself have decided not to put the legislative resolution to the vote in Parliament so as to continue negotiations with the Council , in the hope that it will heed Parliament 's vote today .
8 .
EU policy framework to fight violence against women (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
( DA ) Mr President , the most recent internal tensions and unrest in Tunisia , Egypt , Libya and other Arab countries have led to huge migration flows with their associated challenges for Europe .
Obviously , we must be ready to deal with these situations and these flows of people .
We need to find a way of doing this together by ensuring , in solidarity with one another , that we meet the challenges that arise when our common system is put under pressure from the outside world .
I am therefore pleased that Parliament has today adopted a policy for dealing with migration flows arising from instability .
I am particularly pleased that Parliament 's resolution places the focus on strengthening the role of the border agency , FRONTEX .
That is something that we in the Danish Liberal Party have been fighting for for a very long time .
During the current crisis in North Africa , FRONTEX has proven to be a particularly important instrument for dealing with migration flows in the region .
Now all we need is for FRONTEX to be able to swing into action more quickly when it ultimately counts .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this report because it represents a first step towards an EU policy on migration flows arising from instability .
In this regard it is important that this Parliament speaks out against this hysterical vision of a looming invasion of migrants and asylum seekers coming from the South .
We are not going to be overwhelmed by millions of people escaping political deprivation and tyrannies .
Many people are afraid that asylum seekers are arriving in greater numbers , straining our buckling welfare systems .
This claim is good to gain votes and build support for harsh immigration policies , but it is not backed by the facts .
The overall number of people claiming asylum in the West dropped by more than 40 % over the past decade according to data just released by the United Nations .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also supported and voted in favour of Mr Provera 's report because I think it offers a practical , assertive step forward towards the goal of solidarity , which is moreover provided for by Article 80 on solidarity amongst European Union Member States .
It also pays clear and explicit attention to those that find themselves in great difficulty , such as North Africa in particular at this time .
Respect for human rights , international cooperation and bilateral relations are essential , as too are regional organisations such as the Arab League and the African Union , which can provide added value in a stable , lasting peace process .
We trust that the steps ahead will also be characterised by actions in similar areas that promote , in economic terms , entities that need to be supported and assisted towards sustained and continuous growth .
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to say that migration flows arising from instability are a real challenge for the European Union .
This is about the individual fate of human beings , in which every person 's story is different .
They are on the move through desperation , but what unites them all is hope for something better .
Europe needs to show sympathy and a willingness to help .
European integration is a successful , common project through which we have created prosperity , stability and security - a sort of cradle of wellbeing .
It will be difficult and expensive to respond to this wave of immigration after it starts rapping on the doors of Europe .
The example provided by the island of Lampedusa shows how foreign policy security matters can become internal policy in an instant , and that is why development cooperation alone is no longer enough .
Europe needs a comprehensive , preventive plan that covers aspects of security , regional cooperation , trade policy , climate change , the protection of human rights and the development of democracy .
This is what we need to do .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the European debate on migration flows. one often hears : ' What problems can a country of nearly 60 million people such as Italy have in accommodating a few tens of thousands of immigrants ? ' .
This question disregards two pieces of information , often for ulterior motives .
Firstly , many of these immigrants want to end up in other EU countries .
Secondly , in the last two years , less than 4 000 people have arrived on Italy 's shores , thanks to bilateral agreements with Libya and Tunisia .
In the past two months following the political crisis , 22 000 people have already arrived .
Italy is a pressure cooker right now .
On the one hand , the flow of migrants from North Africa , particularly economic migrants from Tunisia , is not coming to a halt .
On the other hand , France is rejecting immigrants at Ventimiglia because they do not hold residence permits .
If European solidarity does exist , now is the time to show it by working together at EU level to decide how to deal with these flows , both in the current emergency and in the long term , as well as which instruments to use in dealing with those arriving in Europe and what measures to adopt in countries of origin .
This text is an initial step in this direction and I therefore voted in its favour .
Mr President , on a point of order : we are in a Chamber which is meant for discourse , and we obviously all have to show respect for one another .
When you have two group Chairs having a private conversation while others are giving speeches , what message does that send out to their colleagues ?
Mr Daul and Mr Schulz , I have been asked whether you could set an example to the House .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the measure we have voted on today is of some help in clarifying the phenomenon of migration flows and praises the work of Frontex .
I think this should be seen positively and therefore so should the result of the vote .
I do , however , believe that this stance should be accompanied by equal clarity on the part of the Member States , because this challenge affects not only the European Institutions but also policy in the Member States .
I must say , however , that so far not all Member States have implemented and practiced such clarity , starting with the policy of the Italian Government , which has dealt with the situation in Lampedusa in a most objectionable and questionable manner .
Thousands of migrants there have been essentially abandoned to their fate , whilst human solidarity - never mind legal solidarity - would have led to immediate care and certainly greater respect than has been shown , notwithstanding the fact that the legal problem would then have to be dealt with , as we have done in this House .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while it is true that many migration flows arise from instability , we are rather reluctant to use such a mistaken term , because instability really means war , genocide , uncontrolled violence , revolutions and the misery to which these people have been condemned , whilst the European Union remains silent .
There is also the desire for freedom .
The resolution that we have voted on calls for a Union policy for the East and its most appropriate instruments to address various factors that cause this instability .
I wonder what credibility this foreign policy can have , given that events in Libya and North Africa have demonstrated the total lack of an EU foreign policy .
The governments of the Member States each acted on their own behalf , offering a pitiful spectacle to the world and the people that we should be helping .
The only refugee reception policy the Union could offer fell well short of requirements .
The island of Lampedusa and Italy were left without any answers .
Therefore we are certainly voting in favour of this measure , but we urge the Union to finally come up with a foreign policy worthy of the name .
( NL ) Mr President , I abstained from the vote on the Provera report , primarily because I think that it is greatly lacking in clarity .
All kinds of things are stated and proposed in this report - some of them even sensible ideas , which is unusual in this Parliament .
Yet , sadly enough , it remains primarily a report offering total political correctness that nowhere - not in a single place , not in a single paragraph or a single clause - ventures to question the new mass immigration into an already overpopulated continent of Europe , as this relates predominantly to the countries that used to make up what was known as Western Europe but is also a fundamental issue .
My own country of Flanders is the most densely populated country in the whole of the European Union .
The overwhelming majority of Flemings do not want any new immigration , and certainly not from countries with cultures and religions that advocate values that are completely at odds with our own .
It is high time that the European Parliament listened for once to its own European citizens .
Mr President , I agree that we should take measures in the short term to address the humanitarian crisis in the Mediterranean , ensuring the dignity of the people concerned using instruments such as Frontex .
We also need a long-term vision to solve the problems related to migration flows and to help create jobs in the countries of origin of these people .
On of the European Union 's key tools is trade policy .
The time has come to improve the openness of our markets , starting with countries like Egypt and Tunisia .
We also need to establish dialogue with a view to strengthening the regional trade relationship .
We have the example of Turkey and its success both with its customs union and in effectively implementing the necessary democratic reforms .
We have to start daring to talk about custom unions and free-trade agreements with the countries of the Mediterranean that are moving towards democracy and reforms .
I would like to finish by calling on the Council to adopt without further delay the Regional Convention on preferential Pan-Euro-Med rules of origin .
Mr President , the premise of this report is incorrect .
The idea that emigration is a product of poverty and desperation , although superficially plausible , turns out to be specious .
Emigration , we know historically , more often is the product of rising wealth and rising aspiration .
We saw very recently that the great migratory flows from Tunisia came after the restoration of democracy and the end of dictatorship .
The real cause which uproots people and makes them shift themselves hundreds of miles in pursuit of a better life is opportunity .
The reality is that in the European Union we have created a situation where we have long-scale structural unemployment and yet are still are having to import labour .
In our country , the United Kingdom , there are more than 4 million people who are either unemployed or on incapacity benefit and yet every month we are bringing people in from all over the world to do jobs that are not being taken by people born in the United Kingdom .
We have trapped millions in the squalor of dependency .
We have placed them in a situation where work is no longer part of their mental horizon .
If we want to rescue people from that wretched condition , the answer is not in foreign policy but in reform of welfare , so as to restore dignity and independence to our own citizens .
Mr President , one of the factors that is often overlooked in any debate on migration is that quite often it is very difficult for those who migrate from one country to another , and they do so under the most difficult of circumstances .
Think what it must be like to leave behind your family , your village , your town , all your social ties , your friends , maybe never knowing whether you will see them again or when you will see them again .
What makes them leave those countries and seek opportunity , as the previous speaker said , in the West ?
Well , quite often it is because they are escaping from conditions and governments that are no longer able to command their confidence .
We can help in some ways .
Let us look at some of the policies that we have : our fisheries policy , which encourages large fishing boats to plunder the seas off poor African nations , leaving their local fishermen in desperation with no jobs .
What do they do then ?
They seek to migrate .
We have our aid policy , which keeps corrupt governments in power , making it less pleasant for people to stay in their countries .
That makes people look to go abroad and they come here .
We have to get this right .
We have to understand that it is difficult for people to leave their own countries .
We should make sure that our policies help people to stay in their own countries .
( DA ) Mr President , for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe it is absolutely crucial that we secure the same rights and opportunities not only for the women , but also for the men of rural areas as are enjoyed by those who live in towns .
If we want to maintain a stronger European agricultural sector that is able to supply good quality food to the whole of Europe we need to ensure that this sector is attractive to both workers and families .
For this to be possible , it is necessary for us to give rural areas the opportunity for growth , innovation , jobs and development .
It is not necessary for us to impose quotas and unnatural gender distributions on the sector .
Therefore , it is also a good thing that Parliament has today adopted the report on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas , thereby sending a very clear signal that , here too , women play an important role .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , women have always had an important role in the agricultural and rural sector .
Indeed , women account for 42 % of the labour force out of a total of around 27 million workers .
Despite this high percentage , women are not well represented in sector organisations and face discrimination in the decision-making process .
There are many areas in which women 's circumstances could be improved , including ensuring adequate social cover .
The European institutions should therefore act to balance this inequality , perhaps by monitoring the sector through an observatory for female entrepreneurialism in agriculture , as already operated in Calabria and other regions in Italy .
The report voted upon today - which I supported - also takes a long hard look at the issue of the exodus from the countryside .
In order to help keep employment levels steady we need support policies and strategies which are designed to build infrastructure and create services suited to the requirements of modern life , which can be implemented in rural areas .
( DE ) Mr President , life and work have changed radically in rural areas through the transformation of society , changes in social structure and dramatic demographic change .
If it is our aim to keep women of all generations on the land or to encourage them to choose a rural lifestyle , then their needs and requirements must be taken into greater consideration in development policy .
We should bear in mind that the realities for women in rural areas have changed in recent years and are very highly differentiated .
Women themselves have played a part in initiating and shaping this change , both as individuals and in women 's political groupings .
I believe that our rapporteur , Mrs Jeggle , has correctly highlighted this fact , which is why I believe this report is extremely important .
After all , if we want to develop rural areas , we cannot simply concentrate on building up infrastructure and creating an environment for tourism , but also need to ensure that families settle there again , something that involves both women and men in equal measure .
( PL ) Mr President , I endorsed the Jeggle report , not least because it recommends ensuring appropriate funding for the European Union 's agricultural policy .
The trend towards make savings in the EU budget , which is otherwise entirely apposite , must not be followed at the expense of the common agricultural policy .
If rural areas and agriculture in the European Union do not receive appropriate assistance , it will be hard to improve the role of women in rural areas , it will be hard to encourage women to live in rural areas under such difficult conditions , and it will be hard to achieve the objectives of this key policy , such as food security , environmental protection and territorial balance .
We should remember this , and I would like to take the opportunity afforded by the debate on this key report by Mrs Jeggle to call once again for the wish to make savings in the European Union not to be granted at the expense of the common agricultural policy .
( ES ) Mr President , I voted for this report because it helps to combat the invisibility which until now has characterised the work of and role played by women in rural areas .
Without this contribution , it would not have been possible , in the past or in the present , to maintain population and employment outside urban areas .
This visibility should lead not only to social recognition but also to provision .
The common agricultural policy must include a focus on gender in its aid programmes , with special initiatives for female entrepreneurship .
In addition , it must help fund services and promote aspects such as Internet access in rural areas , which promote equality of living conditions in urban and in rural areas .
For their part , the social security systems of the Member States must recognise women 's work in this sphere , both in terms of production and care , especially in the care of dependents and children .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite the fact that women account for 42 % of 26 to 27 million workers and that 29 % of agricultural businesses are run by women , their industry-level representation is almost non-existent and at odds with their importance .
This is not right or normal , so the Union needs to give women a greater role in the rural sector and find suitable solutions for the combination of economic activities that they carry out .
Gender equality , equal treatment , social protection for mothers and recognition of the specific role that women play in agriculture are what is required .
Promoting continuous training is therefore one of the core issues on which we can no longer compromise .
We support the proposals of the rapporteur , Mrs Jeggle , on better representation for women in all political , economic and social bodies in the agricultural sector , and on support for social protection initiatives for women working as small farmers , farm workers and seasonal animal rearers .
Women must be acknowledged specifically within the common agricultural policy , otherwise this reform will be useless and it is quite certain that we will not be able to imagine an untroubled future with fresh cuts in agriculture .
Mr President , I do not know whether you recall the popular television series in our own country Life on Mars , the conceit of which was that the leading character , a police officer , is catapulted back , as it seems , to the early 1970s .
I felt rather as he did as I read through the voting list today .
Here is the EU coming out with policies on women in agriculture , export credits for favoured companies , special grants to Unilever in the Czech Republic and to machine tool manufacturers in Poland .
The 1970s was a dire period for Europe as a whole and for the United Kingdom in particular : a time of stagflation , of unemployment , of national bankruptcy .
But these things did not happen because of some tectonic forces beyond our control .
They happened as a result of wrong-headed policy , in particular the idea that governments could pick winners , and that governments should control the economy and make things happen through reallocating resources .
The 27 Member States have moved on , but the European Union has not .
We are still in this world of taking money from our taxpayers and giving them to favoured client groups .
Why ?
Because if we did not do that , what would the European Union be for ?
As Upton Sinclair once observed , it is very difficult to make a man see something when his job depends upon not seeing it .
- ( SK ) Mr President , it is right and proper that the submitted report sets out to improve the position of women in rural areas .
Unfortunately , however , it views women only as workers or entrepreneurs .
It does not see women in the role of mothers , nor the value of the informal and therefore unpaid work of women .
However , the work of women at home and caring for dependent family members also makes a significant contribution to the wellbeing of society .
This work accounts for up to one third of GDP in European countries , and yet we always pretend it does not exist .
Instead of clearly acknowledging this asset , we put pressure on women to get jobs and go into business .
At the same time , it is precisely in agriculture and rural areas that valuing the work of women would improve the quality of life for families and communities .
( DA ) Mr President , it should always be up to each individual Member State to decide on its own energy mix .
In light of that fact , it is also clearly the case that each individual Member State should cover the costs if it wants to phase out one of the elements of that mix .
However , in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria , in particular , there were a number of nuclear power plants from the Soviet era that were a long way from meeting our safety requirements .
It was therefore also necessary and sensible to support the decommissioning of these plants .
The problem is that the planning that was carried out there , or more accurately the lack of planning , quite simply must not be repeated .
We can see that , by the end of 2013 , we will have spent a total of EUR 3 billion , and we have still not managed to decommission the plants .
That is a sign of poor planning .
The Commission must produce a detailed analysis of the financial efficiency of the projects , because any future support must be conditional upon the countries being able to demonstrate that they have managed their current funds properly .
- ( SK ) Mr President , the submitted report on the state of funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants provides a good picture of the situation to date .
I fully agree with one of the key conclusions of the report , that the decommissioning of these facilities in the countries affected will also require European funding contributions after 2013 .
It will not be within the power of the affected countries to fund this exclusively from their own sources .
For example , Slovakia , under pressure from the EU , decommissioned two fully reconstructed blocks of the Jaslovské Bohunice nuclear plant in 2006 and 2008 .
According to the conclusions of the International Atomic Energy Agency , these blocks fulfilled all of the safety criteria .
The economic impacts of this step are considerable , and will be further multiplied by the high long-term costs for the complete decommissioning of these facilities .
The European Union will also have to make provision for funds to support the decommissioning of the nuclear plants in the financial perspective for the years 2013-2020 .
( PL ) Mr President , energy policy , and above all energy security in the broadest meaning of the word , is a subject provoking heated discussion in every corner of the globe in the light of recent events in Japan .
The disaster at the Fukushima nuclear power station showed how much work we need to do to create an energy supply system which is efficient and environmentally-friendly , but above all safe .
This is a problem not only for Asia , but for every country on every continent .
If nuclear power stations exist which should be closed for safety reasons , let us do everything in our power to ensure that this takes place and efficiently .
Let us provide support for all measures resulting in the creation of new and safe energy sources , and when taking decisions let our overriding priority always be public safety . Thank you very much .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt that a report such as Mr Marinescu 's could not but find support and agreement , even in a situation still characterised by the emotional outpouring following the events in Fukushima .
Mr Marinescu 's absolutely balanced and prudent approach to the document led me to support it in any case .
Furthermore , there is no doubt that the commitment to Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria must be sustained and consistent , whilst at the same time a series of other activities - those simply called ' stress tests ' and also all those tests designed with safety in mind - ought to guarantee safety in the nuclear sector .
There is no margin for error , for reasons we know all too well .
The financing programmes had already been planned for some time and they have been assured .
We trust in the positive and concrete outcome for the entire operation , which signals a step forwards in the direction we all wanted .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of providing adequate financial resources to guarantee the decommissioning of nuclear power plants has already been tackled by European Union legislation on the safety of the nuclear sector .
Today , in the light of recent international events and the consequent decisions of the governments of the Member States in this regard , the issue is highly topical .
We have expressed our backing for Mr Marinescu 's work , which deals with the specific cases of a number of countries which , upon accession , took on particular obligations on decommissioning nuclear power plants and received special support from the European Union for this very activity .
Specific cases aside , on this issue we are duty-bound to establish an effective monitoring system to check and test the nuclear plants within EU territory .
Indeed , the number of reactors that are thought to need to be decommissioned in EU territory in the near future is rather high .
It will therefore be essential - including and above all in such cases - , to ensure the provision of guarantee mechanisms for setting aside adequate financial resources required to tackle both ordinary and extraordinary requirements .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a staunch supporter of the anti-nuclear cause I backed this report not only because I think the decommissioning of these plants is of benefit to all , but also because I hope that no more will be able to be built .
Today we are faced with a ticking time-bomb across Europe .
The operation of nuclear power plants for civilian purposes is founded on engineering practices which are now outdated and anachronistic .
It can be said that their safety is ever more theoretical : everything will be fine , as long as nothing happens .
In fact , we are dealing with protocols from 50 years ago which , in reality , are not protected against events that may be increasingly unforeseeable .
Terrorist attacks could not have been foreseen and nor could the natural and disastrous events - not only earthquakes - which unfortunately are increasingly frequent in our disaster-stricken world .
( HU ) Mr President , I supported the report , which directly affects my country , Slovakia , as well .
In 2004 , the Lithuanian , Slovak and Bulgarian Governments made commitments in their accession treaties to gradually shut down some of their nuclear reactors .
The closure incurred extraordinary economic burdens , thus the EU undertook to provide financial aid for decommissioning by the end of 2013 .
EU experience of nuclear decommissioning is limited .
The shutdown may have a direct effect on the energy supply of the country concerned and neighbouring Member States .
The development of alternative , low carbon emission and competitive energy sources must be promoted in order to manage the negative consequences .
At the same time , we need to provide adequate financial resources to ensure that decommissioning operations occur in accordance with safety regulations .
The European Union will be able to use the experience gained during the shutdown processes with nuclear power plants that are approaching the end of their economic lives .
Based on the results , with a view to 2013 , it may be presumed that several investment projects will be almost complete , and new decommissioning and management structures will be already available to us . Thank you very much .
( EL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the Marinescu report , precisely because in Southeastern and Eastern Europe there is a heavy legacy of extremely dangerous nuclear reactors , such as in Bulgaria , Romania and Slovakia .
However , over all these years , billions of euros of European taxpayers ' money has been spent modernising them and prolonging their life .
We are basically subsidising the nuclear lobby which fought for reconditioning .
Fukushima has shown us yet again that these reactors should be shut down ; however , no such financial provisions were included into the operating costs of reactors and this is a huge and scandalous subsidy for a dangerous , expensive and contaminating method of producing energy .
Now , however , we can change the political will .
Convert subsidies for reconditioning unsafe reactors into funding to close them .
Freeze all new reactors being designed .
Convert resources from Euratom financing and abundant ITER subsidies .
Divert the resources earmarked to design and build new reactors to an economy based 100 % on renewable energy sources by 2050 .
We are in a state of emergency and we must respond .
( LT ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a report that is harsh , but in many places very true .
I would like to emphasise and draw my colleagues ' attention to the fact that , together with Slovakia and Bulgaria , Lithuania has fulfilled the obligations laid down in its accession agreement and has closed its old Soviet nuclear reactors within the deadline set .
Most of the projects concerning the closure of Ignalina have been implemented or are being implemented .
Obviously , there are some difficulties .
When a new Lithuanian Government and Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant Board take office , it is hoped that it will be possible to bring proceedings against those individuals , who failed to organise work properly , and also to review the agreement on the construction of repositories for spent nuclear fuel , managing to obtain favourable conditions .
I entirely agree that it is necessary to manage funds and use resources with complete transparency , thereby ensuring nuclear safety .
However , as we are discussing new nuclear power plants , I would like to use the opportunity to draw my colleagues ' attention to the European Union border , to Russia and Belarus , where there are plans to construct power stations with experimental reactors .
We must focus our attention on this .
( DA ) Mr President , I actually did not realise that we would , in fact , have the opportunity to give an explanation of vote in connection with this resolution , but , as that is the case , I will do so very briefly .
The Danish Liberal Party is essentially against the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
However , once the decision has been taken to set up such a fund and once applications have been sent in where the countries concerned meet the requirements laid down in connection with the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , we obviously must also grant the funds applied for .
We therefore voted in favour .
Mr President , I voted against both the Matera reports on the mobilisation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , for the Czech Republic and for Poland , not because I feel any ill will against those countries - far from it .
I am just very mindful of my own constituents in the West Midlands , and indeed their contribution to the GBP 48 million that the United Kingdom pays to the European Union every single day .
Let me tell you a few things about the West Midlands : we have the largest youth unemployment and our motor industry was decimated , partly due to the European Union funding jobs in Slovakia that took away essential jobs from the Ryton plant .
In 2004 it was , of course , the United Kingdom that bore the brunt of the EU enlargement , because it was the only one not to put up any barriers .
That cost more in public services .
Another example of an expense that my constituents have is that we contribute towards child benefit for people in Eastern Europe .
People come over to the United Kingdom , work in the United Kingdom and claim for children who are resident in Eastern European countries .
What we would like to do , and what I would like to see , is that GBP 48 million a day being kept in the United Kingdom and spent on essential public services , and not handed over , when the EU 's accounts have not been audited for 14 years .
( GA ) Mr President , I was pleased to support these proposals from Bairbre de Brún and wish every success to the workers in the Czech Republic and Poland .
However , I suspect that they will end up disgusted and dispirited , as I saw in my own constituency , especially in Dell in Limerick and Waterford Crystal in Waterford .
The EAGGF is a wonderful concept but , unfortunately , it is too inflexible .
As a result of this , much of the funding returns to the European Union .
I would suggest that , where there is funding left over , the Member State concerned should be able to make proposals to the Commission on how best to utilise it on behalf of the workers .
( GA ) If that is done , it will greatly help unemployed workers and greatly improve the image of the European Union .
( DA ) Mr President , violence against women is a problem that exists the world over , and it is obviously important to adopt a position on this issue - both personally and from a political standpoint .
Clearly , therefore , we must also adopt a position on this issue at European level .
When discussing these problems , instead of creating a Christmas tree adorned with various initiatives , I would simply have liked the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality to have concentrated a little bit more on the initiatives that it actually wants the European Union to focus on .
Other things being equal , I believe that would lend more weight to our actions and make them more effective and thus be better for the women concerned and , in that respect , also for the credibility of the initiatives that we propose here in Parliament .
Mr President , violence against women is not a private issue .
It is a crime to be persecuted .
We need to break the silence .
Respecting culture and religion is important but it should never be an excuse for honour killing , genital mutilation , trafficking , domestic violence and forced marriages .
The Stockholm Programme provides a new policy framework to enhance the fight against violence on women and calls for concrete action .
I encourage the Commission to come forward with a strategy which includes practical proposals .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe we must join forces across political parties to denounce and combat all forms of violence against women .
I support the principle and most of the proposals , but judicial and criminal law measures should be taken at national level .
That is what we are doing in Sweden .
In fact combating violence is at the centre of the women 's organisation of my party , providing practical action and raising awareness not only to protect women , but also to empower women and to develop a culture of respect for women 's dignity .
I have started a social media campaign on this which everybody is welcome to join .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as some of my fellow Members have already said , I think that by voting in favour of this report by Mrs Svensson we are making a commitment to ensuring that the Commission fulfils its pledge to adopt a Communication , before the end of 2011 , for the implementation of a strategy and a European action plan to combat violence against women , which will take a global view and therefore include all the different cases , from sexual violence to domestic violence and female genital mutilation , and - I hope - all the new forms of violence .
I am referring to the actual inducement to violence , which is often carried out by advertising and the media , as well as the forms of blackmail and violations of women 's human rights that occur in the workplace when they decide they want to become mothers or are already working mothers .
Following the implementation and adoption of the directive on trafficking in human beings - to which Parliament was very committed - and the directive on the European Protection Order , I think it would be important to have a proper directive on this issue within the new legal framework created by the Treaty of Lisbon and the Stockholm Programme .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , until all forms of violence against women have been completely eradicated we shall never be able to say that we have a modern society that is finally democratic .
Once again Parliament is looking at this brutal phenomenon , which unfortunately remains shockingly topical .
The figures are quite clear : at least one woman in five suffers physical or sexual violence during her lifetime and violence is actually the prime cause of death and disability among women aged between 15 and 44 - even more than cancer or road traffic accidents .
Therefore , real and permanent mobilisation is needed , leading to the creation of a global legal mechanism to fight all forms of violence against women .
A strong signal must be sent this day .
There is only one final objective : this lethal virus must no longer find fertile ground .

( ES ) Mr President , violence against women is a direct consequence of discrimination ; that is why we need a multi-faceted policy with special attention paid to the children of abused women .
They must have the right to free legal aid and psychological support , women 's refuges and economic assistance to enable them to be independent , to specialised courts , protocols for implementation and special training for health , police and legal workers , and for statistics to be compiled and data collected to give us a true picture of the problem and allow us to apply the most appropriate policies at European level .
( NL ) Mr President , I abstained from the final vote on the Svensson report and I am therefore using my explanation of vote to say that I , too , find violence against women to be shocking and totally unacceptable .
However , I abstained from the final vote because I believe that this report is absolutely teeming with violations of the principle of subsidiarity , which I cherish , and I do not believe that creating new European bureaucracy , observatories or other bodies is desirable - quite the contrary is true .
I am also disturbed , by the way , by the political correctness that results in the failure of the word ' Islam ' to appear even once in this report even though that faith , with its plethora of backward standards and principles , obviously plays a major role in discrimination and violence against women .
That is true in the Islamic world , of course , but sadly also over here .
Let us call a spade a spade and Islam , in its real and current state , backward and misogynistic .
- ( SK ) Mr President , I welcome the report of Mrs Svensson , because it advances the discussion on women 's rights .
In condemning violence against pregnant women , the report states , and I quote : ' the perpetrator thereby harms more than one person ' .
I have been striving for years for women 's rights not to be placed in opposition to the rights of unborn children .
The Svensson report has unfortunately not yet overcome this conflict .
Restricting the reproductive rights of women , which is currently understood primarily to mean the right to abortion , continues to be regarded as a form of violence against women .
However , if we finally count unborn children as human beings , then artificially induced abortion is an act of violence against the unborn child .
In drafting a strategy for the fight against all forms of violence , the Commission should harmonise the rights of women and the rights of unborn children .
The new strategy should protect women while also including mechanisms for protecting unborn children .
This also emerges from the submitted report , but it has to be read carefully .
Mr President , I voted against the Svensson report .
Obviously I totally denounce violence , especially violence against women , so why did I then vote against this report ?
I voted against it because , as a colleague of mine said a bit earlier , it is a bit of a time warp .
It brings us back to the 1970s and political correctness and is very naive in that element .
It just wants to replay the fights of the early 70s .
I also am a bit concerned about the criminal nature it wants to bring in .
This is what the European Union does , is it not ?
It brings itself in on an issue that everyone can agree on - how awful violence against women is - and then sets things up and brings in criminal law .
Then , before you know it , this is extended to more and more areas .
Shame on the European Union for choosing such a subject , even if it is an own-initiative report , because this is where it starts .
This is where the power grab starts and shame on it .
What we need is real action on violence against women at Member State level .
Leave things alone and stop using this subject .
Written explanations of vote
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created in 2006 in order to provide additional assistance for workers affected by the consequences of significant changes in the structure of international trade and to assist in their reintegration into the labour market .
Since 1 May 2009 , the remit of the EGF has been expanded to include support for workers made redundant as a direct consequence of economic , financial and social crises .
At this time when we are facing this severe crisis , one of the principal consequences of which is an increase in unemployment , the EU should use all the means at its disposal to react , particularly as regards support to be provided for those who are facing the day-to-day reality of unemployment .
It is for this reason that I voted for this report relating to the mobilisation of the EGF in favour of the Czech Republic , with the objective of supporting workers made redundant in three enterprises operating in the statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community ( NACE ) Rev.n 2 Division 28 , manufacture of machinery and equipment .
in writing . - ( PL ) The global economic crisis has meant that the financial situation of many Polish companies has worsened .
Problems associated with reduced levels of production have most impact on the ordinary people who work for these companies .
In order to safeguard support for workers made redundant as a result of changes to the structure of global trade caused by globalisation , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was set up .
Its main aim is to help such people to re-enter the labour market .
The current application to mobilise the Fund for the benefit of workers from Polish companies in the Podkarpackie region is the first application this year .
As a representative of Polish interests in the European Parliament , I approve of the Commission 's decision to transfer money from the Fund to implement the objectives set out in the application .
Thanks to this decision , the workers made redundant from three companies in the machinery sector in the Podkarpackie region are receiving nearly EUR 500 000 in financial support .
By voting for the resolution , I would at the same time like to express my hope that the Commission will approve similar applications in the future .
in writing . - ( ES ) The request complies with the requirements of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and relates to 200 of the 594 workers made redundant over a period of nine months in three Polish companies dealing in the manufacturing of machinery and equipment and which reduced their exports by 58 % .
Twenty per cent of those affected were over the age of 54 , and 10 % over the age of 64 .
This assistance will provide improvements to the training of those made redundant to equip them to occupy new jobs in the future .
I am pleased with the work carried out on the basis of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , namely in supporting workers affected by changes in world trade .
I also support the decision to mobilise the EGF in favour of Poland , for the benefit of workers in the manufacture of machinery and equipment sector made redundant as a result of the world economic and financial crisis .
This is quite a timely measure , given the major slump in exports that has taken place in this sector , which has consequently been accompanied by an equally worrying rate of unemployment .
in writing . - ( PT ) The request relates to 594 redundancies in three enterprises operating in the Podkarpackie region of Poland , in the manufacture of machinery and equipment sector .
This is the first request to be examined under the 2011 budget .
It is based on the intervention criterion of Article 2 ( b ) of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) Regulation , which requires at least 500 redundancies over a nine-month period in enterprises operating in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs assessed the respective eligibility conditions favourably .
The EGF was created in 2006 with the objective of providing additional support for workers who have been made redundant and are suffering from the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns , and to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
As a result of a revision of the EGF Regulation in 2009 , the fund 's scope was expanded to include support for workers made redundant as a direct consequence of the world economic and financial crisis .
The annual budget available for the EGF is EUR 500 million .
I believe that it would be advantageous to make the necessary efforts to speed up the mobilisation of this instrument , thus enabling aid to reach the workers who need it more quickly .
This report is on a draft decision of the European Parliament and Council on the mobilisation of EUR 453 570 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , to support the reintegration of Polish workers made redundant as a result of the current economic and financial crisis .
This application , the first to be approved under the 2011 EU Budget , was submitted by Poland on 27 April and concerns 594 workers from the Podkarpackie region , who were working in the area of manufacture of machinery and equipment .
Given that this involves a specific budgetary instrument , and that the amount requested is legally acceptable and complies with the provisions of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European Parliament , the Council and the European Commission , namely point 28 , I am voting in favour of this proposal , and hope that it contributes to reducing the economic difficulties of this region 's inhabitants , and to relaunching the local economy .
in writing . - ( PT ) The agricultural situation and the problems facing the rural world cannot be dissociated from the system 's profound crisis or from current policy , for example the common agriculture policy ( CAP ) , which bears the majority of the responsibility for the continued decline of agriculture in some Member States : everything is oriented toward the interests of large-scale farmers and northern European agro-industry , destroying family agriculture and compromising the viability of small and medium-sized farms .
The role of women in agriculture and the development of rural areas is extremely important , as they represent around 42 % of agricultural workers , are a cornerstone of keeping farms going , and ensure that desertification in rural areas is effectively combated .
Despite lacking any realistic critique of the CAP , the report adopted is generally positive in its approach and how it acknowledges the role of women .
It says that the ' promotion of gender equality is a core objective of the EU and its Member States ' along with the creation of better living conditions in rural areas , and the countering of the desertification phenomenon , for which the defence of ' good transport infrastructure ' and the improvement of ' access to transport for all ' with a view to combating ' social exclusion and inequality in society , primarily affecting women ' is essential .
This report enables the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for Podkarpackie Machinery in Poland .
It should be remembered that Poland requested assistance for 594 workers made redundant in three companies in the manufacture of machinery and equipment division in the NUTS II region of Podkarpackie .
The redundancies are linked to the impact of the economic and financial crisis , which has resulted in a drop in exports for the companies Huta Stalowa Wola SA , HSW - ZZN and DEZAMET SA of 47 % , 34 % and 58 % respectively , meaning that the companies meet the eligibility criteria laid down in the EGF Regulation .
The European Commission is therefore proposing the mobilisation of the sum of EUR 453 570 .
The result , they say , has been a considerable reduction in the production of machinery and equipment , thus demonstrating the effects of the crisis on the companies in question in the country .
The 594 redundancies have severe repercussions for living conditions , jobs and the local economy , which is why mobilisation of the EGF is of the highest importance for supporting the affected workers .
That is why we voted in favour , although we believe that the most important thing would be to prevent these companies going bust and the jobs being lost .
in writing . - ( LT ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund has been created in order to provide additional assistance to workers suffering from the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns .
The application , case EGF / 2010 / 013 PL / Podcarpackie machinery from Poland , was submitted by Poland to the Commission on 27 April 2010 and supplemented by additional information up to 4 August 2010 .
It was based on the intervention criterion of Article 2 ( b ) of the EGF Regulation , which requires at least 500 redundancies over a nine-month period in enterprises operating in the same NACE Revision 2 Division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level in a Member State and was submitted within the deadline of 10 weeks ( Article 5 of the Regulation ) .
In its assessment the Commission indicates that the application fulfils the eligibility criteria set up by the EGF Regulation and recommends that the Budget Authority should approve this application , therefore I voted in favour of this document , which in my opinion will help avoid negative social consequences .
I also believe that other EU Member States should take more advantage of the opportunities offered by the EU funds .
I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Poland because I believe this instrument represents a valuable resource for the support of workers in difficulties on account of the economic crisis .
As has been said a number of times , since 2006 the EGF has been providing practical support to European workers made redundant either for reasons associated with the relocation of their companies or , following the 2009 amendment , on account of the economic crisis , in order to assist their reintegration into the labour market .
Today 's vote was on a request for assistance concerning 594 redundancies ( of which 200 are targeted for assistance ) in three enterprises operating in NACE Revision 2 Division 28 , in the NUTS II region of Podkarpackie .
The total amount of funding provided by the EFG amounts to EUR 453 750 .
To conclude , I welcome the adoption of the report , which shows that the EGF is a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - ( PL ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was set up to provide additional support to workers affected by the consequences of major structural changes in global trade .
Today the European Parliament voted on an application to approve the release of over EUR 450 000 for workers made redundant from three companies located in the Podkarpackie region .
I would like to stress that EU support is a major boost for the region which I represent , since it will allow the workers who have been made redundant to re-enter the labour market , and funds will be earmarked for training , retraining , new equipment and help in becoming self-employed .
The Podkarpackie region is one of the poorest in Poland , and so I am very pleased that it will receive EU assistance .
I would like to thank everyone who voted in favour of providing financial support .
I am pleased with the approval of the appropriation of EUR 453 000 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for Polish workers made redundant in the machinery manufacturing sector .
Following the recommendations of the Committee on Budgets , the European Commission has entered around EUR 50 million in payment appropriations to the budget line for the EGF in the 2011 budget .
This allows us to approve an appropriation of the necessary funds without eroding the other budget lines dedicated to financing important actions among the Union 's objectives and programmes .
in writing . - I voted for this report giving support through the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to 594 workers made redundant in Poland .
The EUR 0.45 million will be used to retrain and support workers through a difficult transition .
Once again we are condemned to vote for a pitiful handout by the EU to the victims of its relocation policies .
The rationale behind the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is intolerable .
I am abstaining merely out of consideration for the Polish workers whose pain may be eased a little by this hypocritical aid .
The EU is an area of solidarity and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is part of that .
This aid is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of company relocations that occur in a globalised context .
More and more companies are relocating , taking advantage of low labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with damaging effects on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is intended to help workers who are victims of company relocations , and it is essential for facilitating access to new employment .
The EGF has been used by other EU countries in the past , so now it is appropriate to grant this aid to Poland , which has applied for assistance with regard to 594 redundancies - 200 of whom are potential beneficiaries of aid - in three companies in division 28 , manufacture of machinery and equipment , of NACE Rev. 2 in the NUTS II region of Podkarpackie in Poland .
Although I voted in favour of this proposal to provide assistance to the workers of Podkarpackie machinery from Poland , I believe that this is an analgesic and palliative measure for the consequences of the capitalist model , and that it does not represent any progress in the fight against the root causes of the crisis .
I agree with the mobilisation of resources from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for people made redundant due to structural changes in trade patterns or as a direct consequence of the current economic and financial crisis .
I believe that the EGF can contribute to the ultimate goal of facilitating these workers ' reintegration into the labour market .
I also voted in favour because I am convinced that this assistance complements the redundancy aid provided for in all national legislation and collective agreements .
Therefore , this mobilisation of funds from the EGF cannot under any circumstances replace or avoid the legal responsibilities of governments and companies to employees who have been made redundant .
in writing . - Taking into account that Poland has requested assistance in respect of cases concerning 594 redundancies in the period from 1 June 2009 to 1 March 2010 ( of which 200 have been targeted for assistance ) in three enterprises engaged in the manufacture of machinery and equipment in the region of Podkarpackie in Poland , I totally approve and support such an active position by the Polish Government and the opinions of my S & D Group colleagues .
Unfortunately , the government of my country - Latvia - does not respond to any requests and letters from my side and thus does not make use of aid from the Stabilisation Fund to overcome the financial crisis .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was established to protect workers who have been made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
Poland has applied for support for 594 redundancies in the Podkarpackie region .
It is only right and proper that we should offer personal support to workers who have been made redundant as a result of globalisation and the economic crisis , aiding their reintegration into the labour market .
I therefore voted in favour of this .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created to provide additional support for workers affected by the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns .
On 15 February 2011 , the Commission adopted a new draft decision on mobilising the EGF in favour of Poland , with the aim of supporting the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant as a result of the world economic and financial crisis .
In this case it was the redundancy of 594 workers - 200 of whom are potential beneficiaries of aid - in three companies manufacturing machinery and equipment in the Podkarpackie region of Poland , during the nine-month reference period between 1 June 2009 and 1 March 2010 .
This is the first application to be examined under the 2011 budget , and it relates to the mobilisation of the total sum of EUR 453 570 .
The Commission 's assessment concluded that there is a link between the redundancies and major structural changes in world trade patterns or the financial and economic crisis , and that these redundancies were unforeseen in nature .
The application meets all of the eligibility criteria set out in the EGF Regulation , which is why I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the fund .
Poland 's application for intervention by the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) relates to 594 redundancies - 200 of whom are potential beneficiaries of aid - in three companies in Division 28 of NACE Rev. 2 , manufacture of machinery and equipment , in the NUTS II region of Podkarpackie .
According to the Commission 's assessment , this application meets all of the legally defined eligibility criteria .
Under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and Council of 18 June 2009 , which amended Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 of the European Parliament and Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the EGF 's scope was temporarily expanded to cover its intervention in situations like this , in which , as a direct result of the world economic and financial crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , in the hope that the mobilisation of the EGF would contribute to the effective reintegration of these workers into the labour market .
in writing . - We have requested that the institutions involved , as usually on those cases , make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF .
Moreover , Parliament appreciates in this sense the improved procedure put in place by the Commission , following Parliament 's request for accelerating the release of grants , aimed at presenting to the budgetary authority the Commission 's assessment on the eligibility of an EGF application together with the proposal to mobilise the Fund and hopes that further improvements in the procedure will be reached in the framework of the upcoming reviews of the Fund .
However , it also recalls the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have been made redundant as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis , points out the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market and , however , calls for an evaluation on the long-term integration of these workers into the labour market as a direct result of the EGF-funded measures .
On 15 February 2011 , the Commission adopted a draft decision on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of Poland , with the aim of supporting the reintegration to the labour market of workers made redundant due to the global financial and economic crisis .
The request concerns 594 redundancies ( of which 200 are targeted for assistance ) in three enterprises operating in the NACE Revision 2 Division 28 ( manufacture of wearing apparel ) in the NUTS II region of Podkarpackie , during the nine-month reference period from 1 June 2009 to 1 March 2010 .
My vote in favour of today 's resolution reiterates the favourable opinion already given in the Committee for Employment and Social Affairs .
in writing . - Whilst voting for this report , I consider it ironic that this fund exists when not all EU countries utilise it .
The share of this fund remaining at year end is repatriated to Member States as part of their ' rebate ' .
Yet failure by some countries , like the UK , to use this fund , which is its established right , in cases like the Twining Tea plant closure in Andover , raises certain questions .
Those pretending to understand the benefits / disbenefits of the rebate query whether or not it is more correct and efficient for countries to make direct use of EGAF monies at local level .
The second irony concerns political and economic participation - engaging at all EU levels of added value .
For the UK to maintain the right not to participate in funds managed at EU level because later benefits may flow is , in this case , uncertain and perhaps even plain wrong .
The UK is renouncing access to funding on a principle of not applying for this fund in order to receive a rebate .
For those seeking help to return to work - in Sandwich , Kent and Andover , Hampshire - there is little justification in saying ' no ' , and this is another UK Government let-down .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which will provide funding for personalised measures to help workers who have been made redundant in Poland .
I voted in favour of this important resolution on migration flows arising from instability : scope and role of EU foreign policy .
Political , social and economic instability , lack of security , political repression and authoritarian regimes are the major driving forces behind migration , depriving affected communities of viable local prospects and income and , hence , of the right to choose whether to migrate or not , putting their lives at constant risk and leaving them with migration as their only option .
The recent dramatic events in Egypt and other countries in North Africa and the Middle East have clearly increased the flow of both legal and illegal migrants to Europe .
The European Union must therefore be ready to withstand the flow of migration .
It can only do this by having an efficient and wise migration policy similar to those implemented in Canada , Australia or New Zealand .
I agree with the rapporteur 's position that we must urge the Commission to ensure that any readmission agreement signed by the EU and its Member States fully respects human rights and the principle of ' non-refoulement ' and does not put at risk any persons in need of international protection .
The EU will thus demonstrate once again that values and respect for human rights are the most important thing and inalienable , and persons seeking asylum will feel safe and respected .
Political , social and economic instability , a lack of security and the political repression carried out by authoritarian regimes are the main factors behind migration and the migratory waves that spill over unceasingly into some countries in the Mediterranean basin , making them unable to manage the numerous difficulties caused by humanitarian emergencies .
In recent weeks it has been impossible to ignore the thousands of migrants that have arrived in Lampedusa following the unrest in the countries of North Africa .
Ninety per cent of them are young people of between 15 and 35 years of age , who are risking their lives in the hope of finding better opportunities .
Despite the extraordinary efforts of the Italian Government , local administrations and the Italian Red Cross , the situation on the island is one of emergency : there is no sign that the arrivals will slow to a halt and one notes the delay of the EU , which has bureaucratic timescales that are incompatible with the situation .
Today , the EU has the duty to develop an efficient global policy on migration that provides for the creation of a European asylum system , the implementation of an obligatory resettlement programme that is capable of sharing out responsibilities equitably , and agreements with the Member States to encourage development .
The recent and ongoing events unfolding on the opposite shores of the Mediterranean bear witness to how the instability in this region and the consequent migration flows represent a challenge that the European Union must face up to .
The migration phenomenon is worrying for the developments and tensions it may cause , both in terms of relations between migrants ' countries of origin and destination , but also between their countries of origin and transit countries .
We need to bolster the policy of prevention , optimising financial resources and improving existing institutional structures .
We must keep illegal immigration under control and , in this sense , I think that extending migration agreements is an effective remedy to obtain short-term results and reduce the instability of migration flows .
I agree with the analysis in the report and , in particular , I concur that a bilateral mechanism that enables active monitoring of the protection status of minorities - or other groups that could be subject to abuse or suffering as a result of instability - should be included when preparing the external action instruments for post-2013 .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
The recent events in Egypt and other countries in North Africa and the Middle East have increased the flow of both legal and illegal migrants to Europe .
The European Union Member States are facing forced migration , which is a result of failing economies , impoverishment , human rights violations , environmental degradation , the widening gap between rich and poor countries , civil wars and political persecution .
The management of migratory flows presents a huge challenge for the European Union , which must take action to establish a common immigration policy , capable of contributing to a reduction in illegal immigration .
I agree that it is necessary to take preventative measures in all EU bilateral trade agreements , including human rights clauses , and the application of appropriate sanctions should be considered for countries that fail to comply with such clauses .
in writing . - ( PT ) Europe is faced with an increase in migration flows resulting from the instability that many countries are experiencing , and this represents a challenge for the EU .
These migration phenomena could be the cause of tensions between origin countries and destination countries , as well as between origin countries and transit countries .
The EU 's strategy should be to combine development cooperation measures with a more comprehensive political vision encompassing security , regional cooperation and bilateral agreements .
This report identifies the following possible areas of action in this regard : encouraging transit countries and origin countries to achieve greater economic and institutional stability ; stepping up the EU 's own mediation and conflict-prevention efforts in cooperation with regional organisations ; negotiating bilateral immigration agreements with transit countries ; and developing an economic agenda which incorporates specific measures to raise employment levels in the EU 's partner countries .
The Commission should seek to strengthen synergies between the development pillar and the security and development pillar by creating new external action instruments for the post-2013 period .
For all the above reasons , I voted for this report .
I voted in favour of this text on migratory flows .
Indeed , the events that our southern neighbours are currently going through are resulting in high levels of migration to European shores .
Now more than ever , we have to coordinate our foreign and immigration policies .
This is a truly European issue and now is not the time for national egoism .
The Mediterranean countries of the European Union should not have to cope alone with the large influx of illegal migrants : this effort should be shared by all EU countries .
I voted for this report because , by setting medium- and long-term goals , it takes a realistic approach to a problem originating in the imbalance between countries that are developed and those that are not , as well as in human rights violations in many parts of the world .
The report suggests procedures to prevent illegal immigration , and aims to involve emerging countries in the comprehensive approach to this problem , along with all the countries involved : origin , transit and destination .
Focusing on the idea of making cooperation policy conditional on the level of respect for human rights also seems particularly positive to me , as do the references made to protecting the most disadvantaged groups , such as women or unaccompanied minors .
in writing . - ( BG ) I voted for this resolution because the migration flows being caused by instability in one country pose a challenge to the entire European Union .
The resolution marks a first step towards creating a common European migration management policy .
This policy must also act as a deterrent .
In order to achieve this , it must combine every possible European Union cooperation instrument in the area of social and economic development , thereby having a direct influence on the causes of instability in the countries where the migration flows originate .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
Migration is a particularly relevant issue which has been highlighted recently , because due to events in North Africa , the European Union , as a neighbouring region , has been forced to receive huge flows of migrants .
The report draws attention to the many factors behind migratory flows , such as political and social factors , economic instability and climate change , which still fails to be taken into account when examining the reason for mass migration .
Due to all these reasons , it is stressed that the EU requires a more effective approach to migration , which would complement foreign policy instruments .
These instruments would help address sources of instability in countries of origin , which force people to emigrate en masse to more stable neighbouring countries .
The report also calls on the Commission to draw up proposals on legal migration , which would be easier to manage and could promote economic and social progress in receiving , transit and origin countries .
It is stated that the very worst human rights violations , as well as criminal activities , which often become a business for those organising those activities , are precisely linked to illegal immigration .
Finally , it emphasises the need to assess the demographic situation in the EU itself , in order to calculate exactly how many people Europe can receive .
The European Union must tackle migration flows caused by wars and armed conflicts , ethnic tension , human rights violations and natural disasters in third countries .
The Union has to meet this challenge effectively by implementing preventive measures and employing the most appropriate foreign policy instruments with a view to addressing the causes of instability directly so that emigration becomes an opportunity rather than a desperate necessity .
A European policy on regulating migration should combine development cooperation measures with a more comprehensive political vision encompassing bilateral security and regional cooperation agreements with countries of origin and transit countries , the protection of human rights and democratisation .
European foreign policy should complement and generate synergies with immigration policy , focusing on the causes of instability and structural problems in the countries of origin .
It must also seek to establish an ongoing dialogue with transit countries , with a view to regulating migration flows and applying uniformly international human rights standards relating to immigration .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Provera because I think it represents a step forward towards the goal of solidarity between Member States .
In recent weeks in particular , Italy has been the destination for thousands of migrants fleeing the countries of North Africa .
Faced with such a difficult situation the EU cannot abandon my country , but must make every effort to ensure that the treaties are respected , particularly Article 80 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
At the same time , we need to optimise financial resources and existing structures .
For example , the role of the Frontex border agency needs to be strengthened and also better funded .
Protecting human rights , increased financial resources , the development of democracies , the rule of law and bilateral agreements are instruments which , if used correctly , can certainly contribute to preventing mass migration .
in writing . - ( CS ) I agree there is a need to come up with an integrated long-term EU strategy for unstable states that would address the basic causes of migration flows .
However , I do not share the belief that the Council should submit an action plan on sharing the burden , based on the principle of solidarity set out in Article 80 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU .
The resettling of refugees from this region should be the responsibility of the states which the refugees head to , and if the influx becomes unsustainable , the response should be to tighten up EU asylum and immigration policy .
In this context , I consider the calls to create a common EU asylum system and a common EU resettlement programme to be alarming .
The creation of a comprehensive Commission approach to legal migration is a good idea , but it should not be linked to the needs of the European labour market or the capacity of each Member State to receive and integrate migrants .
The management of migration flows should remain primarily within the remit of Member States .
I welcome EU efforts to respond to the challenges created by instability and migration flows , which affect not only origin countries but also transit countries , in various areas relating to violence , human rights violations , and so on .
I therefore support an active policy in this area , which seeks to resolve the initial destabilising factors in origin countries , such as lack of economic and democratic structures .
This is the only way to eliminate the negative consequences of migration , which should be positive and productive , and not a means of escape .
This policy should translate into cooperation between origin countries and transit countries , based on dialogue aimed at achieving robust , effective and lasting results .
I voted against the report on migration flows because , although it contains a relatively accurate and balanced analysis of the basic causes that drive people into leaving their country , the report does not contain the necessary conclusions or proposals .
On the one hand , it persists in the approach of dividing people into legal and illegal immigrants and in the utilitarian perception of ' useful ' and non-useful immigrants , thus linking their rights to the various ' quotas ' applied by the Union and the Member States .
On the other hand , the report links the phenomenon of immigration to security issues , thereby creating confusion and equating immigrants with various criminal or ' terrorist ' activities and strengthening the practices and ideologies that criminalise them .
Within this context , the report reinforces the ' paternalistic ' role of the Union still further , to the point that it proposes linking the pillar relating to EU development aid to third countries with the ' security ' pillar , thus completely altering the nature and purpose of such aid .
With the previous conferences having focused on principles , I hope that the fourth UN Conference in Istanbul will be geared towards determining results and devising clear indicators for halving the number of less developed countries by 2020 .
Out of the 51 underdeveloped countries , where 78 % of the population live on less than USD 1.25 a day , only three have moved out of this category in recent years .
The situation is worrying as these countries are the most vulnerable to ordeals such as the financial and food crises and climate change , while also facing extreme poverty , a lack of infrastructure and rising unemployment .
This reality highlights that , unfortunately , the international community has not fulfilled the commitments set out in the Brussels Action Programme .
I hope that during the Conference , where I will be representing the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , we will focus on achieving consistency in terms of development policies and methods for implementing innovative funding mechanisms , with the aim of providing more effective help to these countries which need to be encouraged to implement suitable policies .
This is quite an important issue , and its complex nature needs to be taken into account when it is analysed .
The report in question looks at the importance of continuing with cooperation treaties relating to the European neighbourhood policy ( ENP ) .
The phenomenon of emigration fuelled by situations of crisis and instability has negative implications for the origin country , the destination country and the displaced populations themselves .
This phenomenon needs to be reversed , so that emigration under these circumstances ceases to be the last resort : an escape from a situation of insecurity , of weak economic development , of instability or of fear .
In this explanation of vote , I reiterate the need to take measures ensuring and promoting stability and security in origin countries .
The perspective for reducing these migration flows fuelled by instability and crisis should be prevention .
I believe that European foreign policy , and very specifically the ENP , should provide for aid to these regions of the world , promoting security , stability and the protection of human rights as part of an expanded development process , as I stated in my report on the revision of the ENP-South , which will also be voted on this week .
Some Member States are having to deal with a mass influx of people from the south of the Mediterranean who are looking for protection .
They cannot cope alone with these emergency humanitarian and immigration situations .
Frontex 's human , material and also financial resources must be increased to enable it to provide greater support to operations such as Hermes and Poseidon .
The MEPs are calling on the European Council to draw up an action plan for the resettlement of the refugees , applying the clause of solidarity between Member States .
Indeed , Article 80 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union mentions the principle of solidarity and fair sharing of responsibility between all Member States with regard to border control management , asylum and immigration policies .
In the medium and long terms , we must forge cooperative links with future migrants ' countries of origin and establish mobility partnerships to enable their nationals to come and work , study and travel legally between the two shores of the Mediterranean .
I voted in favour of the report on migration flows arising from instability : scope and role of EU foreign policy .
Political , social and economic instability , lack of security , political repression and climate change push communities into migration , so the EU needs to develop a common immigration policy , to include , specifically , promotion of economic and social progress in receiving , transit and origin countries , and enhancing social cohesion by improving the integration of migrants .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats agree that migration flows as a result of instability constitute a challenge for the EU and that increased efforts are required to deal with the causes of the instability and structural problems in the countries of origin .
However , we believe that it is important for the EU to take genuine responsibility for the migrants who come here and not leave the responsibility to our neighbouring countries , as proposed in paragraph 9 .
We support the call for the human rights dimension to be clearly reflected in the work of FRONTEX , especially the right of a person to leave his or her country , the ban on refoulement and the right to seek asylum .
We see problems with some of the work that FRONTEX has done to date and do not support the wording that states that the European Parliament welcomes the successful activities carried out by FRONTEX .
in writing . - ( PT ) The relationship between centres of instability - social , economic or political - and migration flows toward the European Union is clear .
The Union 's foreign policy cannot simply be not removed from this phenomenon : it must seek to understand it , and monitor it to the greatest extent possible .
In truth , the EU needs to take measures to optimise the use of its financial resources and institutional structures , and effectively manage migration flows resulting from the instability that currently exists in several areas of the world .
A policy of prevention that uses the most appropriate foreign policy instruments , with a view to tackling and confronting the causes of instability , could help to transform the current ' desperate necessity ' for emigration into an ' opportunity ' for emigration .
The rule of law needs to be promoted , human rights protected , and the development of democracy and economies fostered .
Without these common development efforts in the countries involved , working alongside their people and social structures , it will not be possible to contribute effectively to instability reduction .
This report focuses on the migration flows resulting from the political instability being experienced in certain regions of the world , in particular North Africa and the southern Mediterranean .
This situation , which is affecting the countries of southern Europe , particularly Italy - we are all following the situation on the island of Lampedusa , where more than 20 000 people have landed - and the island of Malta , has brought more than 400 000 refugees to Europe .
In order to minimise this situation , in addition to mobilising the European Refugee Fund , it is essential that the EU implement a more sustained plan aimed at humanitarian assistance and guaranteeing the basic needs of these people as soon as possible .
A regional programme aimed at refugees from Egypt , Tunisia and Libya also needs to be drawn up , relating to both asylum and the protection of refugees , in order to prevent human trafficking and to prepare their return to their countries of origin .
I welcome the adoption of this report , as it indicates that the EU is going to address the structural causes of problems resulting from migration flows through its foreign cooperation policy , without preconceptions of any kind .
There are reasons for migration flows .
The most important of these are factors such as wars and armed conflicts , systematic human rights violations , and ethnic and religious conflicts and repression .
However , natural disasters and poverty resulting from the lack of adequate economic and democratic structures are also among the most frequent causes of migration flows .
The effects of the crisis of world capitalism and the consequences of its irregular and asymmetrical development are exacerbating the economic and social situation in many countries .
The uprisings in the Arab world are also an expression of this phenomenon , which also tends to increase migration flows .
The European Union 's discourse on this subject is frequently hypocritical , and it operates a policy of double standards .
On the one hand , it claims to defend human rights in third countries , whilst maintaining a self-serving view of them when it comes to attacking any of these countries .
On the other hand , it is complicit in the continuation of serious situations , such as the one occurring on Lampedusa , Italy .
Prevention of these migration flows requires measures based on a genuine policy of development cooperation and aid , of solidarity and of peace promotion , including peaceful conflict-resolution , which is currently not the case .
We know that wars and armed conflicts , ethnic tensions , systematic human rights violations like refusal to allow people to practise their religion , natural disasters , and poverty resulting from the lack of adequate economic and democratic structures are the main causes of migration flows .
The current outlook is that the situation is going to get worse , with the crisis that capitalism is suffering and its social consequences , including the uprisings in Arab countries .
As a result , the European Union cannot continue with its hypocritical policy of double standards , claiming to defend human rights in third countries while allowing serious situations like the one in Lampedusa to continue .
There needs to be a policy of prevention , and development cooperation measures , with a more comprehensive political vision , that includes , above all , solidarity and the safeguarding of human rights , which is currently not the case .
In general , the European Commission and the European Parliament itself prioritise their economic and geostrategic interests , and forget solidarity and the Millennium Development Goals , adopting shameful directives such as the Return Directive .
This is why we voted against this report , despite the fact that it includes one or two positive points .
I would like to offer my support to the inhabitants of Lampedusa , who are faced with overcrowding , insecurity , supply problems and possibly health hazards , but who , in the eyes of this Parliament , take second place to the tens of thousands of illegal immigrants landing on their shores .
I also wish to say to the Italian authorities that it is to Africa , not Europe , that the boats they charter should repatriate these illegal immigrants .
Most of these people come from Tunisia , a country where apparently a wonderful democratic adventure is taking place , in which they have a duty to take part .
We cannot continue to accommodate all those who feel uneasy in their own country , because it is raining there ... or not ; because it is a dictatorship ... or because it is no longer one ; because it is underdeveloped , or because it is developing .
The main motivation of these migrants is purely economic .
Our development aid policies should encourage people to remain in their own country , and should even be conditional on that and on their citizens returning .
Contrary to what the rapporteur says , there is no such thing as the ' right ' to emigrate .
The European peoples on the other hand , who should be your first priority , do have the absolute right to say ' STOP ' and to be heard .
I voted for this parliamentary report on ' Migration flows arising from instability : scope and role of EU foreign policy ' and I want to focus on a number of aspects contained in this report .
Nearly 24 000 Tunisians have arrived on the island of Lampedusa and on Italy 's shores since the fall of President Ben Ali , and thousands of Libyans have also fled their war-torn country since February .
We absolutely need a European response and European solidarity in the face of this unfolding human drama .
Our report calls for a system of solidarity regarding the resettlement of refugees from North Africa .
Our report calls for the ' solidarity clause ' to be applied between Member States with regard to policies on border controls , asylum and immigration .
Our report also asks for the post-2013 budget to include a provision on emergency funds for a rapid response to immigration and asylum in Europe .
All these aspects are necessary in a genuine European asylum policy , which we have long been calling for and which must be based on the principles of coherence , responsibility , solidarity and respect for human rights .
I voted in favour of this own-initiative report because it highlights the real causes of migration flows , namely political , social and economic instability , lack of security , political repression , violation of human rights , as well as climate change .
This report also emphasises the importance of providing countries of origin with sustainable strategies within the framework of the European neighbourhood policy ( ENP ) and the EU development cooperation policy .
In so doing , it challenges the myth of zero immigration by reminding us that migration cannot be stopped and that the EU needs substantial , but controlled , immigration to support the ageing population and address other social and economic challenges .
in writing . - The Provera report deals with a number of important issues relating to migration and highlights the importance of human rights .
Human rights have been at the heart of campaigns in Scotland and the UK to end the detention of children seeking asylum .
The UK Government has vowed to end this obscenity - but to date they have fallen short .
in writing . - ( LT ) I agreed with this document , because migration flows arising from instability are a challenge for the European Union .
Wars and armed conflicts , ethnic tension , systematic violations of human rights - such as the refusal to allow people to practise their religious faith - natural disasters and the lack of proper economic and democratic structures are the main causes of this type of migration flow .
This phenomenon is particularly worrying because it may give rise to or exacerbate tensions , not only between countries of origin and countries of destination , but also between countries of origin and transit countries .
In order to meet this challenge effectively , the European Union must implement a policy of prevention , employing the most appropriate foreign policy instruments with a view to addressing the causes of instability directly , so that emigration becomes an opportunity , not a desperate necessity .
There is an urgent need , therefore , to initiate a debate with a view to gaining a better understanding of all aspects of migration and their root causes .
This would enable the EU to draw up a coherent and effective policy on migration flows from countries of origin and transit countries and to decide how and how much to invest in those countries with a view to alleviating their internal demographic and social tensions and thus fostering stability .
The draft resolution voted on today by this House poses an important question : how to define the role of EU foreign policy when faced by the simultaneously tragic and delicate issue of migration flows ?
The challenge that the European Union must face up to is caused by the obvious instabilities in which North Africa and the Middle East are enmeshed .
In order to avoid negative consequences , Europe must be able to meet this challenge by setting out and implementing a policy of prevention that acts on the causes of economic and political instability in these countries , proposing shared solutions that can prevent or at least reduce the magnitude of the phenomenon .
However , the resources required for this purpose are extensive , which is why it will be necessary to involve other world powers and coordinate with them .
All of which cannot , however , be done without fully respecting the principle of subsidiarity .
From this point of view , Europe is duty-bound to respond concisely and cohesively , thereby demonstrating its decision to focus on this policy above others .
For these reasons , because I am convinced of the important political signal that Europe is morally obliged to send on this issue and not leave the States to their own devices , I used my vote to support the aforementioned resolution .
Since the Treaty of Amsterdam entered into force , the EU has had very wide powers in terms of controlling migration flows .
These powers are now being called upon to manage the recent influx of refugees fleeing from the troubles in North Africa , especially Libya .
The ' Arab spring ' is a potent symbol of freedom , but it also masks a more tragic reality which is causing large numbers of civilians to take to the road ( or to the sea in this instance ) in search of asylum .
This resolution therefore calls upon EU and international institutions to take stock of the consequences entailed by these vast population movements .
I supported it because individual Member States cannot cope with this situation alone : cooperation and sharing must guide the way we handle it .
The Union 's new foreign policy architecture introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , and more specifically the creation of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , should also allow the action of the Member States to be coordinated more effectively .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which welcomes the Commission 's recent proposals on legal migration for non-asylum seekers , and urges it to develop further instruments to establish a common immigration policy , to manage economic migration with a view to promoting economic and social progress in receiving , transit and origin countries , and to enhance social cohesion by improving the integration of migrants .
It emphasises the need for adequate information to be provided on possibilities for legal immigration to the EU , in order to prevent illegal migration , make better use of the EU schemes for legal immigration , clarify current prospects and opportunities within the EU and give the lie to the false promises made by traffickers , thereby limiting the profits generated for organised crime and human traffickers by the need for people to move .
It calls on the Commission to foster protection measures for vulnerable groups and people ( mainly women and children ) who often become victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation , and urges it to build up information centres on possibilities for migration to the EU in third countries .
It calls , however , for a balanced approach between promoting legal migration into the EU and ensuring that the EU has the capacity to receive and successfully integrate migrants ;
This report fails to disguise the truth , despite its outpouring of fine feelings .
The EU is concerned about the fall of dictators it used to support in exchange for management of ' migration flows ' at its borders .
The idea of a mass influx of refugees , victims of these dictatorial systems , did not worry it , and for good reason .
It is the arrival of democracy that worries it .
Yet Europe will need 230 million immigrants between now and 2030 : the European Commission has said so itself .
Moreover , this text recommends applying sanctions to countries that fail to respect the principles enshrined in the free trade agreements and those advocated by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
The Arab revolutions have barely shaken off the yoke of their own despots and now foreign tyrants are sending them their regards .
This report is arrogant and brutal .
I am voting against it .
Migration flows resulting from instability are a challenge for the European Union .
Wars and armed conflicts , ethnic tension , systematic human rights violations like refusal to allow people to practice their religious faith , natural disasters and the lack of proper economic and democratic structures are the main causes of this type of migration flow .
This phenomenon is particularly worrying because it may give rise to or exacerbate tensions , not only between origin countries and destination countries , but also between origin countries and transit countries .
In order to meet this challenge effectively , the European Union must implement a policy of prevention , employing the most appropriate foreign policy instruments with a view to addressing the causes of instability directly , so that emigration becomes an opportunity , not a desperate necessity .
I voted against the Provera report on migration flows arising from instability : scope and role of EU foreign policy , because I reject the European Union 's migration policy ; the policy of ' Fortress Europe ' , with borders that are iron-clad for men and women but which , by contrast , evaporate when it comes to capital .
This report advocates European migration policy that is not based on the understanding that emigration is a right and not a crime , and does not guarantee the sacred principle of requesting asylum .
The EU 's hypocrisy is abominable : it is criminalising undocumented immigrants .
Illegal immigrants are used for labour in the process of rapidly accumulating capital , in a direct assault on the universal nature of human rights .
The EU , which can only exist through economic immigration , is demonstrating great cynicism .
What is happening in North Africa is proof of ' Fortress Europe ' .
The European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( FRONTEX ) has nothing to do with solidarity or cooperation to help peoples fight against dictatorships like those of Ben Ali , Mubarak or Gaddafi : when thousands of Africans are fleeing repression and war , the EU imprisons them .
in writing . - Migration flows arising as a result of instability constitute a challenge for the EU .
Wars and military conflicts , ethnic tensions , systematic violation of human rights - such as a prohibition to exercise one 's religion , natural disasters , lack of economic and democratic structure are among the causes of such migration flows .
This phenomenon is of great concern since it may not only increase and strengthen tensions between the country of origin and country of destination but also between the country of origin and a country of transition .
In order to address the challenge efficiently , the EU should conduct preventive policy by any appropriate means of foreign policy intended to deal with causes of instability so that emigration becomes an opportunity not a necessity .
In the long term , the EU may undertake effective actions for optimisation of the use of its own financial instruments and existing institutional structures .
The measures proposed in the report are not sufficient and are too declarative .
A precise and specific financial economic plan is necessary .
Otherwise , Europe will choke as a result of the wave of illegal migration .
As a first step on the way to resolving this problem , the report is very useful .
in writing . - ( DE ) In view of the continuing stream of migrants into Europe it would seem all the more important to take a stance against the legalisation of economic migrants .
It is vital that developing countries should receive our support so that these people are encouraged to remain in their own countries .
It makes no sense to allow people from developing countries to enter the labour market , particularly because the unemployment rate in the euro area currently stands at 9.9 % .
Mr Provera 's original report was very good and well-balanced .
However various amendments have unfortunately changed it in the wrong way .
It is for this reason that I have cast a ' no ' vote .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution , because following the unrest in the Arab countries when migration flows greatly intensified , it is important for a common migration policy to function across the entire EU .
Given the fact that migration cannot be stopped , foreign policy must play a special role in this area .
Countries on the EU 's external borders are worst affected by increased migration flows .
Every effort must therefore be made to ensure that a common EU migration policy is established at EU level so that migration flows are managed and controlled optimally .
Only joint efforts will protect economic growth , labour market sustainability and scope for development from negative consequences in those countries facing the greatest flows of immigrants .
This will be an effective instrument for stopping illegal immigration , organised crime and trafficking in human beings .
The EU must make every effort to ensure that legal migration is promoted and that we combat irregular migration effectively .
It is very important to establish a system for legal migration , taking account of the needs of Europe 's labour market and the capacity of each Member State to receive and integrate immigrants .
Legal immigrants in European Union Member States must enjoy the same rights and obligations as other workers .
Furthermore , in every country it is very important to reduce the brain drain and the departure of qualified specialists .
To that end we must introduce assisted return programmes , promote circular migration , regulate recruitment practices and support capacity-building .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Provera on one of the founding principles of the Union : solidarity among peoples .
Given the political crises in North Africa and the slow or totally absent response of the European policy on migration flows , the current situation is so serious and problematic that I think it ought to be dealt with without delay .
Through the adoption of this text , the Council has been invited - an invitation that cannot and must not be ignored - to fully implement the solidarity clause with a practical action plan and sharing of the burden among Member States .
In particular , the text makes the case for minimum standards for giving temporary protection to immigrants and measures designed to share responsibilities and efforts between Member States which , like Italy , take in immigrants responsibly and shoulder the consequences alone .
It is important that , at European level , we are linking the increased pressure from migration flows to EU foreign policy .
European initiatives may help the politically unstable countries in North Africa from which large numbers of illegal immigrants originate .
Full use can and must be made of tools such as development and cooperation aid programmes and readmission agreements .
Clearly , these issues will be crucial in the immediate future , both for Greece and for the rest of the EU , which is why I voted in favour of this particular report .
Migration flows resulting from instability are currently a major challenge for the EU .
They result from wars , armed conflicts , ethnic tensions , human rights violations like refusal to allow people to practice their religion , natural disasters and a lack of adequate economic and democratic structures .
This is a growing phenomenon that causes tensions , not only between origin countries and destination countries , but also between origin countries and transit countries .
This report establishes a set of recommendations aimed at enabling the EU to respond effectively to this challenge .
Among other measures , I would stress the adoption of a policy of prevention , aimed at tackling the causes of instability directly , so that emigration becomes an opportunity rather than a desperate need , and of development cooperation with a more comprehensive political vision that includes security , regional cooperation , and bilateral agreements with origin countries and transit countries .
These objectives should be pursued alongside the Millennium Development Goals , which are closely linked to political stability , and should frame the entire process .
Migration flows arising from instability are the indirect consequence of violations of human rights , environmental disasters and the lack of economic and social structures capable of assuring the wellbeing of broad sections of society .
These things represent a challenge for the European Union , due to the efforts they require both in terms of cooperation for development and in terms of prevention of social tensions , which are often not only created between countries of origin and destination but also between countries of origin and the migrants ' transit countries .
This challenge requires practical responses from the EU that are designed to tackle not only cooperation for development but also foreign policy , implementing preventive measures at both regional and global level , measures which make use of all the foreign policy instruments available , and are focused on security , regional cooperation , bilateral agreements with countries of origin and transit , and protection of human rights and democratisation .
Given my strong conviction that it is important for the EU to act directly on the causes of instability , partly by improving the use of the available instruments , I have no option but to vote in favour of the proposal .
in writing . - Migration flows arising from instability are a challenge for the European Union .
Wars and armed conflicts , ethnic tension , systematic violations of human rights - such as the refusal to allow people to practise their religious faith - natural disasters and the lack of proper economic and democratic structures are the main causes of this type of migration flow .
This phenomenon is particularly worrying because it may give rise to or exacerbate tensions , not only between countries of origin and countries of destination , but also between countries of origin and transit countries .
In order to meet this challenge effectively , the European Union must implement a policy of prevention , employing the most appropriate foreign policy instruments with a view to addressing the causes of instability directly , so that emigration becomes an opportunity , not a desperate necessity .
A European policy on regulating migration should combine development cooperation measures with a more comprehensive political vision encompassing security , regional cooperation , bilateral agreements with countries of origin and transit countries , the safeguarding of human rights and democratisation .
The management of migration flows arising from political instability represents a fundamental challenge for the European Union .
Wars and armed conflicts , ethnic tension , systematic violations of human rights , natural disasters and the lack of proper economic and democratic structures are the main causes of these flows .
I believe it is now necessary to implement a policy of prevention , bringing to bear the most appropriate instruments in order to act on the causes of instability .
European foreign policy should focus on the roots of instability and on structural problems in the countries of origin .
I think this text represents another instrument for the EU to use as it outlines a coherent and effective policy on the phenomenon of migration flows , directing its choices on the most appropriate path towards recreating conditions of political , economic and social stability .
I am strongly opposed to the report in question .
The motto ' united in diversity ' allows for everyone to be master in his own backyard and the European Union cannot and must not force us to accept unwelcome guests .
Denying ourselves the right to return illegal migrants to their countries of origin goes against every rule of good sense .
If legality is not respected , we risk an invasion of millions of desperate people in flight .
People who suffer need to be helped , but in their own countries , by preventing the trafficking of human beings .
I strongly reject accusations of European racism and xenophobia , because I am tired of watching illegal Tunisian migrants going on strike because they are not being given money to buy cigarettes , refusing to eat food containing tuna because it smells of fish , and , once in Italy , demanding housing and work ( for free , of course ) , when we have our own indigenous unemployed and poor people .
Compliments to the High Representative for Foreign Affairs , Baroness Ashton , are surely wasted since in reality she has had no idea how to handle the current crisis in the Maghreb .
The icing on the cake , meanwhile , is having to consider lesbian , gay , bisexual , transsexual and transgender people as persecuted or having few rights and therefore worthy of particular attention .
I voted in favour of Mr Provera 's report , because I consider that his report takes a realistic attitude to the problem and his proposed burden-sharing of immigration is sorely needed .
Immigration is a difficult issue to resolve ; however , we can manage it , if we take the right action .
The problem cannot be shouldered basically by Greece , Italy and Spain .
Since January , 23 000 immigrants have entered Italy .
We must try , especially in light of developments in North Africa and the Arab world , to find a European strategy to address the problem of immigration , so as not to leave the Member States to their fate and , at the same time , to ensure that the unfortunate people forced to migrate and the citizens of Europe bearing the burden are not taken advantage of .
in writing . - ( NL ) This resolution has the merit of cranking up the debate about the Union 's migration policy , although the text could have been more specific and more strongly worded .
Right now , just as the situation in North Africa is giving rise to large flows of migrants , the EU is failing to hit the mark by failing to take any clear responsibility .
Frontex cannot be the only instrument involved in tackling the refugee crisis .
Europe also urgently needs to develop an action plan for burden-sharing in order to assist the resettlement of refugees from the region and to offer support to the homeless .
I find it regrettable that , in the current circumstances , the postponement of an agreement governing cooperation between the EU and Libya was apparently the only possible option .
In such agreements , it is not the tightening-up of border controls into the Union that should be the primary concern but monitoring the ratification of and compliance with the Geneva Convention .
I hope that this resolution is a first step towards a more global approach to the issue of refugees so that people are dealt with in a more humane way .
I voted for Mr Provera 's report on ' Migration flows arising from instability : scope and role of EU foreign policy ' .
Coordination between foreign policy and immigration policy is essential .
We need to focus on the deep-rooted causes of instability in certain regions of the world and to manage migration flows effectively .
Migration management policy should indeed be effectively combined with European development cooperation policy , and should take into account aspects concerning security , regional cooperation in the Southern countries and cooperation agreements with countries of origin and of transit .
With regard to the central role of some third countries in this policy , I am convinced that it is absolutely essential for the EU to sign cooperation agreements to be signed between with these countries in order to combat illegal immigration .
In this respect , the cooperation agreement between Libya and the European Union , which for the time being is suspended , must be restored .
The recession and political instability prevailing in several countries have helped to boost migration flows and this poses a challenge for the EU .
The measures proposed in this particular report will help to address this problem , which terrifies the countries on the EU borders directly and the whole of the EU indirectly .
One of these measures is the development of a permanent monitoring system for Frontex activities and operations linked to the management of migration flows , which must be permanent and stable .
That is why I voted in favour of Mr Provera 's report .
I welcome the adoption of this balanced resolution which proposes routes for responding to the challenges of migratory pressures which Europe is facing .
I believe it is essential for the EU 's migration policy and its development aid policy to feed into each other .
There are unseen human dramas behind the migration phenomena , and part of the solution lies in aid policy for third countries that will contribute to their development and stability .
It is an issue that the European neighbourhood policy ( ENP ) also needs to take into consideration .
I believe there is an urgent need for a Union-wide response and I call on Member States and the Commission to mobilise the necessary tools and resources .
This will be done by strengthening the resources and role of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders ( FRONTEX ) .
It will also be done by providing adequate assistance to the regions and towns of the Mediterranean coast that will have to deal with the humanitarian emergency that this influx of immigrants is going to create , and that will have to ensure that order is maintained and to encourage the integration of legal migrants .
To my mind , European solidarity must fully come into play between Member States and third countries .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of this report .
As the report highlights , the current stream of migrants is causing huge tensions between the countries of origin , the recipient countries and the transit countries , as well as within the recipient countries themselves .
As a preventive measure , Mr Provera proposes getting to the root cause of migration and addressing the lack of democratic and economic stability in the recipient countries in European foreign policy .
The European Parliament has produced various reports in the area of development policy that called on the Commission and Baroness Ashton in particular , to include the human rights situation in all its negotiations and only to provide support and facilitate trade in this context .
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate this demand .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas , because women in today 's society assume multifunctional roles in the context of their individual family and occupational ties , and this very multiplicity of roles enables them to contribute significantly to progress and innovation at all levels of society and to the improvement of quality of life , especially in rural areas .
Unfortunately , there is a decrease in the number of women in rural areas .
Therefore , in order to ensure a stable situation for populations working in agriculture , rural development policy should focus more strongly on creating innovative and sustainable living and working conditions in rural areas .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that we should encourage women 's entrepreneurial spirit and initiatives , in particular through the promotion of female ownership , networks of female entrepreneurs , and provision in the financial sector for facilitating access for rural businesswomen to investment and credit - thus empowering them more effectively in the marketplace and enabling them to develop businesses from which they can make a stable living .
It is also important for support to be given to political efforts to further the role of women in agriculture by making it easier for them to be active as agricultural entrepreneurs .
There must be improved access to land and credit for women to encourage the establishment of women in rural areas and as actors in the agricultural sector .
I am delighted to give my backing to the report by Mrs Jeggle since it focuses attention on the 42 % of women who live in rural areas and do an essential job in developing , stabilising and modernising them by coming up with new forms of entrepreneurship .
Thanks to their hard work , these women have shown that they can contribute to the evolution of traditional ways of life and production in the countryside , building businesses that can provide jobs and which allow family commitments to be reconciled with work .
The objective of guaranteeing equivalent living conditions in all regions and avoiding the unilateral development of urban centres means the rural space needs to be equipped with the most up-to-date IT infrastructure , with adequate access to broadband , and developing electronic forms of enterprise , such as e-business , which allow people to do business regardless of their distance from urban centres .
In addition , we must also improve women 's education and provide easier access to credit in order to support female entrepreneurship .
The social protection policies to be embarked upon must also bear in mind the living conditions of migrant women employed as seasonal workers in agricultural businesses , particularly with regard to the need to guarantee these women suitable accommodation , medical insurance and adequate sanitary facilities .
Respect for the principle of gender equality is a basic requirement under the Europe 2020 Strategy and should be promoted in order to increase the number of women involved in economic and social activities and the equality of rights for women and men in the agricultural sector in particular .
I feel it is important to emphasise the role played by women in farms and rural areas .
This is why support policies must reflect more than they have until now women 's important role , needs and situation in the countryside .
I encourage Member States to devise incentives in the countryside for promoting women as producers or entrepreneurs and for supporting their involvement in the political process , including as representatives on the management board in institutions , with the aim of supporting equal roles for women and men .
I voted for this report which helps combat social exclusion in rural areas .
The key aim of rural development policies is to ensure equal rights for men and women and equivalent living conditions in all regions , thereby avoiding unilateral development of highly populated urban areas so as to prevent a mass exodus from the villages .
Since women make up 42 % of those involved in the agricultural sector , it is clear that they play an important role in rural areas and farm business .
There must be recognition and support for women and for the contribution they make to agriculture and rural life and , to this end , I support this important report .
There must be due recognition given in EU agricultural policies in future to the role of women .
I support what the report says on the excellent work of women 's networks in energising rural communities and promoting equality and social inclusion in the countryside .
They must get more political support at local , national and European level .
In Ireland , for example , the ICA is an important and influential organisation in rural areas which celebrated 100 years of existence recently , it has approximately 11 000 members and has been supporting rural women for a long time now .
Proper support must be given to those local organisations and they must be taken into account in EU agricultural policies in the future .
in writing . - ( PT ) Women are playing an increasingly important role in the agricultural sector and rural areas .
Over the last few years , the support provided to women for their own projects has enabled them to make significant progress , which has resulted in increased development for rural society as a whole .
Women have been contributing to advancing traditional economic models and lifestyles in rural areas , whilst also contributing to the stabilisation and modernisation of the business models involved , and , as a result , to the sustainable development of rural areas .
In rural areas too , women expect to be able to realise their own plans for their lives , to be economically independent and to meet family challenges .
As such , this report , for which I voted , advocates taking greater account of the wide range of vocational skills , interests and achievements of women , so that jobs in farming remain an attractive option for them .
Ensuring that men and women can succeed and have good life prospects in rural areas should be the main objective of European rural policy .
The situation of women in rural areas is a very real and topical issue for the European Union .
However , it is a very serious and urgent matter for some new Member States , such as Romania , where there is a very high proportion of rural areas with an extremely low employment rate .
We need to adopt a suitable approach , one which will receive financial support in the future CAP , so that we can achieve results in creating living conditions which are attractive to women and men in these areas .
I agree with the idea expressed by Mrs Jeggle about a European rural women 's network supported also through the measures under the second pillar of the CAP .
I also agree with the notion that one of the priorities of the reform of the CAP should be for women in rural areas to have access to services and aid , according to the needs of each Member State .
The report under discussion today is particularly important since it focuses on the main points to be worked on in order to obtain an effective contribution from women in the development of rural areas , while at the same time aiming to improve employment prospects in the context of the new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
In my opinion , the role of women in agricultural businesses and rural environments represents a significant aspect of territorial development policies .
Indeed , one of the main objectives of European policy on rural areas is to guarantee equivalent living conditions in all regions so that , even in the countryside , men and women have the chance to grasp opportunities to build something .
During the current CAP development phase , bearing in mind the needs of women who live in rural areas takes on fundamental importance , as does unleashing their potential .
I believe that in terms of a forward-looking worldview , it will be necessary to make greater efforts for the sustainable use of rural areas , which must be efficient both in terms of energy and quality .
Furthermore , greater commitment will be needed from all those involved in the agricultural reform process .
in writing . - ( BG ) The aim of the common agricultural policy is to promote the high-quality , sustainable development of rural areas .
I voted in favour of the text because I think that women play an extremely important role in modern society .
During recent years , it has become clear that a large proportion of the projects carried out in agricultural areas would have been inconceivable without the active involvement of women .
I also think that living conditions need to be improved in rural areas .
This can be done by increasing access to the infrastructure , facilities and services for everyday life .
Women must be given the opportunity to achieve a work-life balance and village communities need to be preserved .
Women must have access to support services , facilities and structures .
Their role also needs to be strengthened in the decision-making process .
in writing . - ( IT ) Considering that the risk of social exclusion in rural areas is greater for women than for men , and considering the significance of this , I strongly support this resolution , which draws attention to the role of women in agriculture and demands not only that women 's agricultural and non-agricultural professional competencies be given more prominence in business and regional development strategies , but also encourages incentives for the promotion of women 's involvement in the market by eliminating all types of discrimination , improving available training and access to post-graduate and specialist courses .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because I believe that regional development is becoming a particularly relevant issue today , as rural areas are becoming more and more sparsely populated , due to social change and changes in social structures , values and a growing tendency towards individualisation .
I entirely agree that one of the important measures that may change this emerging tendency towards urbanisation is the creation of suitable living and working conditions in rural areas .
Experience shows that quality of life and economic power in rural areas are closely linked to women and the role they play in farming .
Consequently , it is particularly important for the measures proposed in the report , which would enable women to realise their own plans for their lives , to be economically independent and meet family challenges just as successfully as they do today in urban areas .
Measures listed in the report include the continuation and development of training and counselling provision for women that has a specific rural focus , continuity of EU support for agriculture and business in rural areas , the development of the most essential infrastructure and IT infrastructure , and the opportunity to take advantage of early retirement and many other measures .
in writing . - ( IT ) I should like to congratulate my colleague and rapporteur Mrs Jeggle for the work she has accomplished , which has allowed Parliament to publicly acknowledge the multifunctional role played by women in the agricultural sector .
Despite the fact that 42 % of around 27 million workers in the sector are women and almost 29 % of agricultural businesses are managed by a woman , the role of women has yet to be properly recognised .
I voted in favour of this document because I agree on the need to recognise the unique role played by women in agriculture .
Furthermore , I believe we have an obligation to identify the specific needs of women in rural areas and to ensure that future strategies , beginning with the next reform of the Common Agricultural Policy ( CAP ) , adequately meet those requirements .
The European Union must not overlook the professional , familial and social aspirations of women who live in rural areas .
To allow this to happen , it is therefore appropriate for European institutions to guarantee the necessary support services and an innovative package that is not exclusively geared to the market .
Finally , I share the proposals made by the rapporteur , Mrs Jeggle , especially as regards the need for greater female representation in political , economic and social organisations in the agricultural world .
in writing . - ( PT ) I welcome the importance accorded by the Commission to the role of women in the development of rural areas .
The multifunctional role of women in recent years , in both economic and social terms , is a reality to which we should not be indifferent .
This applies especially to agriculture , a sector to which women have contributed significantly in recent years , not least as regards business diversification and adjustment to the market .
Thus , and in line with common agricultural policy objectives of encouraging more-sustainable use of rural areas , action needs to be taken with a view to satisfying the needs and aspirations of women in these areas .
In doing this , particular care needs to be taken to maintain and develop the necessary support infrastructure , with the importance accorded to education being particularly significant .
in writing . - Moves by the European Parliament today to support and strengthen the contribution of women to Europe 's vital agriculture sector are welcome .
The ' Women in Agriculture ' report was backed by a significant majority of MEPs and is a timely measure .
Not many people realise that 42 % of those working regularly in the agricultural sector are women .
I welcome this report .
in writing . - ( RO ) Bearing in mind that the principle of gender equality is promoted by European legislation and is one of the fundamental requirements of the Europe 2020 Strategy , I consider it appropriate to include this issue in the future common agricultural policy , including through the use of new instruments which will promote this principle .
I believe that the future common agricultural policy must be a fair policy , including for women .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report , as it argues that promoting gender equality is a core objective of the EU , and considers that this principle should be incorporated into the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
It is essential to facilitate women 's access to farming and agricultural credit .
This report also contributes to the promotion of sustainable economic growth and rural development .
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted in favour of the report on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas , as we believe that it is essential to combat the lack of equality in society .
The report also illustrates the importance of there being a well-functioning infrastructure and the basic provision of certain services , for example broadband and childcare , not just in towns , but in rural areas , too .
However , we would like to emphasise that we do not believe that agriculture should retain the same proportion of the budget in the next multiannual financial framework , but rather that agriculture 's total share should be significantly reduced .
in writing . - ( PT ) If we advocate serious commitment to the agricultural sector - as I do - and the possibility of the working in the rural world being a real lifestyle choice for families , it is vital to ensure that anyone making this choice has access to similar conditions as those living in the cities , in terms of health , education and family support infrastructure .
Development and social cohesion involve harmony between rural and urban areas , without the former being forgotten about or systematically considered less attractive .
Such a paradigm shift can , naturally , involve women 's active role in agricultural communities .
I do not have a romantic and bucolic vision of the ' escape to the country ' : quite the contrary , I know that such a lifestyle choice has costs , and often means leaving behind easy access to the infrastructure essential for modern life .
This is why I view the concerns set out in this report favourably , as they allow a commitment to promoting quality infrastructure for supporting families , education , health and transport in the rural world too .
in writing . - ( PT ) The promotion of equality between the sexes is a core objective of the EU and its Member States .
This principle should be included in the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) in order to promote sustainable economic growth and rural development : farms , rural tourism , direct marketing and social services are the cornerstones of a rural supply structure , and should be supported sustainably through the CAP .
The CAP should be used to promote these services , in order to provide women with new prospects and opportunities for paid work , and also to facilitate the reconciliation of family life with working life to a significant extent .
There is a need to take action against population aging in rural areas , and to this end conditions need to be created for the settlement of people , as the importance of vibrant and dynamic rural areas with a diversified population should be stressed .
In this context , I would stress the importance of development opportunities and adequate challenges for young women .
There is a need to support and revitalise the rural world as a diversified and extensive area in which to live and do business , making use , above all , of the specialist knowledge and skills of women .
in writing . - ( PT ) This resolution is opposed to adopting the draft regulation proposed by the Commission on ' on the authorisation and refusal of authorisation of certain health claims made on foods and referring to children 's development and health ' , as it is not compatible with the objectives and content of the Regulation on nutrition and health claims made on foods .
Docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) is found in breast milk , where it contributes to normal visual development in children aged up to 12 months .
In a context of a lack of clear scientific consensus on the effect of DHA-enriched formulas on infants , in a biological environment other than breast milk , whether formula milk or other foods for infants , we believe that a preventive and precautionary stance should be adopted .
We are concerned about the adoption of the draft regulation in question , as it does not meet the requirements of Regulation ( EC ) No 1924 / 2006 , which states , inter alia , that ' a claim should be scientifically substantiated by taking into account the totality of the available scientific data ' .
in writing . - ( PT ) All policies of the European Union and the Member States should take promoting equality and women 's rights into account , along with combating sex-based discrimination .
There is therefore a need to accord particular importance to the situation of women in agriculture and rural areas , whose lives are suffering from the profound crisis into which current policies , such as the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and others , have plunged the rural world .
Women , who represent around 42 % of the 26.7 million people working in agriculture , are particularly affected by hundreds of thousands of small and medium-sized farms going out of business , and by the process of destruction of family farming , which have resulted from successive CAP reforms .
As in other areas of activity , they are also victims of unemployment , insecure jobs , low wages and poverty , which have been aggravated by the antisocial policies imposed under the pretext of the crisis .
Instead of empty words , we need , therefore , to break with the policies that created the current situation .
Value needs to be ascribed to the role of women , their rights , equality , and public services in rural areas relating to health , education , cultural and leisure provision , social infrastructure ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( DE ) This report deserves whole-hearted support because it draws attention to the special role of women in agricultural business and in rural areas , while at the same time offering solutions for current challenges .
These solutions will help make the working life and day-to-day situation for women in rural areas more attractive .
One strand of this solution is supporting affordable , easy access to support services and facilities such as kindergartens , out-patient clinics , and so on , as well as the requisite infrastructure .
There is also a proposal to use EU funding to improve the quality of life in rural communities .
Another essential element is greater access to schools , higher level vocational and academic training , and an improvement of social conditions for women in rural areas .
This will not only benefit women in rural areas , but also enrich these areas , sustainably developing them as an integrated place in which to work and live .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this document , because it is very important to highlight the role that women play in farm businesses and in rural areas , taking particular account of its multifunctional nature .
It remains a crucial task for European rural policy to achieve equivalent living conditions in all regions , preventing the one-sided development of heavily populated urban areas , so that , even in rural areas , women and men can look forward to staying and having a successful life .
If we want to keep women of all generations living in the countryside or encourage them to move there , then support policies must reflect their needs and circumstances more strongly than has been the case in the past .
In a modern society , the only way to do this is through recourse to support services , facilities and structures that must be affordable and accessible at regional level .
One of the core European support strategies must be to maintain this supportive structure and develop it in a woman-friendly way .
It is necessary right at the planning stage - for example , when constructing a kindergarten , creating a day-care facility or developing public transport - to identify new approaches and to involve women of all generations in the decision making .
Schooling , vocational and academic education and further training remain fundamental to quality of life and quality of work in rural areas .
in writing . - ( FI ) The lives of women in rural areas have changed and become more diverse over the last 50 years or so .
Traditional jobs in these areas have declined in number .
At the same time , new lifestyles have come along to take their place .
They show marked differences as regards women 's background , education and status in the labour market .
These changes also need to be reflected more in the Union 's support policy , for improved reconciliation of rural women 's working and family life .
In recent years , women have used their education and professional skills to promote the development of the traditional rural economy .
Innovative rural businesses of all kinds , which focus , for example , on services and farm tourism , have significantly revived the rural economic structure .
There must also be support for the establishment and development of innovative rural businesses in the future .
Finally , I would like to point out that the promotion of gender equality is one of the main objectives of the EU and the Member States .
The Union 's common agricultural policy should therefore incorporate the principle of promoting equality .
in writing . - ( DE ) This report represents a move by the European Parliament to improve living and working conditions for women in rural areas and to create opportunities for their development .
At the centre of report 's proposals is the further expansion of rural infrastructure to offer women new prospects and employment opportunities .
The issue of work / family compatibility is something that also affects those in the agricultural business .
Like the rapporteur , I am convinced that a campaign of active support for rural areas is the only way to prevent women from moving to the cities .
This also requires needs-based childcare facilities and an infrastructure tailored to families in the agricultural sector , as well as access to the Internet and other communication technology .
In order to be able to implement important measures in rural areas in the future , we will require sufficient financial means for agriculture and for the development of rural areas .
I support the call in the report , emphasising the importance of not cutting the agricultural share of the EU budget as part of the forthcoming talks on the future EU financial framework .
in writing . - ( IT ) I strongly supported the report produced by my colleague Mrs Jeggle because I found it to contain important principles to be noted and upheld in the future .
Out of a total of around 27 million people regularly employed in agriculture in the EU , around 42 % are women whilst , according to official statistics , one agricultural business in five ( around 29 % ) is directly managed by a woman .
I invite you to take these figures into consideration when assessing the huge contribution women in many local communities make to development , which often follows a disproportionately low participation in decision-making processes .
This is a barrier that we must overcome with a policy of services that , via the new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , will facilitate the processes of development and activity in the rural fabric of many areas .
I am thinking in particular of training , consulting and business creation initiatives , which in the framework of the second pillar of the CAP , could still be developed and which would represent the turning point for a significant improvement in living conditions for women , as well as men , in rural areas .
I consider this to be a fairly strategic requirement , not least when it comes to achieving the EU 2020 Strategy objectives , with particular reference to initiatives aimed at stimulating innovation , research and development .
in writing . - ( PL ) Today in Strasbourg we voted on the report on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas .
I personally come from a rural area , I live in a rural area and there was a time when I worked hard on my parents ' farm .
I can state with full conviction that women in rural areas influence not only the development and modernisation of farms , but frequently also the stimulation of the entire rural community , thanks to their hard work and determination .
Their activities in rural homemakers ' clubs , their efforts to preserve traditions and family customs , and also their successful implementation of new solutions in the area of farm management mean that they are a group which should be supported and promoted and whose value should be stressed .
I would like to thank all women in rural areas , both in Poland and throughout the European Union , for their hard work and their contribution to regional development , and I would like to make it known that I voted in favour of the Jeggle report . Thank you .
in writing . - I welcome this report 's recognition of the important role women play in agricultural production and the need to adapt certain policies and conditions to assist them .
However , I do not believe this should be used as a justification to throw even more money at the CAP .
in writing . - ( IT ) I have voted in favour because I strongly believe that we need to recognise the central role played by women in places where their work is fundamental to the performance or recovery of that particular local economy , which in itself contributes to the general growth of our countries .
The role of women in the agricultural sector has changed significantly in recent decades , becoming an ever more multifunctional position .
For this reason , the European institutions should take steps aimed at avoiding an exodus of women from the countryside , or in any case at encouraging the return of women to rural life .
Support for women and their plans would lead to progress in the development of rural communities as a whole .
We need to offer women who work in the agricultural sector the chance to achieve their individual life plans , making them economically independent , and able to meet familial responsibilities .
Jobs in agriculture must remain attractive to women so that they are able to carry out their multiple professional competencies .
In this period of financial and economic crisis , it is fundamental that we create equivalent working conditions in the countryside and in cities , so as to repopulate territories which could provide a kick-start for economic recovery in a given European region .
The radical changes in European rural areas all represent challenges in terms of population , jobs , services and the environment .
We must emphasise the significant impact of the presence and involvement of women on quality of life and the rural economy .
Women will represent great potential for the EU when it undertakes to develop and build on Europe 's rural economy .
EU funding can therefore help to improve the quality of life and work in rural areas by boosting incomes and through schooling and vocational and academic education and further training .
The future of the agricultural sector depends on its ability to diversify .
The potential of the services provided by farm businesses in addition to their own food output depends on the creativity of the people involved , the women among them having already contributed a great deal .
There are many opportunities for the creation of local services , and to involve women in these is the best way to guarantee the success of such projects .
in writing . - ( PT ) Given women 's increasing importance in agriculture and rural areas , the new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) needs to take this into consideration in order to promote equality between genders .
That is the only way that we will succeed in promoting sustainable economic growth and rural development .
As in urban areas , we need to create good living conditions in rural areas , so that women and their families have incentives to remain there .
I voted for the report on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas because I believe that their role is crucial in this sector that employs 14.6 million people , or 41 % of women .
Although I am aware that the second pillar of the common agricultural policy provides support for projects relating to women 's living conditions in rural areas , I believe it necessary to analyse the projects underway in order to identify sound practices and contribute to improving the situation of women , which is especially affected by the consequences of the current structural crisis of the capitalist system in rural areas .
This is especially true when we take into account the high levels of female unemployment , to which we must add the fact that many women do not even take part in the labour market , meaning that they are not registered as unemployed and do not feature in unemployment statistics .
I also believe that social protection for women workers in the agricultural sector is indispensable to the development of rural areas , so I voted for this report , which is a step in that direction .
in writing . - As was said , the report aims to highlight the need to implement the principle of gender equality in the common agricultural policy as a way of promoting sustainable economic growth and rural development .
Therefore the EU needs to refocus its EU support strategies in order to develop the rural areas in a women-friendly way .
Promotion of the entrepreneurial attitude and skills of women in agriculture , improving access and specific training for women , equipment of rural areas with the most up-to-date IT infrastructure , greater recognition and more support for women 's networks , fostering the quality and accessibility of infrastructure facilities and service , adequate social security benefits for women working in agriculture , shared ownership of farms , specific attention for female immigrants are among the most important points which the different political groups agreed on .
Well , who would vote against it ?
How unspecified and populist it is !
It seems that the rapporteur showed her kindness to women working in agriculture .
Nothing specific is said about children and healthcare .
Lack of efficient healthcare !
The lack of efficient healthcare and pre-school education in rural areas is precisely what concerns women from Latvia , Estonia and Lithuania .
I voted ' for ' ; however , the report is raw and unprofessional .
in writing . - ( DE ) The role of women is still a subordinate one in the agricultural sector .
According to this report , we need to cater more closely to the needs of women , particularly in non-urban areas .
Opportunities should be made available for further education and training , as well as better access to childcare .
Women farmers are contributing more and more to the diversification and adaptation of businesses , leading to a significant rise in multifunctionalism in the agricultural sector .
In order to be able to maintain the attractiveness of farming as a source of employment and a lifestyle , women should be given the chance to influence decisions in committees and associations .
Likewise , it is essential the position of women in agriculture should be made more secure in order to offer them an incentive to stay in the sector .
I have voted in favour of this report , as we must stop the decline in farming by every means available to us .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the Jeggle report , which I welcome , being an MEP elected in Romania , a country which has a large number of people involved in agricultural activities .
However , I would like to point out that , in my view , the report ought to have been firmer on the issue of living conditions in the countryside .
We need a heavily financed European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development to be able to narrow the disparities between rural and urban areas .
Investment in modernising the basic physical infrastructure must remain an essential aspect of this fund .
Furthermore , additional references would have been helpful to the ageing of the rural population and the importance of the programmes aimed at the early retirement of farmers and setting up young farmers .
in writing . - ( DE ) In many ways , women are the backbone of our agricultural sector .
The role of women is becoming increasingly important the more we try to establish the right conditions for a sustainable , ecologically responsible agricultural industry based on small holdings .
That is why it is important for society to give greater recognition and respect to the work of women in the agricultural sector .
In addition , more must be done in future to cater to the specific needs of women in the agricultural sector in order to attract the younger generations to the industry .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( PL ) A motion for a resolution by the European Parliament on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas was adopted today .
Our experience in recent decades has proven that the growing involvement of women and their knowledge , experience and professionalism is a key factor in the development of all branches of the economy .
For this and other reasons , I believe that one of the fundamental objectives of the common agricultural policy should be to make rural areas more attractive , paying particular attention to the needs and role of women .
We should make every effort to help women to achieve their goals , and also to combine a career with family life .
In order to achieve this , we need guaranteed access in rural areas to services in the broad sense of the word and to infrastructure , and also training and personal development opportunities .
It is essential to take measures to support entrepreneurialism among women and to combat all manifestations of gender-based discrimination .
We should also focus on ensuring greater political and financial support , for example by means of easier access to investment and loans .
I am sure that all these measures will ensure that women 's potential for the development of agriculture , and of local communities and entire regions , is put to ever better use .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution , aimed at increasing the role of women in the agricultural sector and improving their situation in rural areas , providing more social guarantees and promoting employment and entrepreneurship .
Above all , we must make every effort to ensure the establishment of an effectively functioning social protection system , which would make it possible to take early retirement and receive maternity pay .
In order to create a favourable environment to promote entrepreneurship , all rural areas must have the most up-to-date IT infrastructure .
Adequate broadband access is one of the main factors behind the growth in the activities of small and medium-sized enterprises in rural areas .
Furthermore , we must make every effort to ensure that rural communities are preserved and opportunities are created to reconcile family and working life .
Consequently , there is a need to ensure that people living in rural areas receive a high standard of health care , education , child care and other services intended to meet daily needs and which would create more favourable living conditions and would reduce social exclusion .
Member States using money from the Structural Funds must establish and implement initiatives which would promote the participation of women in the labour market , reduce social inequality and address issues related to transport infrastructure .
Greater attention must also be paid to farmers ' organisations , and a European rural women 's network should be created so that development programmes in rural areas are fully implemented .
in writing . - ( IT ) The new common agricultural policy ( CAP ) also takes into account social issues such as the role of women in rural areas .
The common aim is to avoid a situation in which development occurs exclusively in population centres , thereby avoiding discrimination on the grounds of sex and or geographical provenance of citizens who live in the countryside .
Since I agreed with these principles , I voted in favour of the report , which underlines the important role played by women in agricultural businesses and in rural environments , and draws attention to the significance of this role for territorial development policies .
The report highlights areas where work is needed to see women better integrated and to make best use of their professional potential , leading to better prospects in life by way of greater ecological and energy efficiency in rural areas .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report as I agree with the majority of the proposals it puts forward , specifically the promotion of multifunctionality in rural areas , which are areas for living and doing business where communities should stay and be made dynamic .
It is important to recognise that rural areas are particularly affected by population ageing , low population density and , in some areas , depopulation , for which reason the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) should be oriented toward responding to these challenges .
It is a fact that , historically , women 's work in agriculture has been systematically undervalued , and frequently unpaid or paid at a lower rate than equivalent work carried out by men .
It is therefore important that this be taken into consideration as part of this topic , and that , above all , equal working conditions be established for equal work .
In any case , I believe that the key thing is for this issue to eventually lose its relevance , by establishing gender equality in agricultural activity .
in writing . - ( IT ) Women are the backbone of the agricultural sector in rural areas .
It is thus important that we focus on the role they play in agricultural businesses and in rural areas .
To that aim , we must take into account their needs and make use of their potential , since issues such as quality of life and economic capability are linked , particularly in rural areas , to the presence of women and their work on many fronts .
Thus , European support policies must do more than ever before to meet their needs and conditions , so as to prevent an exodus of women of all generations from the countryside or , in any case , to encourage them to return to rural life .
In light of this , aid from the EU can contribute to improving quality of life in rural areas , for women who manage a business or supply services as well as for consumers of goods and services .
Since women play a vital role in terms of sustainable development in rural areas , I am voting in favour so as to guarantee concrete support for women in this sector .
in writing . - Women are very important for the agricultural sector and the rural world and their presence there is increasingly obvious .
It is therefore important to highlight the role that women play in farm businesses and in rural areas , taking particular account of its multifunctional nature .
If we want to keep women of all generations living in the countryside or encourage them to move there , then support policies must reflect their needs and circumstances more strongly than has been the case in the past .
In rural areas , as elsewhere , women expect to be able to realise their own plans for their lives , to be economically independent and to meet family challenges .
The European Commission should increase the budgetary allocations for the ESF in order to provide adequate resources for measures to improve education and training for improving labour market access and combating unemployment and measures and activities under the Social Inclusion Strategy and the EU 2020 flagship initiative on combating poverty and social exclusion in favour of disadvantaged and vulnerable persons , especially women , including those confronted with precarious and insecure contracts .
The Member States should contribute in particular to a definite improvement of the social situation of women in agriculture in Europe .
What if women farmers were the future of the common agricultural policy ?
While slightly controversial , that statement is largely well founded when we consider the importance of women in rural life and on farms .
According to statistics , women farmers in the European Union account for 43 % of farm labourers and 20 % of farm managers , and this does not include the spouses of male farmers whose work is often not taken into account .
At a time when farms are becoming specialised , the creative nature of women is an unquestionable advantage which , combined with their greater concern for environmental sustainability and quality , deserves to be recognised and supported at European level .
That was the choice made today by the European Parliament which , in adopting Mrs Jeggle 's report , has highlighted the important role that women will play in the future enhancement of rural areas .
As the rapporteur very appropriately wrote in her explanatory statement : ' Experience shows that , in rural areas most particularly , quality of life and economic strength are linked to the presence of women and their involvement in a wide range of activities . '
Here we have a simple and modern way of re-thinking the agricultural profession .
in writing . - Women are the backbone of the agricultural sector and the rural world and their presence there is increasingly obvious .
It is therefore important to highlight the role that women play in farm businesses and in rural areas , taking particular account of the multifunctional nature of these businesses .
In this context , there are opportunities to provide practical support measures for women in agriculture .
Greater account must be taken of the wide range of vocational skills , interests and achievements of women , so that jobs in farming remain an attractive option for them .
This will entail women having a full share in the resources that underpin farming as a way of life and a type of business .
Women farmers must have a share in rights and duties that is commensurate with their co-responsibility for the farm business , including through the representation of interests on agricultural bodies and by having a real share in farm income .
Ensuring adequate social cover for all women who work in agriculture is another indispensable factor in modern sustainable farming .
Experience with systems of agricultural social security in the EU Member States should be taken into account and should , in the medium term , contribute to a definite improvement of the social situation of women in agriculture in Europe .
in writing . - ( IT ) Sustainable development in rural areas has always been considered a priority in Europe , in order that we may guarantee the best possible living conditions for men and women who choose to work in this sector .
Currently , 26.7 million people are employed in the agricultural sector in the European Union .
Forty-two per cent of these are women , and at least one agricultural business in five is managed by a woman .
An image of rural female reality emerges from these figures that is radically different from that of previous decades , in which women were the protagonists of change and came from very diverse social and economic backgrounds across the Member States .
I support the text of this report since it draws attention to the need to plan European support strategies for rural areas that are tailored specifically for women , in order to work towards improving women 's social and working conditions in the medium term .
in writing . - ( IT ) We have no option but to vote in favour of the report on the role of women in agriculture and in rural areas because we still believe in the professional farmer who lives from the income derived from his own business .
Typically engaged in maternity and their usual role of supporting other family members , women are undoubtedly disadvantaged in an agricultural context .
The routines of agriculture are not determined by fixed hours but have to adjust to seasonal requirements , vegetative periods and the possible presence of livestock .
There are periods when working days will be 12 to 13 hours long , seven days a week , and others that are quieter .
It is obvious that a woman farmer , during pregnancy for example , cannot give up working on the land if she needs to , because to do so would deprive her of income for the whole year .
The needs of women farmers are thus different to those of other female workers , and so it is vital that they are guaranteed adequate and specialised support , taking into account the fact that agricultural businesses are almost always located far from public services , such as public transport , assistance or social support .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution , because I consider that women play a huge role and make a huge contribution to rural and agricultural development .
Support for women and their business plans in the rural sector will help the entire rural community to progress considerably .
In the midst of an economic crisis and with galloping unemployment , we must provide incentives to keep women of all ages in the countryside , to support female entrepreneurship and to invest in their training , in order to achieve development and innovation in the agricultural sector .
I would like to begin by thanking Mrs Jeggle for this excellent report , which highlights the extremely important role played by women in agriculture .
I am aware that many of us would like women of every age to remain in the countryside , or we believe that we need to encourage them to move there to ensure the future of rural areas and agriculture in Europe .
However , in order to facilitate this , we have to improve women 's access to education and training in the agricultural sector and allow them to gain better access to direct payments .
On the other hand , we must ensure they have access to decent pensions and social insurance .
In Romania , for example , some women living in the countryside are not eligible for farmer pensions and find it very difficult to start a business in the agricultural sector .
This is why it is paramount that we focus more attention on women working on family or subsistence farms and guarantee them both a decent living and adequate pensions .
in writing . - ( PL ) I endorsed the report on the role of women in agriculture and rural areas .
In particular , I am in favour of solutions aimed at increasing levels of employment among women in rural areas .
In Poland there are more women who are unemployed than men , particularly in rural areas .
A large percentage of those without work in rural areas are women under the age of 34 .
In the majority of cases these are educated women , who cannot find work appropriate to their qualifications .
This is a particularly dangerous trend , since it is young people who should be given greater opportunities to gain a foothold in the labour market .
In the long term , this results in the feminisation of unemployment in rural areas , and thus in higher levels of poverty among young women .
Many of them decide to move to towns to look for work , which in turn leads to an ageing of the rural population , a drop in the natural growth rate and a general deterioration of living conditions for residents of rural areas .
In connection with this , I support the proposal whereby provision should be made in the new EAFRD regulation for special funding aimed at supporting women in the future 2014-2020 programming period .
This may have a positive effect on levels of employment among women in rural areas .
I am also in favour of ensuring appropriate benefits for women living in rural areas , within the framework of social security systems .
These benefits must take into account the fact that women have less earning power and that this affects their pension entitlements .
in writing . - ( PL ) As a result of social and demographic developments , changing value systems and a wider range of choice , the structure of rural areas is changing .
The role of women in rural areas is also changing .
What is now needed , in order to ensure that women remain in rural areas , or to encourage them to choose a rural lifestyle , is to take greater account of their needs and make sure that these needs are reflected in our support policy .
We should ensure that women are more visible in rural areas , particular in the economic and financial spheres , and we should make instruments available to achieve these tasks .
In view of the fact that it is still women who take care of young children and sick and elderly people , giving up work to do so , we should make it possible for them to achieve a balance between family life and professional life .
This is possible by means of infrastructure development , for example , by building nurseries and developing various educational and cultural options .
The key to achieving these aims will be to include women of all generations in decision-making processes .
It is also of the utmost importance to improve access to medical services and cancer screening programmes for women .
Furthermore , it is still worth supporting and developing agritourism as a low-risk form of economic activity which fosters job creation and work-life balance , and promoting electronic forms of entrepreneurship , such as e-commerce , which make it possible to be economically active regardless of how far you are from urban centres .
in writing . - The EPLP supports the aim of Elisabeth Jeggle 's report ' Role of Women in agriculture and rural areas ' to highlight the sector specific problems faced by women working in agriculture and many of the measures proposed to strengthen their position .
The report addresses the specific needs of women working in agriculture , by proposing a series of recommendations which take account both of their living conditions and their role and contribution to the development of the rural economy .
However , the EPLP does not agree with the Paragraph 4 , which speaks against further reducing the proportion of the total budget accounted by agricultural expenditure .
We would like to see significant reprioritisation within the Multiannual Financial Framework to fully fund Europe 2020 priorities that have the greatest impact on raising employment and growth levels .
in writing . - I supported this report , which highlights the importance of gender equality in promoting sustainable economic growth and rural development .
I believe that it is important to encourage representation of women in all political , social and economic bodies of the agricultural sector , to ensure that women are participating on an equal basis .
I am pleased at the adoption of Mrs Jeggle 's report , to which I myself contributed .
Indeed , the common agricultural policy is of social value in that it recognises the fundamental role women play in preserving the future prospects of rural life and prosperity in rural areas ( given that 41 % of the 14.6 million persons engaged in agriculture in the EU are women ) .
The aim in particular is to promote women 's entrepreneurial attitude and farming skills , equip rural areas with modern infrastructure which will enable women to achieve a work-life balance ( through the creation of day nurseries , for example ) , aim for a greater representation of women within political , economic and social bodies in the agricultural sector ( by making absolute parity the goal ) and implement adequate social cover for women working in agriculture as well as shared ownership of farms .
If true equality is fairness , then recognising the role of women in agriculture is what really matters .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of this report .
There is a continued need for an active support policy in rural areas aimed at offering women better prospects and better work opportunities .
Qualified female farmers need broadly-based training and must be able to operate and think in an entrepreneurial way .
This requires optimum infrastructure in rural areas when it comes to education , further training , schools and childcare , as well as unrestricted access to modern information technology .
In addition , women 's networks and access for women entrepreneurs to credit and investment opportunities must be expanded .
I voted in favour of this report , which calls for an improvement in the situation and the recognition of women who work in agriculture and for the ongoing provision of rural aid .
The report points out the crucial need to ensure social cover for female spouses of farmers who earn an income , and indeed for temporary and migrant workers .
This should be an obvious step , not only for agricultural work , but also in the broader context of all self-employed professions , if we want to achieve true gender equality goals in these areas , where women are particularly badly treated .
Therefore , yes , the promotion of gender equality must also be incorporated in the common agricultural policy and the Union must bring its stated objectives and its acts into line with each another .
Nevertheless , I am under no illusions about the overall consistency between the Union 's objectives and the use of European funds , especially with regard to human rights , of which women 's rights are an integral part .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted in favour of Mrs Jeggle 's report .
The report highlights the enormous contribution made by women in recent years to the sustainable development of rural areas and to the diversification and adaptation of farming to market changes .
However , if women are to be offered real prospects in the agricultural sector , the common agricultural policy must encompass more female-oriented aspects , including ( as explained in this report ) the provision of specific forms of training and counselling , as well as infrastructural aid .
in writing . - ( PL ) I would like to congratulate Mrs Jeggle on a document which makes a significant contribution to the debate on the shape of the common agricultural policy .
A key factor affecting the increase in economic potential of rural areas is the involvement of women - both in political bodies and agricultural organisations and by means of self-employment .
A key issue in terms of job creation is the promotion among women of electronic forms of entrepreneurship such as e-commerce , which make it possible to be economically active even in inaccessible areas .
We should also make better use of opportunities aimed at developing community life in rural areas by drafting and implementing programmes supporting training systems for women 's organisations .
Something else which is of key significance in terms of equal opportunities is support for the putting in place of appropriate childcare infrastructure in rural areas , since properly functioning childcare makes it easier for women to return to work more quickly and makes them more competitive in the labour market .
I would like to thank Mrs Jeggle once again for taking my proposals on board during her work on the report .
Things which women asked for during public consultations I organised in the Ziemia Lubuska region were included in the document .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the efficiency and effectiveness of EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in the new Member States .
This is a very important document for Lithuania , Bulgaria and Slovakia as they decommission nuclear power plants .
There is concern that key waste infrastructure management projects have experienced delays in Lithuania and this is preventing it from absorbing EU funds in a timely and efficient manner .
It is noted that considerable financing is still required for decommissioning and that national funds are not sufficient to cover this : the State Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant Decommissioning Fund has so far accumulated just over EUR 100 million ( while the technical costs of decommissioning alone range from EUR 987 million to EUR 1 300 million ) .
The European Parliament therefore calls on the EU Member States to take appropriate measures in this respect .
The decommissioning of nuclear power plants is a very complicated process .
Countries do not have sufficient experience to be able to anticipate all the work involved and carry it out efficiently .
The European Parliament is adopting this resolution at the right time , thus encouraging Lithuania , Bulgaria , Slovakia and all EU Member States to implement decommissioning work as efficiently as possible .
This is very important work which will continue to receive much attention from the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this important document .
When they joined the European Union , Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria made commitments that were politically and economically complex to decommission nuclear power plants , and the European Union made a commitment to allocate the financial assistance required for the decommissioning work , the construction of nuclear waste repositories , the storage of such waste and the development of energy projects .
I believe that the concept of European Union solidarity can contribute effectively to mitigating the negative economic consequences of early closure in the energy sector , but many important issues remain unresolved .
The issue of awards is not entirely clear , because it is now known that current funding will be insufficient to carry out the decommissioning work in a timely and proper manner .
There is a danger that decommissioning the nuclear power plants will be delayed through lack of financial resources and this may pose a threat to the environment and human health .
Detailed decommissioning plans have yet to be finalised , and , as a consequence , that there is insufficient information on the timetables , the costs of particular projects , and their sources of funding .
I agree that the European Commission must play a greater coordinating role with these three Member States , in order to reach an agreement on the submission of detailed plans , the completion of work on schedule and the volume of funding .
The Commission must also study ways of altering the EU 's methods of financing decommissioning operations in view of the strategies employed in the Member States and their national administrative structures , and simplifying the rules on management of the funds in such a way that they do not affect the safety and security of the decommissioning operations .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for Mr Marinescu 's report because , in my view , a lack of funding for decommissioning measures will delay the process of providing financial assistance to the three Member States in question : Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria .
A delay in this process would pose a threat to the environment and human health .
In the future evaluations carried out by the European Commission and the Court of Auditors of the European Union , the following aspects must be clarified : the allocation and use of funds by the EU for ensuring safe decommissioning , safe storage of nuclear waste and coordination between the three existing programmes .
In this regard , the experience which has been accumulated must be used effectively and the model based on projects prepared and funded previously must be used in order to achieve a reduction in costs .
I voted for our fellow Member 's report on providing the financial assistance requested by Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria for shutting down nuclear power plants .
It is glaringly obvious that if we do not provide suitable resources , we may face extremely serious consequences for the environment and human health .
The resources allocated must certainly be managed in a proper and transparent manner .
It is a serious concern that we do not have a single EU team of coordinators and experts for all three projects , which will supervise the drafting of a plan and clear timetable and the proper use of the funds already allocated , and decide what is required to complete the shutdown in safe conditions .
The key word in this report is ' responsibility ' .
The nuclear industry must realise that it can no longer shirk its responsibility for nuclear power plant decommissioning , as it has so often done in the past .
Decommissioning nuclear power plants that had generally insufficient safety standards was exactly what it pledged to do at the time of the various EU accession processes .
Unfortunately , the allocated amounts were not used correctly .
It is about time , therefore , that all the necessary conclusions were drawn from this .
This observation may apply to the nuclear power plants in the new Member States , but it is still relevant for all EU countries that have opted for this technology .
The disaster in Japan has made us all think about nuclear safety .
Assistance in shutting down the plants in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria that were using obsolete technology contributes to minimising the consequences of the exceptional expenditure that their closure by 2013 entails .
The aid is channelled into the environmental improvement and modernisation of new electrical systems , and into improving security of supply .
I voted for this initiative because this should also be the future for other European nuclear plants with obsolete technology .
in writing . - ( IT ) With this report Parliament does well to put pressure on the Commission to ensure that it continues to closely monitor and control the way in which Slovakia , Bulgaria and Lithuania have spent and will spend the considerable sums of finance from which they have benefited in the framework of the programme to dismantle their Soviet-era nuclear power stations to make them secure .
The catastrophic accident in Japan a few weeks ago makes it clear to those who had not already realised that you do not trifle with nuclear energy : whenever one has anything to do with the atom , safety criteria must be applied with the utmost rigour , and the Commission must therefore take responsibility for monitoring the progress of the dismantling programmes of the old power stations in the three ex-communist countries .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of Mr Marinescu 's report , which draws attention to a problem that is currently highly topical .
In light of what took place in Japan , questions arise now as to the safety of existing and functioning nuclear power stations in Europe .
The commitment taken on by Lithuania , Bulgaria and Slovakia during EU accession negotiations to dismantle old nuclear reactors that proved impossible to adapt to meet the required minimum safety standards , must be a sustained and coherent commitment , in respect of which the European Union has for some time now established and provided packages of support and finance .
I hope that the dismantling works take place promptly and in a way that guarantees the maximum safety of citizens and the environment .
I also hope that they are able to catch up on accrued delays and finish work by the end of the agreed time period .
Finally I would like to stress , moving above and beyond specific cases , the need to monitor what checks are taking place on other reactors in Europe , making the institutions responsible for ensuring the safety not only of existing plants but also of new ones should more have to be built in the future .
Compliance with nuclear safety standards and protection for the population against nuclear risk are particularly important aspects which justify the funding granted by the European Union to the three Member States for decommissioning their nuclear power stations , which could have no longer been modernised to meet the highest safety standards .
However , I fully support the point of view expressed in this resolution as I think that we need to monitor the way in which these funds are spent so as to ensure that they make an effective contribution to guaranteeing the safety of the decommissioning process .
Unfortunately , the strategies have been lacking in clarity , which has also resulted in a lack of any ceilings for the European Union 's funding of the decommissioning activities .
In future , such a way of working should be avoided , with the need for a comprehensive plan to be devised to cover all the actions which will be eligible for funding .
It is vital to demonstrate transparency in the way this money is spent to guarantee the funding 's effectiveness and , ultimately , to ensure that European taxpayers ' money is being spent responsibly .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is imperative that the nuclear reactors in Slovakia , Bulgaria and Lithuania be decommissioned , because they cannot meet the required minimum safety standards at an economically acceptable cost .
This will not be possible without EU financial aid to address the consequences of their closure and decommissioning , which would naturally cover environmental upgrading measures , in line with the acquis , and measures for modernising conventional production capacity in order to replace production capacity , and so on .
European Union financial assistance has been made available in the form of contributions to three International Decommissioning Support Funds administered by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Union is concerned about the possible safety consequences from decommissioning the old nuclear power plants in new Member States and by the possible inadequate management of the radioactive waste they generate .
The operations involved are generally exorbitant .
This is why it is vital for the financial resources allocated by the EU to be managed properly and as transparently as possible , as well as adequate external supervision provided to ensure fair competition on the energy market .
At the same time , the Union must constantly promote the development of alternative energy resources which have low emissions and are competitive , in order to remedy the adverse economic and social consequences arising from the process of decommissioning old nuclear power plants .
Since 2007 , three nuclear power plants in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria have been decommissioned with substantial financial support from the EU .
In light of the delays and of the general mismanagement , Parliament is calling for the Commission to put together a coordination team to oversee planning and scheduling , review the use of the funds allocated to date and decide whether EU aid will still be required after 2013 .
Parliament has also demanded that the European Court of Auditors draft a special report on these three decommissioning programmes by the end of the year , in order to establish whether the money spent has truly helped to improve safety .
Faced with the budgetary restrictions affecting all countries , Parliament will only agree to extend its assistance if EU funds have really served to improve the security of energy supply , modernise infrastructure and develop sustainable energy projects .
Following the nuclear disaster in Japan , the EU is conscious of the extent of its responsibility and that it cannot afford to neglect the safety of its nuclear facilities .
in writing . - ( CS ) The report on the effectiveness of EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in the new Member States presents a summary of EU funding for the disconnection and dismantling of the nuclear plants at Ignalina in Lithuania , Bohunice in Slovakia and Kozloduj in Bulgaria .
Within the framework of EU accession talks , Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria undertook to close and decommission these nuclear plants which , under the G7 negotiations , could not be modernised at a financially acceptable cost , and in which it was impossible to secure the minimum safety standards .
The EU undertook to fund the closure and decommissioning , and it is delivering the financial framework .
I welcome the fact that the EU is able to support such activities .
The decommissioning of old and unsafe nuclear power plants in Europe is essential for sustaining the life and health of European citizens .
I hope that the oldest nuclear plants in France will also be shut down and decommissioned in a similar way .
Germany decided to take a similar step immediately after the disaster in Japan .
I will vote for the adoption of the report , as it is necessary to complete the process of closing and decommissioning the Ignalina , Bohunice a Kozloduj plants , with the appropriate funding from the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report on EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in the new Member States .
I believe that the EU should support the closure of these facilities and investment in alternative energy projects , in order to guarantee the safety and protect the health of the European public , to reduce energy dependency , and to minimise potential social costs .
in writing . - ( PT ) Prior to their accession , the rules regarding nuclear energy and radioactive waste in place in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe were less stringent than the rules applicable in the EU at the time .
In addition , some of these countries continued to operate old , Soviet-manufactured reactors that could not be adapted to the minimum required safety standards at an economically acceptable cost .
For this reason , on accession , Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria undertook to decommission reactors not considered to meet the standards .
The intervention and financial assistance of the EU was required for this , which is due to continue until 2013 .
Following the tragic events in Japan , I believe there is an urgent need to complete all the programmes for closing and decommissioning nuclear plants in Central and Eastern Europe whose operations do not comply with European safety standards .
in writing . - ( PT ) Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria have fulfilled their obligations regarding the timely closure of the respective units in three nuclear power plants ( NPPs ) .
Unit 1 at the Ignalina NPP was closed on 31 December 2004 , and Unit 2 on 31 December 2009 .
Unit 1 of the V1 NPP in Bohunice was closed on 31 December 2006 , and Unit 2 on 31 December 2008 .
Units 1 and 2 of the Kozloduy NPP were closed on 31 December 2002 and Units 3 and 4 on 31 December 2006 .
There is legal justification for the granting of financial assistance , with the amounts for this being set annually by Commission decision based on individual annual combined programming documents , permitting control over the development and financing of the approved projects .
The purpose of the EU assistance is to support these three Member States in coping with the financial and economical burden caused by early fixed closure dates , and to cover the cost of many important decommissioning activities , invest in energy projects with the aim of reducing energy dependency and help to mitigate the social impact of the decommissioning of the power plants .
We know that the average age of reactors in operation in nuclear plants in nearly half of the Member States of the European Union is relatively high , which has created the need to decommission some of these reactors for reasons of safety , and of defending and safeguarding public health and the environment .
In the case of the new Member States , faced with the requirement to decommission a number of units , it seems only right to us that they can expect EU support to properly and safely complete the decommissioning processes .
These processes should include necessary maintenance and surveillance following shutdown , waste treatment , waste and spent fuel storage and decontamination , the environmental upgrading of facilities , and support for replacing the production capacity of shut-down plants , paying particular attention to environmental sustainability and energy efficiency .
Finally , it should be noted that the social consequences of these processes also need to be taken into account , guaranteeing - in addition to all safety conditions , before , during and after decommissioning - that workers ' jobs and other rights will be safeguarded .
in writing . - Paragraph 7 of the Marinescu report notes that the decommissioning of certain nuclear power stations in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria ' should be assigned the highest priority in the interests of the safety and health of all the people of Europe ' .
I fully agree with that statement but would go further : a complete move away from nuclear power in all Member States would be in the interests of the safety and health of our people .
in writing . - ( LT ) As you know , Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria operated old soviet design nuclear reactors which the international community concluded could not be upgraded to meet the minimum required safety standards at an economically acceptable cost .
In recognition of the fact that the early closure represented an exceptional financial burden , and as an act of solidarity , the European Union committed itself to provide adequate additional financial assistance for the decommissioning of these reactor units until the end of 2013 .
However , there is concern that key waste infrastructure management projects ( spent fuel storage and waste repository project ) have experienced serious delays .
Available slack in the system is almost exhausted and delays may start to impinge upon the critical path for the whole decommissioning plan , with a commensurate increase in cost .
The Commission should report on the results of the reassessment of the project timeline .
A large portion of the funds was allocated to energy projects , but considerable financing is still required for decommissioning and national funds are not sufficient to cover this : the State Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant Decommissioning Fund has failed to accumulate sufficient funds .
The technical costs of decommissioning alone range from EUR 987 million to EUR 1 300 million .
The EU Member States must take appropriate measures in this respect .
Furthermore , as far as nuclear safety is concerned , we must discuss the new nuclear power plants with nuclear reactors that are planned on the EU 's borders , in Russia and Belarus .
These may represent a new challenge for the EU that could in future pose a real threat to the health of our people and our environment .
in writing . - ( DE ) Nuclear reactors in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria cannot be modernised at an economically viable cost to ensure that they meet the required minimum safety standards .
As part of their accession negotiations , these three countries have undertaken to shut down and decommission the nuclear reactors within an agreed timetable .
In order to press ahead with an efficient shutdown , we need a clear financial framework and controls for the correct use of the funds provided .
I support Mr Marinescu 's report because the safety of Europe 's citizens must be our top priority .
in writing . - ( IT ) The subject of the efficiency and efficacy of the EU 's financing of projects to decommission nuclear power stations in the new Member States is relevant now more than ever .
The recent events in Japan have made safety concerns more pressing than ever before .
The report by Mr Marinescu examines , more specifically , the provision of adequate financial resources to guarantee the decommissioning of nuclear power stations in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria .
Indeed , on their entry to the European family , these states assumed responsibility for decommissioning the nuclear power plants on their territories .
The EU is committed to providing sufficient financial support to meet these obligations .
In fact , I believe that the European Union must propose decisive action on certain subjects that its citizens hold close to their hearts , including that of the safety of nuclear power plants .
When Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria joined the European Union , a shutdown and decommissioning plan was drawn up for a number of old nuclear power plants failing to meet European standards .
Thanks to the release of very substantial appropriations , which will total EUR 2 848 million by the end of 2013 , it has been possible to shut down all of those plants and to ensure a partial conversion to other energy sources in those Member States .
However , a number of the commitments made do not seem to have been honoured , and one is entitled to wonder about the use of the allocated funds .
That is why I voted in favour of this European Parliament resolution .
Highlighting the almost non-existent progress in decommissioning , despite this being the main reason for the programme , the resolution calls on the Commission to implement this assistance more effectively , by producing an annual progress report , for example .
To this end , the Commission could build on the audit currently being carried out by the European Court of Auditors .
It should also put together a team of coordinators and experts to cover all three projects , which , curiously enough , it has still not done .
in writing . - I voted for this report which deals with the three countries , Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria , that operated old soviet design nuclear reactors which the international community , in line with the G7 multilateral programme of action adopted at the Munich G7 summit in 1992 , concluded could not be upgraded to meet the minimum required safety standards at an economically acceptable cost .
In the context of the negotiations for accession to the European Union , the three countries took the commitment to close and subsequently decommission these nuclear reactors on fixed dates .
In recognition of the fact that the early closure represented an exceptional financial burden and as act of solidarity , the European Union committed itself to provide adequate additional financial assistance for decommissioning these reactor units until the end of 2013 .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report is on EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in the new Member States .
These plants represent a danger to public health and to the ecosystem , not only in their country of origin , but also throughout Europe and the world .
With regard to the subject matter of the report , I voted in favour of contributing to the decommissioning of these old plants .
However , I believe that EU nuclear policy should go further .
Given the serious risks connected with nuclear power that have been well known for a long time , and the nuclear disaster currently being experienced in Japan , I call for the immediate establishment of a European plan for abandoning this type of energy .
I also believe that the EU should immediately suspend funding and support for new nuclear plants .
This report deals with the decommissioning of nuclear power plants that have fallen into disrepair and present an immediate threat to the health of all EU citizens .
It only partially calls into question the so-called ' energy ' component of the EU financial assistance allocated to this decommissioning programme .
This House must clearly condemn this financing of new nuclear power plants .
It is not doing so , and nor is it demanding the abandonment of nuclear power , necessary though it is .
With the Fukushima disaster having happened only a few days ago , this is shamefully short-sighted .
I call for the immediate implementation of a European plan to phase out nuclear power .
I voted in favour , with particular reference to the financing of the decommissioning of the nuclear power plants covered by this report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Nuclear safety is a concern for everyone in Europe .
The recent accident in Japan has highlighted the risks inherent to nuclear plants .
Eastern European states seeking to become part of the EU have nuclear plants using Soviet technology that have been operational for many years and are reaching the end of their lifespans .
Given the substantial cost of decommissioning these structures , it is only natural for the EU to support these countries in their efforts toward this decommissioning , so that no nuclear accident will occur in European territory , with consequences that are , unfortunately , well known to all of us .
I voted for this report on the efficiency and effectiveness of EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in the new Member States , because it notes that the decommissioning of the nuclear power plants concerned should be assigned the highest priority in the interests of the safety and health of all the people of Europe , and because it expresses fear that a lack of financial resources for decommissioning measures will delay the decommissioning of nuclear power plants and threaten the environment and human health .
The Fukushima accident is proof that nuclear energy is uncontrollable in the event of a disaster , and that its management cannot be in private hands .
We therefore urgently require a moratorium so that no further nuclear plants will be built , and we need to establish a timetable for closing the 143 plants that currently exist in Europe .
The EU must move toward a future free of nuclear plants and based on renewable energy sources .
in writing . - The resolution assesses plans to decommission out-of-date nuclear stations in three EU countries : Ignalina in Lithuania , Bohunice in Slovakia , Kozloduy in Bulgaria .
The resolution also estimates expenditure and delays in possible funding of energy projects which are not related to decommissioning .
' Possible funding ' is well said .
It is necessary to define clearly and specifically exactly how powerful energy sources will be substituted , where and when new electric stations will be constructed by our financial means .
I voted ' for ' because I understand the hazard of nuclear stations , but what is the sense in decommissioning Ignalina while other nuclear stations have not yet been built in the European Union ?
Maybe it is better to carry out reconstruction works ?
in writing . - ( DE ) Upgrades to some nuclear reactors in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria to ensure that they meet the required minimum safety standard are either impossible or come at an economically unreasonable cost .
Under the terms of EU accession negotiations , these Central and Eastern European States were provided with funding to help with the decommissioning of outdated reactors .
Around EUR 1 300 million had been paid out to Lithuania ( Ignalina ) , Slovakia ( Bohunice V1 ) and Bulgaria ( Kozloduy ) up to 2009 .
The EU is committed to further payments until the end of 2013 .
During the Russian-Ukrainian gas crisis , Slovakia considered reactivating the decommissioned Bohunice power plant in order to make up for the energy deficit caused by the lack of gas supplies from Russia .
Japan has shown us how easily a nuclear power plant can get out of control .
This makes it all the more important that outdated reactors should be shut down , while at the same time building up alternative sources of energy to prevent reactivation by the back door .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( RO ) There is absolutely no question that in the interest of the safety and health of all European citizens , the EU and Member States must give top priority to the decommissioning of the relevant nuclear power plants in the new Member States .
However , just as much attention should also be focused on eliminating the dangers in the immediate vicinity of the European Union .
On this point , I am highlighting the urgent need to identify and mobilise the funds required to build a new sarcophagus on top of the Chernobyl power plant reactor which exploded in 1986 .
I agreed with this resolution on the efficiency and effectiveness of EU funding in the area of decommissioning nuclear power plants in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria .
Above all , we must strive to ensure that all decommissioning work is carried out in time while properly implementing all the necessary safety measures and eliminating even minimal risks to human health and the environment .
If we are committed to decommissioning Ignalina and other nuclear power plants , all financial resources allocated to this process must be used as intended following the principle of transparency and efficiency .
National authorities must finalise detailed decommissioning plans as a matter of urgency .
I believe that the results of the audit carried out by the European Court of Auditors will reveal the objectives of the use of the funds and their effectiveness .
We must make every effort to ensure that dismantling activities and management of decommissioning waste will have started by 2013 .
I believe that it is advisable to require the Commission to present the European Parliament with a detailed financing plan and identify responsibility for the use of European Union assistance .
Given the fact that state funds for the decommissioning of nuclear power plants have not accumulated a sufficient amount , it would be advisable for the strategies and plans drawn up to include new actions and provide for additional EU funds accordingly .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of the text on EU funding for the decommissioning of nuclear power stations in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria because , in light of recent events following the earthquake and nuclear crisis in Japan , I believe it is fundamental and crucial that the European Union adopts a policy of safety checks on nuclear reactors which will remove any degree of risk .
Old Soviet-design nuclear reactors were active in the territories of the countries in question , and these have proved technically impossible to modernise to meet currently required international safety standards .
Funding provided by the EU is consistent with the economic burden borne by these countries in order to close the nuclear power stations .
in writing . - ( PT ) As part of the EU accession negotiations , Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria negotiated support for the decommissioning of old nuclear reactors of Soviet design that , in the opinion of the international community and in line with the 1992 Munich G7 summit , could not be adapted to minimum required safety standards at an economically acceptable cost .
In the context of the accession negotiations , the three countries undertook to close and subsequently decommission these reactors on fixed dates .
Recognising that early closure represented an exceptional financial burden , and in solidarity , the European Union undertook to provide adequate additional financial assistance for the decommissioning of these reactors up to the end of 2013 .
The assistance programme has been subject to regular audits and assessments .
The European Court of Auditors ( ECA ) is currently carrying out audits of the results of the three programmes , and a report is expected in autumn 2011 .
It can already be concluded that synergies could have been created between the three projects to make the EU action more efficient and effective .
I voted in favour of this report , from which I would stress the Commission 's recommendation for harmonising the rules on funding the decommissioning of nuclear reactors .
in writing . - ( IT ) The European Parliament 's motion for a resolution on the efficiency and efficacy of the EU 's financing for the decommissioning of nuclear power stations in the new Member States , as presented on 14 March 2011 , aims to ascertain what stages have been reached in the dismantling of obsolete nuclear power stations in Lithuania , Bulgaria and Slovakia , which since 1999 have benefited from financial assistance from the EU for this project .
The safety of energy supply is one of the fundamental priorities in the EU 's energy strategy .
According to current forecasts , the delays experienced by the programmes to date will not prevent the start of the processes of dismantlement and management of nuclear waste nor will it affect works to be carried out by power station personnel by 2013 .
Nonetheless , it remains a serious concern that the decommissioning plans have yet to be finalised , and that efforts will have to be made to improving the management of financial resources as well as coordination between the national authorities of the relevant Member States .
For these reasons , I am voting in favour of the motion for a resolution .
in writing . - The three countries , Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria , operated old soviet-design nuclear reactors that the international community , in line with the G7 multilateral programme of action adopted at the Munich G7 summit in 1992 , concluded could not be upgraded to meet the minimum required safety standards at an economically acceptable cost .
In the context of the negotiations for accession to the European Union , the three countries took the commitment to close and subsequently decommission these nuclear reactors on fixed dates .
In recognition of the fact that the early closure represented an exceptional financial burden and as act of solidarity , the European Union committed itself to provide adequate additional financial assistance for decommissioning these reactor units until the end of 2013 .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted in favour of this report because I consider it of prime importance for us to continue to closely monitor the decommissioning phase of nuclear power plants in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria where , at the moment of their entry into the European Union , old Soviet-design nuclear reactors were still in operation , which have proved impossible to upgrade to more recent safety standards at a sustainable cost .
After the recent disaster in Japan , falling behind with these procedures is no longer possible , for the sake of the safety of all citizens in Europe and elsewhere , and moreover the exceptional financial burden associated with the decommissioning process can no longer be used as an excuse for potential delay .
For this reason , the European Union is committed to supplying adequate financial assistance to decommission these reactors before the end of 2013 .
In the interests of the entire European Union , no further delay can be tolerated and should be immediately denounced on all the most relevant occasions .
in writing . - ( IT ) Following the nuclear disaster caused by the power plant in Japan , which was also related to a failure to adapt to current safety standards , we can say we have made an excellent choice when , during accession negotiations , dates were set for the definitive shut-down of three old Soviet-design nuclear power plants in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria .
The date for the definitive shut-down and subsequent safe maintenance was set at 2013 , with a cost to the European Union of almost EUR 3 billion .
Following delays and cost increases linked to the securing of the three power plants , the report invites the Commission to exercise greater supervision , to establish what the current state of play is and the expected timeframe for the completion of different phases of the decommissioning process according to the original timetable .
in writing . - ( NL ) Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria had old , Soviet-period nuclear plants that the international community decided could not be upgraded to meet minimum safety requirements for an economically reasonable cost .
The accession negotiations were used to get the three nuclear power plants closed by a set date and subsequently dismantled .
2.7 billion euro was set aside for this over the 1999-2013 period .
At the end of 2009 , EUR 1.8 billion of this had already been allocated .
Despite this , there have been considerable delays in the implementation of the dismantlement programmes .
The European Parliament fears that these delays will lead to risks for the environment and human health .
I am satisfied with this report , not least because this House backed my amendments , which were tabled in the Committee on Budgetary Control and called for the funds to be managed and their resources to be used with absolute transparency .
The European Parliament also adopted my proposal to have the Commission report annually to Parliament and inform us of whether its forecasts that the resources set aside will be absorbed over the next three years prove accurate .
This report forms the basis for very close monitoring of this process and that is a positive thing from a wide variety of points of view .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as I support the gradual decommissioning of nuclear power plants .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of this report .
The dismantling of the plants in Ignalina , Bohunice and Kozloduy is taking too long and greater commitment should be required from the national operators .
It is urgently necessary for all Member States also to urge common standards for the dismantling of plants .
Clear areas of responsibility must be defined .
In their EU accession negotiations , the three countries , namely Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria , declared their willingness to remove these three unsafe nuclear power plants from the network .
in writing . - ( LT ) The tragic events that occurred last month in Japan and concern over the safety of the Fukushima power plant have led to much discussion of nuclear power plants .
It is very important for these discussions to take place - many Lithuanians remember the Chernobyl tragedy only too well .
The closure of Lithuania 's Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant was one of the conditions for EU membership , but this has been very painful .
The EU provided Lithuania with EUR 837 million of assistance to eliminate the consequences of the closure of the nuclear power plant over the period 2007-2013 .
However , it is not enough to simply receive the financing from the EU allocated for the closure of the reactor .
Safe decommissioning is a long road and the EU must support Lithuania at every step of the way .
This should include comprehensive support - the management of radioactive waste and dangerous waste .
As the rapporteur states , comprehensive EU support is important for reducing the economic and social consequences of the closure of Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant .
The closure of the nuclear power plant made many Lithuanians redundant and damaged our economy .
The EU must provide more assistance for projects in the energy sector in order to mitigate the economic consequences of the closure of Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant .
This might include promoting the renewal of measures to increase energy output and energy efficiency .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the report on the decommissioning of the three nuclear reactors in Lithuania , Slovakia and Bulgaria .
Because these nuclear reactors do not meet even the minimum safety standards , their dismantling was one of the conditions agreed to by the three countries during accession negotiations and the European Union undertook to cover part of the dismantling costs .
In this context , it is particularly good news to know that the closure of the Ignalina plant in Lithuania means that the country 's only nuclear power plant has been taken offline .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created in 2006 in order to provide additional assistance for workers affected by the consequences of significant changes in the structure of international trade and to assist in their reintegration into the labour market .
Since 1 May 2009 , the remit of the EGF has been expanded to include support for workers made redundant as a direct consequence of economic , financial and social crises .
At this time when we are facing this severe crisis , one of the principal consequences of which is an increase in unemployment , the EU should use all the means at its disposal to react , particularly as regards support to be provided for those who are facing the day-to-day reality of unemployment .
That is why I voted for this report relating to the mobilisation of the EGF in favour of the Czech Republic , with the objective of supporting workers made redundant from Unilever ČR spol.s r.o.
The aid includes 460 of the 664 workers made redundant by the company Unilever ČR , who were employed in the retail sector : 52.4 % of those affected are women , 13 % are older than 54 years and 9.1 % younger than 24 years .
It should be stressed that the measures that will aid with the training of the redundant workers will be co-financed by the company , which is not ducking its responsibilities , and will be put into practice by contractors or companies working on its behalf .
in writing . - ( CS ) It is a success of the European Parliament that the 2011 budget allocates for the first time payment resources amounting to EUR 47 608 950 in the budget item for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
The EGF was created as a separate specific instrument with its own targets and deadlines , and it therefore deserves its own dedicated resources , thus avoiding transfers from other budget items , which happened in the past and which might frustrate the achievement of various political objectives .
In my opinion , the EGF has proved its worth , and my only concern is that the new Member States have not made greater use of it .
The impression may ultimately arise that the aim of the EGF is for the old Member States to get the EU budgetary resources they were formerly used to within the framework of , for example , the cohesion policy .
In my opinion , the first Czech request in history for a grant from the EGF is the first swallow , after which others will follow , because Czech industry too has been hit by globalisation and the worldwide financial crisis , and Czech workers who have been laid off deserve European assistance in their efforts to succeed in a challenging labour market .
in writing . - ( CS ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was established in 2006 as a flexible instrument for the rapid provision of one-off , time-limited individual support to help workers laid off as a result of globalisation or the financial and economic crisis .
This marks the first release of resources from the fund for the Czech Republic since the eruption of the global economic and financial crisis , and it is specifically for mitigating the consequences of the lay-off of 634 workers of the Unilever company , which has shut down a factory in the municipality of Nelahozeves .
In view of the fact that 52.4 % of those laid off are women , and more than 13 % of the workers laid off are over 54 years old , I consider the release of resources for the Czech Republic to be very proper , and I therefore voted in favour of the report .
I am pleased with the work carried out on the basis of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , namely in supporting workers affected by changes in world trade .
In the same way , I support the decision on the mobilisation of the EGF in favour of the Czech Republic , for the benefit of workers in the company Unilever , which has seen more than 500 unexpected redundancies as a result of the world economic and financial crisis .
This decision is therefore of great importance , not only for the workers and their families , but for the district of Melník , where the Unilever facilities are situated , the economy of which is largely dependent on the food processing industry , and the chemical and energy industries .
I voted in favour of this report and of the amendment calling for a review of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
This is because I regret that the EGF as it stands does not require an investigation into the financial health , possible tax evasion or state aid situation of multinational companies whose restructuring justifies the intervention of the EGF .
I believe that this ought to be addressed in the forthcoming revision of the EGF Regulation without compromising redundant workers ' access to the EGF .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen again this time to support the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund - this time to help a total of around 1 200 people who have lost their jobs in Poland and the Czech Republic - because Europe is still suffering the effects of the economic crisis and exceptional times require exceptional measures .
However , we believe that in future we should instead use instruments that already exist - in particular the European Social Fund - in order to increase the employability of those who have been given notice or have been made redundant .
There will probably be no need for the Globalisation Adjustment Fund in the next budgetary period .
in writing . - ( PT ) The request relates to 634 redundancies from the company Unilever ČR , which operates in the retail sector in the Czech region of Střední Čechy .
As with this year 's first request relating to the Polish region of Podkarpackie , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has made a favourable assessment of this process 's compliance with the eligibility criteria .
I cannot fail to note with regret the spread of redundancies throughout the Union , indicating that a great deal still needs to be done to reverse the cycle of crisis in which we are mired .
I support the Commission 's proposal to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , and hope that the redundant workers will be able to find new jobs as quickly as possible .
This report is on a draft decision of the European Parliament and Council on the mobilisation of EUR 323 820 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , to support the reintegration of Czech workers made redundant as a result of the current economic and financial crisis .
This application , the second to be approved under the 2011 EU Budget , was submitted to the Commission on 24 March 2010 and concerns 634 workers from the company Unilever ČR , in the Střední Čechy region , who were working in the retail sector .
Given that this involves a specific budgetary instrument , and that the amount requested is legally acceptable and complies with the provisions of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European Parliament , the Council and the European Commission , namely point 28 , I am voting in favour of this proposal , and hope that it contributes to reducing the economic difficulties of this region 's inhabitants , and to relaunching the local economy .
Another mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , this time to support workers made redundant from a factory owned by the multinational Unilever in the Czech Republic .
As on other occasions , we voted in favour .
Nevertheless , in addition to the reservations that we always express in these situations , there are particular aspects of this process that need to be stressed .
The European Commission has limited itself to stating that Unilever did not receive any aid from state or EU funds to open the factory in the Czech Republic , before or after its accession to the EU .
However , the Commission has not provided information , as it should have done and it was asked to do , on what is happening regarding the group 's other factories , arguing that it is not obliged to do so under the EGF Regulation .
In addition to what has taken place in the specific case of the Czech Republic , it would be interesting to find out about and assess the Unilever group 's behaviour at European level .
We therefore regret the lack of information relating to public assistance awarded to this group , as well as to multinational companies generally whose restructuring is the reason for EGF interventions .
This is another mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , which in this case seeks to benefit workers made redundant from the multinational Unilever 's Czech factory .
The European Commission 's position in this area has been very controversial , as it has restricted itself to stating that Unilever did not receive any state aid or financial support from European funds to open the factory in the Czech Republic , before or after its accession to the EU .
However , the Commission has not provided information , as it should have done and it was asked to do , on what is happening with other factories within the group , arguing that it is not obliged to do so under the EGF Regulation .
I therefore drew attention , during the debate in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , to the fact that that no information was available on what is happening with the Unilever group at European level , and I proposed that this issue be taken into account during the review of the Regulation , so that there can be an examination of the financial situation , including state aid , of the multinational companies whose restructuring is the reason for EGF interventions , without compromising access to the fund for redundant workers .
We therefore voted in favour of these proposals .
I voted in favour of this report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in support of the food industry employees ( UNILEVER ) in the Czech Republic .
I would stress , however , that there is an urgent need to review the regulation of that fund as soon as possible .
To this end , during the vote I co-signed and secured the adoption of an amendment specifying that it is detrimental for the regulation not to require an investigation into the financial health , possible tax evasion or state aid situation of multinationals which benefit from the intervention of the EGF .
At a time when the European Union is struggling to finance its objectives and is obliged to choose between policies of equally high priority , the Community budget cannot afford to fund the market entry and relocation strategies of large multinational companies whose sole intention is to increase their profits .
This must be taken into account in the forthcoming regulation , without prejudicing redundant workers by compromising their access to the EGF .
in writing . - ( CS ) I recommend voting in favour of the Barbara Matera report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) , within the framework of which the Czech Republic has submitted its first request for support .
I consider it important to emphasise the significance of this fund , which was created under Czech social democrat commissioner Vladimír Špidla .
The financial and economic earthquake that followed has deprived many people throughout Europe of their jobs .
The resources from the EGF fund only those measures which smooth the way to a new job for people who have been made redundant , who have signed up to the professional training programmes and acquired a skill answering to the needs of the labour market , or who have become self-employed .
Pursuant to Mrs Matera 's report , I can recapitulate that Unilever has fulfilled all of the criteria .
Unilever ČR had to close the plant in Nelahozeves due to the effects of the economic crisis , and the lay-offs affected most of the workers .
Unilever offered all of those leaving a comprehensive support programme for finding new employment , and the firm cooperated closely with the local employment office in managing the programme .
I can therefore agree with the release of resources based on the information in this report , and with the Commission 's proposal to pay the Czech Republic EUR 323 820 from the EGF .
in writing . - ( LT ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was established to provide additional support for workers made redundant as a result of major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation and to assist them with their reintegration into the labour market .
The scope of the EGF was broadened for applications submitted from 1 May 2009 to include support for workers made redundant as a direct result of the global financial and economic crisis .
The Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 allows the mobilisation of the EGF within the annual ceiling of EUR 500 million .
On 24 March 2010 , the Czech Republic submitted an application to mobilise the EGF in respect of cases concerning 634 redundancies ( all targeted for assistance ) in the enterprise Unilever ČR , spol.sr.o , operating in the retail sector ( food products ) , and supplemented it by additional information up to 20 September 2010 .
This application complies with the requirements for determining the financial contributions .
The Commission , therefore , proposes to mobilise an amount of EUR 323 820 .
I therefore agreed that the EGF should be mobilised in order to provide a financial contribution for the application submitted by the Czech Republic .
I also believe that other EU Member States should take more advantage of the opportunities offered by the EU funds .
in writing . - ( IT ) I voted for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) in favour of the Czech Republic , because I consider that instrument to be a valuable resource for the support of workers experiencing difficulty on account of the economic crisis .
Today 's vote concerned a request for support for 634 workers in the enterprise Unilever ČR , operating in the retail sector in the NUTS II region of Střední Čechy , amounting to a sum of EUR 323 820 financed by the EGF .
Finally , I should like to emphasise the importance of the EGF , which has been shown to be a useful and effective resource for combating unemployment resulting from globalisation and the economic crisis .
in writing . - I welcome this report which releases funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund to assist workers made redundant in the Czech Republic .
The application relates to 634 redundancies that occurred following the closure of a Unilever plant in Nelahozeves in the last quarter of 2009 .
Four hundred and sixty redundant workers will benefit from personalised measures supported by EGAF funding to a total of EUR 0.32 million .
I am abstaining out of consideration for the Czech workers who have been sacrificed on the altar of globalisation .
The precarious situation in which they find themselves is simply the consequence of the neoliberal EU policies which this fund endorses and supports .
I am voting against , because the handout granted to the victims of these policies is pitiful compared to the profits being reaped elsewhere .
The EU is an area of solidarity and the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) is part of that .
This aid is essential for helping the unemployed and victims of company relocations that occur in a globalised context .
More and more companies are relocating , taking advantage of low labour costs in a number of countries , particularly China and India , with damaging effects on countries that respect workers ' rights .
The EGF is intended to help workers who are victims of company relocations , and it is essential for facilitating access to new employment .
The EGF has been used by other EU countries in the past , so now it is appropriate to grant this aid to the Czech Republic , which has applied for assistance with regard to 634 redundancies - all potential beneficiaries of aid - from the company Unilever ČR , spol.sr.o , which operates in the retail sector in the NUTS II region of Střední Čechy .
Although I voted in favour of this proposal to provide assistance to the workers of Unilever in the Czech Republic , I believe that this is an analgesic and palliative measure for the consequences of the capitalist model , and that it does not represent any real progress in the fight against the root causes of the crisis .
I agree with the mobilisation of resources from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for people made redundant due to structural changes in trade patterns or as a direct consequence of the current economic and financial crisis .
I believe that the EGF can contribute to the ultimate goal of facilitating these workers ' reintegration into the labour market .
I also voted in favour because I am convinced that this assistance complements the redundancy aid provided for in all national legislation and collective agreements .
Therefore , this mobilisation of funds from the EGF cannot under any circumstances replace or avoid the legal responsibilities of governments and companies to employees who have been made redundant .
in writing . - ( DE ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was established to protect workers who have been made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
The Czech Republic has applied for support for 634 redundancies .
It is only right and proper that we should offer personal support to workers who have been made redundant as a result of globalisation and the economic crisis , aiding their reintegration into the labour market .
I therefore voted in favour of this .
in writing . - ( IT ) The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a fund allocated by the Union to provide economic support to certain sectors in difficulty within Members States or to those sectors which are expanding towards the average standards of the Union .
It is for this reason that I voted in favour of Mrs Matera 's report .
For 2011 the Union 's budget line for payments from funds of this sort has been increased by EUR 50 million , and therefore it is easier to provide funding to a wider range of sectors .
Specifically , these are the first requests for mobilisation in 2011 from the machinery production and manufacturing sector in the Czech Republic and Poland .
The fund ( of almost one million euros ) will go to support workers specialising in the trade and production of machinery .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) was created to provide additional support for workers affected by the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns .
On 15 February 2011 , the Commission adopted a new draft decision on mobilising the EGF in favour of the Czech Republic , with the aim of supporting the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant as a result of the world economic and financial crisis .
This is the second application to be examined under the 2011 budget , and it relates to the mobilisation of the total sum of EUR 323 820 .
The process refers to the redundancy of 594 workers - all potential beneficiaries of aid - from the company Unilever ČR , spol.sr. , which operates in the retail sector in the region of Střední , during the four-month reference period between 16 September 2009 and 16 January 2010 .
The Commission 's assessment concluded that there is a link between the redundancies and major structural changes in world trade patterns or the financial and economic crisis , and that these redundancies were unforeseen in nature .
The application meets all of the eligibility criteria set out in the EGF Regulation , which is why I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the fund .
The Czech Republic 's application for intervention by the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) relates to 634 redundancies that occurred during the period between 16 September 2009 and 16 January 2010 inclusive at the company Unilever ČR , spol.sr.o , which operates in the retail sector in the NUTS II region of Střední Čechy , meets all of the legally defined eligibility criteria .
Under Regulation ( EC ) No 546 / 2009 of the European Parliament and Council of 18 June 2009 , which amended Regulation ( EC ) No 1927 / 2006 of the European Parliament and Council of 20 December 2006 establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the EGF 's scope was temporarily expanded to cover its intervention in situations like this , in which , as a direct result of the world economic and financial crisis , there are ' at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises , in a NACE 2 division in one region or two contiguous regions at NUTS II level ' .
I therefore voted in favour of this resolution , in the hope that the mobilisation of the EGF would contribute to the effective reintegration of these workers into the labour market .
, in writing - ( CS ) I voted in favour of the report on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for the Czech Republic , and specifically for former employees of the Unilever company , and I am pleased the report has been adopted .
I am sorry that the British conservatives voted against it , and that the Czech chairman of the European Conservatives and Reformists could not get them to change their minds , even though this is the first time that the Czech Republic has made use of resources from this fund .
in writing . - As usually in this type of reports , the EP :
1 . Requests the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF ; appreciates in this sense the improved procedure put in place by the Commission , following the EP request for accelerating the release of grants , aimed at presenting to the budgetary authority the Commission 's assessment on the eligibility of an EGF application together with the proposal to mobilise the Fund ; hopes that further improvements in the procedure will be reached in the framework of the upcoming reviews of the Fund ;
2 . Recalls the institutions ' commitment to ensuring a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF , providing one-off , time-limited individual support geared to helping workers who have been made redundant as a result of globalisation and the financial and economic crisis ; points out the role that the EGF can play in the reintegration of workers made redundant into the labour market ; however , calls for an evaluation on the long-term integration of these workers into the labour market as a direct result of the EGF-funded measures .
in writing . - ( IT ) On 15 February 2011 , the Commission adopted a proposal for a decision on the mobilisation of the EGF in favour of the Czech Republic , in order to support the reintegration into the labour market of workers made redundant as a result of the global financial and economic crisis .
The question under examination refers to 634 redundancies , all targeted for assistance from the fund , made by the Unilever enterprise operating in the retail sector in the NUTS II region of Střední Čechy , during the four-month reference period of the four months from 16 September 2009 to 16 January 2010 .
My vote in favour of today 's resolution confirms the favourable opinion I have already expressed at the meeting of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
in writing . - ( CS ) The release of funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund will support the reintegration of 460 workers affected by the closure of the Unilever company in the municipality of Nelahozeves in Central Bohemia in the Czech Republic .
In view of the fact that this will involve significant help in solving the social impacts connected with the mass lay-off in this small community , I have voted for the adoption of this report .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which will provide funding for personalised measures to help workers who have been made redundant in the Czech Republic .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a controversial mechanism .
Officially , this fund enables the European Union to finance concrete actions to offset the effects of the crisis .
It is as much use as a plaster on a wooden leg .
However , this mechanism is used on an ad hoc basis and only in certain cases .
In reality it is being used to finance redundancy plans .
Today , the European Parliament has taken this hypocrisy even further by allocating a proportion of this fund to Unilever , which has just closed its Czech Republic factories and made over 600 people redundant , while its net profits have risen by 26 % to EUR ° 4.6 ° billion .
I therefore voted against this report , which raises a more general issue than that of the Unilever case .
How can national and European public bodies , given the employment crisis we are facing , continue to use public money to subsidise multinational companies which lay off employees despite being in profit , and which are therefore putting their shareholders ' interests before their employees ' ?
in writing . - ( DE ) I can only endorse the amendment tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament requiring that a company be evaluated as a whole when awarding funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
I have made such calls many times in the Committee on Budgets .
However , I found myself unable to vote in favour of the report as a whole .
Czech company Unilever ČR spol.sr.o , which is active in the retail sector , has made 634 workers redundant and has sought support measures for all those who have lost their jobs ( the individual measures are normally only needed for some of the redundant workforce to help reintegrate them into the labour market ) .
As emphasised in every report in which Parliament approves EGF funding , claims on the structural funds should not be used in place of measures for which businesses themselves are responsible according to the collective agreements .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on dual-use items and technology , meaning goods which can be used for both civil and military purposes .
Controlling the export of dual-use goods is a key for the non-proliferation of arms , including weapons of mass destruction ( WMD ) .
It is therefore very important to ensure that the EU 's Dual-Use Regime becomes more democratic and transparent , while at the same time ensuring that it is sufficiently strict .
Currently , the requirements applied for the export of dual-use items and technology vary in stringency .
I believe that the EU should aim to apply the strictest export regimes on every item , and this should be applicable to all of its Member States .
The Commission must establish an effective system in this area , which would facilitate the collection of credible data on the end use of the dual-use items exported from the Union .
in writing . - ( LT ) Controlling the export of dual-use goods ( for civil and military purposes ) is a key for the non-proliferation of arms , including weapons of mass destruction ( WMD ) .
For 15 years the EU has been tightening control of the export of dual-use goods , relying on preventive measures such as the imposition of export licensing requirements and customs registration procedures .
However , given constant technological changes and new threats , it is necessary to regularly update lists of controlled dual-use items that reflect those of the main international export control regimes .
The main task of these international export control regimes is to update the lists of goods to be controlled .
To date , these lists have been quasi-automatically transposed into EU legislation without any participation by the European Parliament , but with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament 's approval is now required .
I agreed with this report and the European Parliament 's proposals that strive to ensure more democratic and transparent EU control regimes for dual-use goods and a greater role for the Commission in assessing the implementation of this regulation in the Member States .
I voted for this report because the control of exports of dual-use items is a key factor in the non-proliferation of weapons , especially weapons of mass destruction .
Given the large volume of cross-border trade in the European Union , the enforcement of controls on EU exports of dual-use items is based on preventive measures , such as imposing export licensing requirements and customs registration procedures .
Export controls have a considerable impact on EU trade policy as they can affect more than 10 % of all EU exports .
in writing . - ( IT ) Export controls of dual-use items , meaning goods which can be used for both civil and military purposes , have been the subject of EU-level actions for around 15 years .
These controls have a high impact on European trade policy , since they can affect over 10 % of all EU exports .
In my opinion , the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and its clarification of the EU 's competencies in the area of international trade provide an invaluable opportunity to reaffirm the role of the Union and the European Parliament 's responsibility within the EU 's institutional framework for decision making .
The main export control tool is Regulation ( CE ) No 428 / 2009 , which introduced a number of significant changes to the scope of dual-use export controls -use items in the European Union .
I believe , specifically , that the EU regime relating to dual-use items should be organised in a more transparent way .
To this end , I agree with the rapporteur 's belief that full European Parliament involvement , through the application of the Treaty of Lisbon 's obligations and its joint interpretation agreed by Parliament and the Commission within the new Framework Agreement , would be crucial .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr Leichtfried 's report deals in a positive way with the important subject of the control of EU exports of dual-use items , meaning goods which can be used for both civil and military purposes .
Control over this kind of export , which affects more than 10 % of all EU exports , has proved to be of the utmost importance for the non-proliferation of armaments .
I am voting in favour of the report because it aims to introduce more transparent control procedures for the aforementioned exports .
I voted for the proposal for amending the regulation as I think that the new points introduced will result in making the EU 's dual-use regime more transparent and democratic .
This means that the European Parliament will be able to participate in updating the lists featuring the products to be controlled by the international regimes .
These lists are currently transposed almost automatically into EU legislation without Parliament having any say .
Furthermore , it is the Dual-Use Coordination Group 's job to submit an annual report to Parliament so that the latter is fully informed about the progress on controlling products and technologies which can be used for both civil and military purposes .
Dual-use items are products which are liable to have both civil and military uses , such as chemical products and technical construction material , as well as software and other new technologies .
It is often difficult to predict the true purpose of exported products ; therefore exporters must be made aware of their responsibilities and be obliged to verify the true purpose of the various products they sell abroad .
Even though several control and information mechanisms already exist , we have called for heightened security in this area .
That is why we voted in favour of the amendments calling for prior notification of exports , stricter controls and greater transparency .
This will provide an additional safeguard to prevent misuse and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
Products , including software and technologies , that can be used for both civil and military purposes are considered dual-use technology products .
This dual use means particular care is needed with regard to their export , to prevent the proliferation of weapons and , above all , of weapons of mass destruction .
As is clear to any analyst , it is essential for international security that there be control of these products , and that the regulations establishing the relevant control mechanisms be constantly updated in line with technological developments .
It is also clear that , in states under the rule of law , these controls should be transparent and democratic , as is the Commission 's intention .
Finally , I believe , as stated in the Opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , that the Commission needs to be sensitive to the fact that some EU Member States have more restrictive and stringent rules with regard to control of exports of dual-use products .
This is natural and , in my opinion , should be maintained .
This report is on the need to control the export and circulation of what are called dual-use products : that is , those that have not only a civil but also a military one .
Over the last few years , the European Union has been taking a number of measures to prevent these materials being used for the manufacture of weapons , particularly weapons of mass destruction .
The EU 's main instrument of control is Regulation ( EC ) No 428 / 2009 , of 5 May , which covers the sale and transportation of these materials , but which needs to be amended in order to prevent different approaches being taken in different Member States .
I therefore agree with the proposals included in this report , as they aim to reassure the European public with regard to the production and circulation of dual-use materials , and to make the current arrangements more transparent and democratic .
Export controls on dual-use products are the subject of measures at EU level .
The main instrument for controlling exports is Regulation ( EC ) No 428 / 2009 of 2009 .
This regulation expanded the scope of controls on sale and transportation .
Although there is an attempt in the report to introduce increased democratic controls and transparency , there are certain key issues preventing us from voting in favour of it .
Following its creation , the ' list of exporters , brokers and stakeholders that have been consulted ' is the responsibility of the Dual-Use Coordination Group , chaired by a representative of the Commission .
It will be this group that decides which countries may be traded with , removing this power from Member States , thus calling their sovereignty into question .
Another aspect is the inclusion of Israel on the list of destination countries for dual-use products .
Let us recall , for example , the joint research projects financed by the Seventh Framework Programme for Research , especially those that took place with the participation of Israel Aerospace Industries Ltd . , manufacturer of the unmanned aircraft used in the attack on the Gaza Strip in 2008 / 2009 , causing the deaths of dozens of people .
We voted in favour of returning this report to the relevant parliamentary committee , to enable negotiations with the Council to continue , on the basis of the legislative proposal with the amendments introduced by Parliament .
We know that the use of civil products and technologies for military purposes lacks an approach that is not tied up with controlling exports of what are known as dual-use products and related services .
Although this control of exports is important , and should be carried out in a judicious manner , without adversely affecting access by developing countries to products and technologies required for their development , there is a need to increase the transparency of the processes involved , and to open them up to democratic scrutiny .
We would emphasise that there is also a need for consistency in this area between other EU policies and the objectives of this Regulation .
The joint research projects financed by the Seventh Framework Programme for Research , especially those that took place with the participation of Israel Aerospace Industries Ltd . , manufacturer of the unmanned aircraft used in the attack on the Gaza Strip in 2008 / 2009 , causing the deaths of dozens of people , are well known .
in writing . - ( IT ) The EU 's new competencies in the area of international trade following the Treaty of Lisbon provide a good occasion for bringing greater transparency to the market for dual-use items .
The changes to this Regulation , which affect items which can be put to both military and civil use , will enable closer controls on this kind of item .
This is crucial in avoiding the proliferation of weapons .
Taking into account furthermore the procedure in committee , I confirm my support for my fellow Member .
in writing . - ( LT ) Chemical and radioactive materials , centrifuges , technical equipment , software and components are used not just for civil , but also military purposes .
In the wrong hands these goods may become torture equipment or weapons of mass destruction .
I voted in favour of this document , because it proposes improving the regime for the control of exports of dual-use items and technology , in other words , enhancing export checks on dual-use goods .
This document also extends the list of goods for which a licence must be obtained and export movement must be reported .
in writing . - ( DE ) Items and technology with civil and potential military uses should be subject to the same competitive conditions in all Member States .
The point is to find common and , above all , secure framework conditions that ensure safe usage .
This should prevent an artificial reduction in the sale prices of European exports , clearly strengthening European small and medium-sized businesses .
I voted in favour of the proposed amendment to the regulation because transparency and safety must be the top priority for such items and technology .
in writing . - I welcome this report .
Export controls of dual-use items , meaning goods which can be used for both civil and military purposes , have been the subject of EU-level actions for around 15 years .
Controlling the export of dual-use goods is a key for the non-proliferation of arms , including weapons of mass destruction .
Given the high volume of trade across the borders of the European Union , the enforcement of EU export controls on dual-use goods relies on preventive measures such as the imposition of export licensing requirements and customs registration procedures .
Export controls have a high impact on the EU 's trade policy as they can affect more than 10 % of all EU exports .
The main EU export control tool is the Dual-use Regulation ( EC ) No 428 / 2009 of 5 May 2009 , which entered into force on 27 August 2009 .
This new Regulation introduced a number of significant changes to the scope of dual-use export controls in the European Union .
These include the introduction of controls on brokering activities and transit with regard to dual-use items .
The Dual-use Regulation includes regularly updated lists of controlled dual-use items that reflect those of the main international export control regimes .
in writing . - ( CS ) Controlling the trade in dual-use goods is an important area , with both security and commercial aspects that would not be sufficiently effective and enforceable without the associated flow of shared information or flexible international cooperation .
In this context , I would also like to emphasise the role of the relevant monitoring bodies , for example customs authorities , which shoulder considerable responsibility for the direct monitoring of exports or transit of dual-use goods .
In my opinion , we should also assist these bodies , for example in the area of access to modern monitoring equipment , the acquisition of new expertise in the performance of monitoring procedures and , last but not least , through support for professional training and work exchange visits .
A sophisticated security policy should always include setting up the export regime for dual-use goods to a high standard , along with the application of all international commitments .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and its clarification of the EU 's competences in the area of international trade provide a good occasion to reaffirm the EU 's role in this area and the European Parliament 's role , power and responsibility for decision-making within the EU 's institutional framework .
The EU 's dual-use regime should be organised in a more transparent and democratic way .
Full European Parliament involvement , through the application of the Treaty of Lisbon 's obligations and its joint interpretation agreed by the European Parliament and the European Commission within the new framework agreement , would be crucial to achieving this objective .
in writing . - Dual-use items are products which can be used either for peaceful or for military purposes .
Control over the export of dual-use items is a key aspect of non-proliferation of arms .
Having regard to high volumes of trade across the EU border , application of EU control over exports of dual-use items is based on preventive measures .
Control of exports has a large impact on EU trade policy .
It would be nice if instruments of control do not become a means of fighting against competitors through business structures .
To this end , it is necessary to create a long list of dual-use items ; however it is a topic for another report .
I voted ' for ' .
in writing . - ( DE ) The export of dual-use items and technology is very carefully regulated within the EU .
This term particularly relates to items and technology that can also be put to military use .
In order to prevent abuses in the export sector , there are four types of export authorisations : the Community General Export Authorisations , National General Export Authorisations , Global Export Authorisations and Individual Export Authorisations .
Each of these applies within the EU .
In addition , there are also international export control regimes to which the EU subscribes and in which the Commission attempts to improve the standing of the EU .
These include the Australia Group , of which the Commission is a full member and which includes each of the 27 Member States and the US , Canada , Japan , South Korea and Australia , the Nuclear Suppliers Group , in which the Commission has observer status , and which includes the EU 27 , the US and Russia , the Wassenaar Arrangement , in which the Commission has no status , but which includes all EU Member States except Cyprus as full members , and the Missile Technology Control Regime , in which the Commission also has no status and of which only 19 Member States are full members .
I have voted accordingly , so as not to go against the principle of subsidiarity .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as in a limited way it takes a step in the direction of tackling the current lack of transparency in relation to export credits and in tackling the massive gap between the stated objectives of the EU and the reality of how export credits are used in the EU .
The EU likes to portray itself as a force for human rights and environmental protection .
The role of European ECAs demonstrates the hollowness of this claim .
These credits are regularly used to back projects and trade that are destructive to the environment and workers ' rights .
To achieve real trade justice in this area , these agencies , which support approximately 10 % of world trade , must be taken into democratic public ownership .
The books must be opened up so that the workers and those affected by them can see for the first time where the money has gone and workers ' control must be exercised on the operation of these agencies so that their massive resources are used for the benefit of working people , small farmers and the environment .
I voted in favour of this report , as I believe that the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and its clarification of the EU 's competences in the area of international trade provide a good occasion to reaffirm the EU 's role in this area and the European Parliament 's role , power and responsibility for decision-making within the EU 's institutional framework .
The EU 's dual-use regime should be organised in a more transparent and democratic way .
Full European Parliament involvement , through the application of the Treaty of Lisbon 's obligations and its joint interpretation agreed by the European Parliament and the European Commission within the new framework agreement , would be crucial to achieving this objective .
It is a recasting of Regulation ( EC ) No 1334 / 2000 in the light of the current international framework .
In fact , the widening of the scope of dual-use export controls is essential if these are to cover controls on transit and brokering , and the penalising of illicit brokering of dual-use items linked to , for example , a weapons of mass destruction programme .
in writing . - ( IT ) The proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1334 / 2000 setting up a Community regime for the control mechanism of exports of dual-use items and technology , as tabled on 7 February 2011 , aims to supply the Union with an efficient regime of preventive measures designed to prevent the proliferation of weapons , including weapons of mass destruction .
TheRegulation that is currently in force in this area ( ( EC ) No 428 / 2009 ) establishes a system of checks which allows the Union to comply fully with the commitments assumed in the context of the four international export control regimes to which the EU is a party .
In any case , the clarification of the EU 's competencies in the area of international trade introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon provides a good occasion to raise the profile and improve the image of the Union in an international context and the role , power and responsibility of the European Parliament within the EU 's institutional framework for decision making in the area of international trade .
These are my reasons for considering it opportune to make the necessary amendments to the Regulation in order to achieve these ends and I am therefore voting in favour of the proposal .
in writing . - In AFET / SEDE , as green MEP as rapporteur , we were very successful .
The AFET / SEDE opinion proposed to delete the Low Value Shipments CGEA because we were provided with good data proving that there is no positive correlation between a low price and a low security risk , an assumption on which the whole CGEA relied .
On the contrary , some very cheap dual use items might be of great risk if they get into the wrong hands .
We were also able to delete the part on ' Information Security ' of EU007 because among the possible destinations were some non-democratic countries .
We also managed to get a broad support in AFET / SEDE for strong wording on the need to respect human rights when in comes to the export of telecommunication equipment because interception technologies , digital data transfer devices for monitoring mobiles phones , etc. are part of this CGEA .
With regard to possible destinations of individual CGEAs we managed to exclude both Israel and India because of their unwillingness to become a State Party to the Non-proliferation Treaty ( NPT ) .
But the most contentious and important issue was the question of whether it is sufficient to control , notify and register after the export has taken place or prior to the export .
in writing . - ( IT ) The control of exports of dual-use items , that is goods which can be used for both civil and military purposes , has been the subject of EU-level actions for around 15 years .
This type of control is crucial in the fight against the proliferation of arms , including weapons of mass destruction .
Given the high volume of trade across the borders of the European Union , the enforcement of EU export controls on dual-use goods must rely on preventive measures such as the imposition of export licensing requirements and customs registration procedures .
The approval of this resolution represents a further step in this direction .
I voted in favour of this report , because the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon offers a good occasion to reaffirm Europe 's role and the power and responsibilities of the European Parliament within the EU 's institutional framework for decision making of this kind . The regime must be reorganised in a more transparent way , through the application of the obligations in the Treaty and its joint interpretation agreed by Parliament and the Commission within the new Framework Agreement .
in writing . - ( NL ) The control of exports of dual-use items - in other words goods that can be used for both civil and military purposes - is very important in relation to the non-proliferation of weapons .
The European Parliament 's position carries the achievements of the Treaty of Lisbon into EU legislation , and rightly so .
Parliament also reinforces democratic control and transparency and raises the profile of the EU in relation to international export control regimes .
It is also positive that the Commission is obliged to produce reports on the functioning of the Regulation , together with a comprehensive impact assessment .
However , the trickiest bone of contention between the Council , Parliament and the Commission in all this remains the question of when the control of notification and registration of the export takes place , whether before or after the actual export .
As far as I am concerned , it is crucial that this control should take place before the export is effected .
This is because , in practice , ex-post control will always result in us having to hunt around for the facts after the event .
Parliament has just decided to opt for ex-post controls .
In the end , I therefore voted against the final version of this report .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this resolution on officially supported export credits .
Export credits are an important instrument for supporting EU enterprises .
I agree with the opinion that support for medium and long-term export credits is a powerful tool which is not yet fully exploited in all Member States and needs to be encouraged .
Export credits can help to create jobs by securing financing for projects which otherwise would have more restricted access to capital due to their non-market character .
Nevertheless , it should be observed that currently there is insufficient transparency to find out what export credit agencies ( ECAs ) finance or have financed in the past .
The lack of transparency leads to huge cost and time overruns , and it also facilitates bribery and corruption .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur 's proposal to establish a requirement for the EU Member States to report to the Commission annually on the activities of their ECAs as regards risk calculations and the disclosure of off-balance sheet vehicles , and to make the notification of social and environmental risk calculations mandatory .
in writing . - ( LT ) Most industrialised countries , including all EU Member States , have at least one officially supported Export Credit Agency ( ECA ) , and these collectively account for the world 's largest source of official financing for private-sector projects .
The collective magnitude of the export credit guarantees provided in the period 2004-2009 by the ECAs of the EU Member States alone was in the range of EUR 468 billion .
ECAs facilitate legitimate trade where the private capital market fails .
They have a much higher risk-absorbing capacity than private actors , since they do not have to pay taxes and make profit , and hence have more lee-way to break even on an extended credit than private banks .
However , for the same reason ECAs are also potentially a massive distortion of trade , if their financing operations are not disciplined by common rules .
Although ECAs are an important instrument to support trade and investments of European companies , it is necessary to ensure that their operations are financially sound , and they do not need to turn to the tax payer for re-financing their operations .
I agreed with the report and the requirement to submit annual reports to the European Commission and the European Parliament , because currently there is very little data showing what ECAs finance or have financed in the past , and some national ECAs do not even report the overall balance of their annual operations regularly , which violates the principles of transparency .
in writing . - ( IT ) The aim of the European Commission 's proposal is to introduce the ' Arrangement on officially supported export credits ' as negotiated by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) into European legislation so as to ensure EU norms and transparency in the operations of national export credit agencies .
This measure , already a positive step in itself because it tackles corruption and the lack of transparency which results in huge cost and time overruns , is improved by the Jadot Report , which seeks to further improve transparency and justice by introducing the Arrangement agreed within the OECD into EU legislation .
Export credit agencies ( ECAs ) account for the world 's largest source of official financing for private-sector projects .
They are government agencies or quasi-official financial institutions that provide export credits , loans , insurance and investment guarantees for companies operating in high-risk areas abroad , including many developing countries .
It should be noted that financing of such major projects in developing countries represents several times the combined annual funding of all multilateral development banks .
ECAs are therefore instruments that are well placed to contribute to EU foreign policy objectives , in particular the alleviation of poverty and climate change .
I believe the improvements to the agreement in question to be positive , particularly with regard to greater transparency , and I believe it essential to state explicitly that ECAs should take into account and respect EU policies and objectives , not least values associated with the consolidation of democracy , respect for human rights and consistency with development policy .
While , on the one hand , ECAs facilitate trade , they could , on the other , cause it to be distorted in the absence of clear and transparent criteria and rules .
in writing . - ( IT ) Foreign trade is one of the most powerful political tools we have available in our dealings with third countries .
At least until it becomes necessary to decide otherwise , the EU has chosen not to have its own army and to adopt trade policy as its main negotiating tool in international relations , and in this respect it has not been without success .
Direct foreign investment in our businesses , furthermore , represents a source of development for third countries in which work is created and it is certainly worthwhile encouraging these links through export credit agencies .
What we can no longer allow , in an internal market with single customs duties , is that investment can be steered by individual Member States .
This does not belong on the path created by the EU that it tries to present to the rest of the world .
The transfer of all competencies relating to international trade from the level of the States to that of the Union is a further step in the establishment of a single industrial policy , with a view to a common economic policy and , on the horizon , further synergies between our States .
The activities of Export Credit Agencies will need to be better supervised at European level and conducted in a more transparent manner .
These agencies will be required to publish an annual activity report in order to verify whether the supported projects fulfil the European Union 's environmental , social and development objectives .
MEPs have called for fossil fuel subsidies to be phased out in order to encourage the ecological transition , in line with national and European commitments on combating climate change .
Through this vote , Parliament is reaffirming its desire to see the systematic application of financial transparency measures and measures to incorporate the climate change issue in all EU policies , including those in relation to trade and investments of European companies .
I voted in favour of the report on officially supported export credits , as I believe that officially supported export credit agencies need to be more transparent and report on their activities .
It is also important to ensure complete consistency with the objectives of Article 208 of the Treaty , which establishes the reduction and eradication of poverty as the main objectives of the Union 's development cooperation policy .
The Commission and Council are currently reviewing the legislative framework - called the ' Arrangement on officially supported export credits ' - to transfer it into EU law .
The purpose is to provide additional legal certainty for the export credit agencies ( ECAs ) of the Member States .
Export credits are effective instruments for supporting EU companies , as they are able to help with job creation and the implementation of projects that would otherwise have difficulties securing financing .
The fact that ever more applications are being received would suggest that the Member States need to introduce the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Arrangement quickly .
I agree with the Opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , as I believe that ' European level supervision of export credits should be introduced as an exception when a distortion of competition within the internal market occurs .
The principle of subsidiarity must be upheld . '
This report is on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of certain rules to the obtaining of export credits by officially supported companies .
In reality , the majority of Member States have export credit agencies ( ECAs ) , which play an essential role in supporting European trade and business investment , totalling EUR 468 billion in 2004-2009 .
This support comes under the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures ( ASCM ) - also called the Agreement - negotiated between the countries of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) , and it is an example of a public finance instrument with European Union involvement .
Given that these agencies essentially support environmentally harmful industrial activities , not least because of CO2 emissions , and that , according to the World Bank , they have an insignificant effect on poverty reduction , I agree with the rapporteur 's position that ECAs should contribute to EU policies and objectives , meaning there is no need for the OECD Agreement to be reviewed .
We believe there is a need for greater supervision and control of export credit agencies ( ECAs ) , with regard both to exports , and to investments and finance , as their lack of transparency causes immense harm by encouraging bribery and corruption .
ECAs are public instruments that are used a great deal by the EU to contribute to financing its international objectives , and economic and geostrategic interests , which cannot be separated from objectives of dominating and controlling regions and countries , leading to the creation of veritable neocolonial relationships .
Investments financed by ECAs frequently bring no benefit to the countries that are their supposed beneficiaries .
The drawing up of guidelines for export credits is aimed at getting around the announced end to direct aid within the framework of World Trade Organisation agreements , which is pressurising developing countries to accept the signing of the Doha Round .
The main objective of direct aid or credit continues to be the control of markets and natural resources , the exploitation of workers , and the use of products or investments to control the sovereignty of destination countries that are made possible by ECA financing .
There is a need for greater supervision and control of export credit agencies ( ECAs ) , with regard both to exports , and to investments and finance , as their lack of transparency causes immense harm by encouraging bribery and corruption .
However , ECAs are public instruments that are used a great deal by the EU to contribute to the financing of its international objectives , particularly with regard to climate change and the alleviation of poverty .
Sometimes it is used as a means of financing instances of veritable EU neocolonialism in so-called developing countries .
The drawing up of guidelines for export credits is aimed at getting around the announced end to direct aid within the framework of World Trade Organisation agreements , which is pressurising developing countries to accept the signing of the Doha Round and is contested by them .
The main objective of direct aid or credit continues to be the control of markets and natural resources , the exploitation of workers , and the use of products or investments to control the sovereignty of destination countries that are made possible by ECA financing .
It would be wrong if officially supported export credits failed to respect certain principles , in particular certain social ethics , and to comply with the guidelines on external and development aid policy .
Transparency regarding the use of these funds is therefore compulsory .
However , it is the external policy conducted by the Union that serves as a reference , and that policy has proved , especially in recent months , to be non-existent , inconsistent and divergent , to say the least .
The Union itself does not respect the principles that it lays down : when did we last see the Commission actually apply the social , human rights and environmental clauses that it scatters throughout its trade agreements ?
When has it ever objected to the European Investment Bank financing projects outside of Europe which create unfair competition for European businesses , or which are socially and environmentally questionable ?
Moreover , the aim of this report is the transposition into European law of an arrangement negotiated within the globalist and ultra-liberal organisation , the OECD .
That arrangement de facto permits European businesses to be handicapped in relation to their competitors , particularly those from China .
When it came to voting either for or against , we abstained .
in writing . - ( LT ) As is known , it is impossible to find out what export credit agencies ( ECAs ) finance or have financed in the past .
Some national ECAs do not even report the overall balance of their annual operations regularly .
Many others do not report disaggregated data of their sectoral lending or the geographical distribution .
This is in spite of transparency requirements in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Arrangement of 2005 , which all EU Member States adhere to , and which shall now be transferred into EU law .
The OECD Arrangement does not contain the requirements needed to guarantee the fair pricing of premiums since it entails no disciplines with regard to transparency and minimum standards in the application of social and environmental risk calculations .
There are proposals to tidy up transparency requirements on risk calculations , disclose off-balance sheet vehicles , make the notification of social and environmental risk calculations mandatory and to establish a requirement for the EU Member States to annually report to the Commission on the activities of their ECAs in these regards .
I therefore voted in favour of this document , because it will introduce more transparency and standards in the application of social and environmental risk calculations .
in writing . - ( LV ) I supported the resolution for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of certain guidelines in the field of officially supported export credits , because I consider that clear rules are needed for all European Union Member States on how to support exporting businesses .
Export credit guarantees are an important means of helping entrepreneurs to acquire new markets and create new jobs .
However , I did not support Amendment 22 , which imposes an extra burden on entrepreneurs and makes European businesses less competitive than entrepreneurs in other member states of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) .
In a time of crisis , European Union Member States must reduce the administrative burden on entrepreneurs , not create a new one .
In this field , the European Parliament must set an example , and not seek fresh reasons for imposing an extra burden on entrepreneurs .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
I view export credits as an important instrument for supporting EU enterprises .
In light of the increased demand for officially supported export credits , it is of the utmost importance that the newest OECD regulation of this instrument is introduced in Member States as soon as possible .
Support for medium- and long-term export credits is a powerful tool which is not yet fully exploited in all Member States and needs to be encouraged .
Export credits can help to create jobs by securing financing for projects which otherwise would have more restricted access to capital due to their non-market character .
I agree with the rapporteur , who notes that any new legislation in this field must avoid the creation of any new red tape or bureaucracy which would add to already existing costs .
European-level supervision of export credits should be introduced as an exception when a distortion of competition within the internal market occurs .
The principle of subsidiarity must be upheld .
This report calls for the granting of officially supported credits and guarantees for private sector exports to be supplemented by ' social and environmental impact assessments ' .
It also calls for the greenhouse gas emission reduction targets to remain unaffected by these projects .
That is a minimum .
I shall vote against the report , however , to express my bitter regret that the Committee on International Trade is not seeking to give itself the means to keep to social and environmental targets worthy of the name .
Free competition , the fight against protectionism and obstacles to the denunciation of agricultural export subsidies are some of the many absurdities endorsed by this text .
Export credit agencies ( ECAs ) have been playing an increasingly important role in supporting all types of investments , thus contributing to reducing the impact of the current economic and financial crisis by creating jobs , and by supporting the trade and investment of companies that would otherwise not be granted credit in the private sector .
ECAs have become the major source of public finance for developing countries .
A significant proportion of export credit financing projects in developing countries are concentrated in sectors such as transport , petroleum , gas and extractive industries , as well as in major infrastructure projects , such as large dams , for example .
However , it is important that ECAs ' activities be closely supervised , so as to prevent future problems .
in writing . - The EU is a participant in the Agreement on Guidelines for Officially Supported Export Credits concluded in the framework of the OECD .
It will be correct if the European Parliament adopts amendments to the proposal of the Commission intended to apply additional measures for transparency and accountability of reports in the European Union .
in writing . - ( DE ) Public and officially supported export credit agencies are important backers for private business projects in developing countries .
In these times of overstretched national budgets they are gaining increasing importance as sources of investment for European businesses , insofar as these are not required to refinance themselves with taxpayers ' money .
Because the risk assessment criteria for public export credit agencies are quite different from those when the loan comes from a private bank , competition can be distorted in international trade , as the Chinese example illustrates .
That is why a whole host of regulations exist , such as OECD and WTO agreements , which fix the deadlines for repayment and a minimum premium rate .
For the purposes of evaluation and in order to prevent abuse and to avoid refinancing from taxpayers ' money , specifications are required for greater transparency through an EU-wide obligation to publish annual reports , etc .
It is open to question whether the proposed measures will bring about greater transparency .
I have therefore abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of this report , as I agree with the rapporteur that export credit constitutes a powerful instrument for supporting EU companies .
Given the growing number of applications for export credit with official support , it is increasingly important that the most recent Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Agreement on this instrument be introduced by Member States as quickly as possible .
Medium- and long-term export credit is a valuable instrument which is not yet fully exploited in all Member States and needs to be encouraged , especially in a weakened economy like that of Portugal .
Export credit certainly acts as an engine for job creation , by securing financing for projects which otherwise would have more restricted access to capital .
Any legislation in this field must avoid the creation of any and all new administrative bureaucracy , which could add to already existing costs .
European-level supervision of export credits should only be introduced as an exception when some distortion of competition within the Internal Market could occur .
The principle of subsidiarity must be scrupulously upheld in this area .
in writing . - ( IT ) Export credit agencies ( ECAs ) represent the world 's largest source of official financing for private-sector projects .
However , they can also create a massive distortion of trade if their financing operations are not disciplined by common rules .
Therefore we should go ahead with a revision to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) agreement ( the Arrangement on officially supported export credits ) so that we can monitor more carefully the functioning of the European ECAs so as to ensure that their decisions are coherent with EU policies and objectives .
We also need to clarify the obligation of transparency in risk calculations and on the disclosure of off-balance-sheet vehicles .
In short , it is vital to establish a requirement for the EU Member States to report annually to the Commission on the activities of their ECAs in this regard .
In the light of the previous observations , and given that ECAs can be useful instruments to contribute to the Union 's external objectives ( especially climate change and tpoverty alleviation ) , I am voting in favour of this resolution since I believe that export credits are an important instrument to support trade and investments of European companies .
As the rapporteur Mr ° Jadot said , today 's vote strengthens the European Parliament 's position on the issue and sends out a strong signal to an overly timid European Council .
Export Credit Agencies are an important instrument for the European Union in terms of supporting trade and investments of European companies .
However , there was an urgent need to tackle the lack of transparency and EU supervision - particularly by Parliament - surrounding the activities of these agencies , particularly given that several hundreds of millions of euros are channelled though them every year , and that national budgets are subject to severe constraints .
I too am delighted that MEPs have once again declared their support for the phasing-out of fossil fuel subsidies and are thus encouraging the ecological transition , in line with European and national commitments on climate change .
in writing . - ( IT ) Most industrialised countries have an export credit agency .
These agencies collectively account for the world 's largest source of official financing for private-sector projects .
Export credit agencies ' underwriting of large industrial and infrastructure projects in developing countries tops several times the combined annual funding of all Multilateral Development Banks .
The agencies facilitate legitimate trade where the private capital market fails .
They have a much higher risk-absorbing capacity than private actors , since they do not have to pay taxes and make a profit , and hence have more leeway than private banks to break even , even on an extended credit .
However , for the same reason , they are also potentially a massive distortion of trade , if their financing operations are not disciplined by common rules .
I voted in favour of this report because export credits should be subjected to repayment requirements within a certain time limit and that a minimum premium rate should be charged to cover the risk of non-payment .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this important resolution on a new EU policy framework to fight violence against women .
Violence against women is an international as well as a European problem .
Despite the fact that violence against women has been a topic of debate for several decades , the international community has not managed to put an end to this extremely destructive form of criminality .
It is therefore very important to make every effort at EU level to reduce violence against women as much as possible and create the conditions to prevent it , to prosecute criminals and protect victims .
To achieve these objectives it is necessary to harmonise criminal law at EU level , and put in place a legal framework , under which offenders would be effectively punished and victims protected .
This is also very important for combating trafficking in human beings .
Forced marriage is another form of gender-based violence , which constitutes a serious violation of the individual 's right to freedom and self-determination .
It is important for young women to be protected against such forced relationships .
Honour-related violence is a key concept in this context .
In order to stop all forms of violence against women , it is necessary to disseminate information on gender equality , and to actively inform society , particularly those layers where relations between women and men are based on traditions and rituals .
in writing . - ( IT ) In Europe , one woman in four is a victim of at least some form of violence during her lifetime .
The annual cost of this violence is estimated to be in the region of EUR 33 billion , a figure that should not be underestimated .
Respect for the principle of gender equality is a value which is consistently disregarded in the face of a vast range of human rights violations affecting women , which damage their physical and mental health , their rights and their position in society .
The few figures currently availably do not provide a complete view of the phenomenon , but it is sufficient to observe familial or work contexts to see that we have still not managed to protect women from violence .
I support the commitment taken by the Commission to present in 2011-2012 , the ' Communication on a strategy to combat violence against women , domestic violence and female genital mutilation ' , to be followed up by an EU action plan , but I also hope we will see the adoption of a comprehensive policy approach , comprised of legal , judicial , executive and health actions , which can effectively reduce this kind of violence and the consequences which it unfortunately has on the 26 % of children and young people who report having experienced physical violence in childhood .
The official figures on violence against women are much lower compared to the sad reality in each Member State .
Officially , between 2004 and 2009 , approximately 60 000 cases of domestic violence were recorded , with almost 800 cases resulting in the victim 's death .
Out of all the women abused , 70 % put up with the abuse in silence and only 30 % decide to make a complaint to the police .
In this context , I support the provision of easy access to free legal aid for victims of violence against women .
I think that declaring a European Year of Combating Violence Against Women has the potential to raise awareness among Europeans about this problem which features in the everyday lives of a significant number of women in the European Union .
I voted for this report as I support the importance of a European charter which will set out a minimum level of assistance services to be offered to victims of violence against women , with the aim of reducing the incidence of this problem in all Member States .
This own-initiative report was drafted within the framework of the various proposals that the European Commission will announce in 2011 and 2012 on fighting violence against women .
This is a particularly important topic for me , as well as for the Femmes au Centre ( Women at the Centre ) Association , which held a conference on the topic a few weeks ago in Paris .
The report proposes a new comprehensive policy approach against gender-based violence , including , in particular , the establishment of a European charter setting out a minimum level of assistance services for victims and a Europe-wide criminal-law instrument .
I voted in favour of this report .
The international community must implement a cross-border approach to combat violence against women .
There is no doubt that violence against women violates their basic rights and fundamental freedoms , in particular the right to security and human dignity .
Member States must implement CEDAW ( UN Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women ) , which aims to ensure the rights and freedoms of women .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon the EU can introduce criminal law provisions , and the Treaty makes particular reference to human trafficking and to the sexual exploitation of children and women .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe it is time that the EU faced this issue and gave good example by means of the legislation and support required to bring an end to violence against women .
A multi-faceted approach must be adopted to ensure the effectiveness of the political , social and legal measures being applied .
in writing . - ( LT ) Violence against women in its various forms remains a major international as well as a European problem .
In the EU it is important for women 's integrity to be comprehensively and consistently protected in law .
Some countries still do not have a law criminalising domestic violence against women .
Domestic violence must not be treated as a private matter .
The Member States must ensure that legal authorities make the prosecution of acts of domestic violence a priority , and that the perpetrators of such violations are prosecuted .
I voted in favour of this report , which expresses the European Parliament 's clear position .
We encourage the Commission to fight violence against women .
Of course , there are preventive and repressive legal mechanisms in all the Member States .
However , it is also the responsibility of Europe to take up this issue , which falls within its remit .
It is not acceptable for women to be subjected to bullying and physical or psychological violence on a daily basis .
I voted for this report because violence against women is both a global and European problem .
This report presents a package of measures which are absolutely necessary to guarantee women in Europe a decent life .
It is of fundamental importance that women 's integrity is comprehensively and consistently protected by law .
When legislating at EU level , it is absolutely imperative to be aware of the extreme vulnerability which women and children experience in relation to domestic violence .
However , it is not enough to introduce or approve a series of criminal laws for the protection of women ; criminal prosecution must also be made more effective .
A key area where more resources could be input is the training of police authorities in Europe .
The police are the first law enforcement agency with which women who have fallen victim to violence come into contact .
One practical measure which can be taken is to set up an emergency number for gender-based violence in Member States .
Women subjected to violence could call this number to obtain immediate assistance .
in writing . - ( IT ) Equality between the sexes is one of the fundamental principles of the European Union .
Despite the fact that violence against women has been a topic of debate for decades , the international community has not yet managed to put an end to this serious form of criminality .
Gender-based violence results in serious damage to individuals ' physical and mental health , whilst this entails increased costs for society in the form of social problems and costs for the legal and healthcare systems .
It is estimated that the cost to society of gender-based violence , in the form of spending on healthcare , the legal system and social services , is EUR 2 million per hour in total in all EU Member States .
In my opinion , an important area in which women 's physical and mental integrity requires strong legal protection is in relation to genital mutilation .
I believe , in fact , that acts which result in serious harm to women 's health cannot be legitimised through cultural considerations .
Furthermore , more knowledge as to the extent of gender-based violence in Europe is essential , so that public awareness of this problem can be enhanced .
I am therefore in favour of actions taken to encourage Member States to draw up national action plans to combat gender-based violence .
in writing . - ( BG ) This report on the priorities and outline of a new EU policy framework to fight violence against women puts forward numerous interesting proposals .
This is why I supported it .
However , in my view , it must not be in any way a directive that every Member State should be obliged to transpose into their own legislation .
The mechanisms facilitating access to legal aid , enabling victims to assert their rights anywhere in the European Union must not and cannot be provided free of charge .
I am in favour of establishing a legal framework that gives immigrant women the right to hold their own passport and residence permit , and makes it possible to hold a person criminally responsible for taking these documents away .
in writing . -- ( IT ) These days , I would expect that a report into violence against women would highlight the absolute emergency represented by the increasing levels of violence against women in the Muslim communities of Europe .
European women 's rights and gender violence organisations report that this phenomenon continues to grow .
This is something that takes place right under our noses , but it seems there is a certain reluctance to talk about the problem using the correct terms .
The report mentions , for example , forced marriages and female genital mutilation , but these phenomena , which are growing exponentially in our cities , are tackled as if they are issues related to cultural background .
The truth is that they are linked to the massive presence of immigrants who bring to Europe a fundamentalist conception of religion , Islam , and while today it is women in these communities who are paying the price , tomorrow it could affect our women and the very core of western society .
The EU should immediately put in place adequate and targeted policies on this subject , and not on violence related to ' cultural ' backgrounds , which means nothing , so that we can fight this strongly spreading phenomenon today , which at this pace will become impossible to manage tomorrow .
I voted in favour of this report , because it is necessary to stop violence against women as a matter of urgency .
I would like to draw attention to the fact that one in ten women in Europe has experienced violence and it is one of the most frequent causes of violent death among women .
Despite the fact that violence against women has been a topic of debate for several decades , it pains me to see that we are still unable to protect women from violence .
It is therefore very important for the European Commission to draw up a single directive on all forms of violence against women - physical , sexual or psychological - and on combating it .
Gender-based violence covers sexual abuse , human trafficking , forced marriage , genital mutilation and other forms of violations .
Such violent crimes have a major impact on and do irreparable damage to a woman 's physical and mental health , and therefore the Member States should ensure better healthcare for the victims of violence .
Furthermore , I would like to urge the Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilią Malmström not to reduce the financial assistance allocated to non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) combating violence against women .
Even more acts of violence are taking place during the economic and financial crisis , therefore under no circumstances can we reduce financing in this area .
The European Parliament has adopted in the past a resolution on violence against women , which emphasised the need for comprehensive legislation which would combat every form of violence against women .
The Commission has made some important decisions in principle towards this end , especially by drawing up a new action plan for gender equality , which stresses that gender-based violence is one of the key problems to be addressed .
The Commission has also announced that it will submit a proposal in 2011 for a strategic plan to combat gender-based violence .
Gender-based violence results in severe harm to individuals ' physical and mental health .
This entails a heavy cost to society in the form of social problems and costs for the legal and healthcare systems .
The cost to society of gender-based violence is estimated on the basis of spending on healthcare , the legal system and social services .
Gender-based violence is also a serious problem in terms of democracy .
The very fact that women are subjected to violence restricts their opportunities to participate in social and working life .
As a liberal MEP , I cannot but support this report as Member States need a new strategy for combating violence against women , which has a serious impact on women 's physical and mental integrity , regarded as a fundamental right .
Violence against women has an adverse impact on both the victims and the children who grow up in such an unsuitable environment for their personal development .
Gender equality is one of the EU 's fundamental values which is of particular importance to liberals .
Modern society , based on equal rights and equality before the law , cannot tolerate such incidents , even when there are cultural or religious reasons to justify them .
I think that the EU and Member States must use every instrument available to them to combat gender-based violence .
I support the notion of a directive which will stipulate criminal sanctions for perpetrators of violence against women .
I think that this must be accompanied by the creation of a sufficient number of victim support centres and by adequate training for those who work with them , such as police officers , judges , doctors and others .
I am pleased with the concern shown at EU level about violence against women .
I believe it to be decisive for the success of combating this European and international problem that the Member States take on responsibilities , naturally involving adoption of the necessary legislation .
I am therefore voting for the new EU policy framework to fight violence against women , as I believe it represents progress in the fight against the violation of fundamental rights and freedoms , such as the right to security and human dignity .
in writing . - I voted for this report as the situation in Ireland mirrors the problem experienced across Europe .
The National Crime Council in 2005 found that one in seven women in Ireland experienced severe abusive behaviour of a physical , sexual or emotional nature from a partner at some times in their lives .
The impact of domestic and physical and / or sexual violence should not be underestimated , as it results in severe damage to individuals ' physical and mental health giving rise to severe depression and even suicide .
However Parliament 's report also shows the cost to the exchequer as it is estimated that the cost to society of gender-based violence - in the form of spending on healthcare , the legal system and social services - is EUR 2 million per hour in total in all EU Member States .
In 2009 , I had the privilege in becoming the first ambassador of Rape Crisis North East based in Dundalk .
This support and counselling service is one of many across Ireland East .
These NGOs offer vital support for victims of sexual and domestic violence , yet have to cope with a very difficult funding environment .
I hope this report helps fight domestic violence in Europe .
I vehemently condemn any form of violence against men , women or children , and I support any initiative enabling this scourge to be anticipated and combated , and its victims to be protected .
The figures that have come to light in some studies on violence in Europe are unacceptable , with 26 % of children and young people having been the target of physical violence , between a fifth and a quarter of the female population having been victim of acts of physical violence at least once during their adult lives , and more than one tenth of them having suffered sexual violence involving the use of force .
In fact , the number of women who are victims is alarming , and the enormous disparities existing between the policies and legislation of each Member State contribute to that , meaning that women do not enjoy the same level of protection throughout Europe .
It is crucial that European legislation ensure comprehensive and consistent protection for all women , through the adoption of a comprehensive legal act enabling all forms of violence against women to be combated , supplemented by a series of measures in a number of political , social and legal areas .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Conservatives agree with the report 's depiction of the problem .
In the Stockholm Programme , with regard to which we have been a strong driving force , the fight to combat violence against women is a priority .
In the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme , the Commission made a commitment to propose a strategy to be presented in 2011-2012 to combat violence against women , domestic violence and female genital mutilation .
Furthermore , Article 8 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union stipulates that the EU shall make efforts to combat all kinds of domestic violence , and the Member States should take all necessary measures to punish these criminal acts and to protect the victims .
Since criminal law is the responsibility of the individual Member States , we voted against the paragraph concerning the introduction of a directive at EU level .
We voted in favour of the report , as we believe that the Member States must take measures to ensure the safety of women .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that , at European level , Member States ought to make additional efforts to compile more comprehensive national statistics which will cover violence against women to a larger extent , regardless of the form in which it occurs - rape , sex trafficking , forced marriages , death , forced prostitution , not to mention violence within the family or from former partners .
However , the aim is also to improve the collection of data on this problem so that the most appropriate solutions can be found for punishing the culprits .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe it is important for a society seeking to be more balanced and fairer .
This phenomenon is present in all societies , in multifaceted form , occurring in the private , public or semi-public spheres , and the related figures and the forms it takes are often unknown .
I therefore believe , as set out in this report , that thorough analysis is needed , along with the creation of better investigative processes for this phenomenon , in order to combat it better internationally .
This report suggests a new approach to gender violence , and the strengthening of measures between the Member States with regard to prevention and criminal penalties , together with assistance measures for victims .
It also asks pertinent questions about the impact of physical , psychological and sexual violence against women in society 's various spheres .
I believe that an active role for the Commission , Parliament and Member States is crucial for the creation of measures to combat this phenomenon , which has implications for a number of people and generations .
in writing . - Men 's violence against women is a violation of women 's human rights which both reflects and reinforces inequalities between men and women .
Studies on gender-based violence estimate that 20-25 % of all women in Europe have experienced physical acts of violence at least once during their adult lives .
Violence against women knows no geographical boundaries , no age limit , no class or race or cultural distinctions , but it is still invisible and the victims are silenced .
I support this report which proposes a new comprehensive policy approach against gender-based violence including : establishing a criminal-law instrument in the form of a directive against gender-based violence ; training for officials likely to come into contact with cases of violence against women ; requirements for Member States to demonstrate due diligence and to record and investigate all forms of gender-based crimes of violence ; asks for financial support to NGOs working to support victims of violence .
It also seeks plans to develop methodological guidelines and undertake new data collection efforts to obtain comparable statistical data on gender-based violence in order to identify the extent of the problem and to provide a basis for a change in action towards the problem .
In Europe , one in four women will experience physical acts of violence within her lifetime and more than one in ten will be a victim of sexual violence involving the use of force .
Faced with such figures , there is an urgent need to take action .
The Commission must therefore establish a new European policy framework to fight violence against women .
All forms of violence against women - rape , prostitution , sexual violence , and so on - must be subject to criminal proceedings in all European Union countries .
Every Member State has the duty to provide these women victims with access to free legal aid and shelter facilities which will allow them to build a new and better life for themselves and their children .
This recognition at European level of violence against women as a criminal offence is absolutely crucial .
The European Parliament adopted a report , this Tuesday 5 April 2011 , on fighting violence against women .
This text emphasises the specific nature of violence against women and girls by men : it is indeed one of the most common and harmful obstacles to gender equality .
Today 's report will make it possible to implement a criminal-law instrument in the form of a European Union directive to combat gender-based violence .
Indeed , it establishes a European charter , which will ensure a minimum level of assistance , including the right to free legal aid and urgent psychological aid services .
Furthermore , MEPs are calling on the Commission to establish a European observatory on violence against women .
Thanks to the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , an adopted amendment also calls for Member States to recognise rape and sexual violence within marriage or any other intimate relationship , as a crime .
Violence against women is both a global and European issue .
Domestic violence , prostitution , human trafficking , it is a disgrace that we are still not in a position to protect women from violence in our societies .
Such gender-based violence is a violation of fundamental rights and freedoms , as well as of rights to safety and to human dignity .
The issue here involves both preserving the integrity of victims and looking after the core collective interests of society , such as liberty and democracy .
The European Union must shoulder its responsibilities and introduce legislation to put an end to this violence .
I therefore voted for the introduction of measures such as a mechanism to facilitate access to free legal aid , financial aid arrangements aimed at promoting victims ' independence and facilitating their return to normal life and the world of work .
Respect for human rights is a fundamental value enshrined in the Treaty on European Union .
So let us respect women 's rights , too .
in writing . - ( SV ) The European Parliament has voted in favour of an EU policy framework to combat violence against women .
We welcome the decision and we voted in favour of the proposal as a whole .
The decision was particularly important as it calls on the Commission to fulfil its previous promises to table a specific legislative proposal with a view to combating violence against women .
However , the proposal contains certain wordings regarding surrogacy that we think were far too simplistic in their general negative attitude to this phenomenon and to international adoptions .
We are not naive with regard to the problems surrounding surrogacy , but we do not want to attack something on account of these problems that in certain cases can be a positive experience for the parties involved .
That is why we voted against those particular wordings concerning surrogacy - a position that our group , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , also adopted in the original vote in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
Violence against women includes a number of serious violations of fundamental rights , such as sexual abuse , attacks on physical integrity and domestic violence , psychological violence , harassment or coercion , and the trafficking of women and their exploitation for prostitution , amongst many other examples of aggression that need to be combated determinedly by the Member States .
I condemn all violence , but especially that used against those in a more vulnerable position - physically , socially , economically or emotionally - such as children and also women .
That is exactly why the Member States must seek to eliminate all forms of violence against women , in particular trafficking for sexual exploitation , violation of their sexual self-determination , and attacks on their physical integrity .
Respect for human life and dignity cannot exist side-by-side with the crimes of which many European women are victims , making firm policies on the prevention of violence and the punishment of its perpetrators necessary .
The international community has been debating situations involving violence against women for a number of years .
However , it is clear that they continue to be victims of violence : one fifth of European women have suffered acts of violence at least once .
It is therefore important that the European Union adopt legislation to bring this tragedy to an end .
Although the European Commission has come up with several initiatives to put an end to this scourge affecting millions of women throughout the world , not least by drawing up a new action plan on gender equality ( 2010-2015 ) , the truth is that the EU cannot stand idly by while violations of women 's fundamental rights are going unpunished , particularly in the following areas : sexual abuse , female genital mutilation and forced marriage , human trafficking and prostitution , lack of legal protection , etc .
I agree that there is a need for further study of this issue , so that we have the most detailed and scientific data available to us .
We cannot remain inactive , however .
I therefore welcome the rapporteur 's proposals , in particular the establishment of refuges for victims , an emergency number , and the institution of the European Year of Combating Violence against Women .
Violence against women in its numerous forms - domestic violence , sexual violence , prostitution , the trafficking of women , sexual and psychological harassment , and violence against women in their places of work - represents a serious violation of human rights and freedoms , both individually and collectively , with profoundly negative social consequences .
The prevention and eradication of violence against women need to constitute essential strategic objectives , the pursuit of which cannot de dissociated from the progress for which our civilisation is striving .
Some studies on gender-based violence estimate that between a fifth and a quarter of Europe 's female population have been victims of acts of physical violence at least once during their adult lives , and around one tenth of them have suffered sexual violence .
It is also estimated that around 26 % of children and young people report cases of physical violence during childhood and adolescence , which is particularly worrying if we take into account premises based on social learning , which hold that today 's victim could potentially be tomorrow 's attacker .
It is important now that the guidance included in this report be implemented .
We welcome the adoption of this report by the Member from our group , Mrs Svensson , who is also Chair of Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
We know that violence against women represents a serious violation of human rights and freedoms , both individually and collectively , with enormous social consequences , given that violence against women involves a wide range of human rights violations , including domestic violence , sexual violence , prostitution , the trafficking of women , sexual and psychological harassment , and violence against women in their places of work .
The prevention and eradication of violence against women are essential strategic objectives important to the progress for which our civilisation is striving .
Some studies on gender-based violence estimate that between a fifth and a quarter of Europe 's female population have been victims of acts of physical violence at least once during their adult lives , and around one tenth of them have suffered sexual violence .
It is also believed that around 26 % of children and young people report cases of physical violence during childhood and adolescence , which is particularly worrying if we take into account premises based on social learning ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 170 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( IT ) Violence against women is an evil in our society that we must fight at all costs .
However , I cannot support this note given what is in my opinion the excessive attention it pays to female immigrants .
Particularly at this time , such attention on the part of the EU and its governments should be highly visible , , and should not be confined to fine words in support of European projects .
My group is divided on the matter .
I voted in favour of Amendment 19 and recital J on the word ' prostitution ' because I am of the opinion that prostitution is indeed an act of violence against women .
Violence against women is a reality all too often overlooked : it is thought that between 20 and 25 % of European women will have already been subjected to physical violence at least once in their adult life .
Last week , the European Parliament adopted a report on this issue and on the need to establish a political framework in this area and I , for one , welcome it .
Our report seeks to encourage all EU Member States to consider violence against women a crime and hence to establish an instrument under criminal law to combat this violence .
Moreover , and importantly , I voted for the introduction of a mechanism to facilitate access to free legal aid , and for urgent psychological aid services to be provided free of charge for victims .
I also supported the amendments recognising the ' serious problem of prostitution ' and which consider that ' violence against women ' encompasses prostitution .
Lastly , I voted in favour of rape and sexual violence being considered a crime , even within marriage or any other type of intimate relationship .
in writing . -- ( IT ) A European regulatory framework in the fight against violence against women represents one crucial step forward within a comprehensive strategy .
Only a combination of legal , social , economic and preventive actions will manage to resolve this problem which is rather close to home , given that over a quarter of women in the European Union have experienced violence during their lifetime .
Violence against women makes no distinction by age or ethnic or cultural background , and it remains an invisible problem that has nonetheless very high human , social and economic costs .
The European Union must affirm its active role in fighting discrimination against women and that is why the Svensson report supports the European Commission in its attempts to create a clear and homogenous regulatory framework in the context of the Stockholm Programme .
I am therefore in favour of the request for an instrument of criminal law which would define violence against women as a crime in itself , through the development of a directive against gender-based violence , to be brought in line with the multiple training , prevention and awareness-raising initiatives in order to fight all forms of abuse against women .
I gave this report my vote , because in the 21st century it is vital that we ensure that rape is considered a crime everywhere in Europe and that the perpetrators of these crimes face criminal prosecution and punishment .
It is not acceptable that at present , depending on which country they live in , not all victims of these hateful crimes enjoy the same opportunities to obtain justice and reparation for the violence done to them .
The ball is now in the court of the Council and Commission , who surely will not prevent this crucial step towards helping women who are victims of this violence to obtain reparation for their suffering .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report , because we must stop all violations of women 's rights and violence against women .
I believe that according to the Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme adopted last year , the Commission should draw up a strategy on combating violence against women as a matter of urgency .
At the same time the Member States must ensure that healthcare providers , social workers , the police , courts and other institutions carry out improvements to enable them to respond to all cases of violence against women in a timely and professional manner .
in writing . - ( PL ) It goes without saying that human dignity and the right to safety are fundamental values of life which must be protected .
The very word ' violence ' is so strongly charged with negative emotion that many people try to change the subject when gender-based violence is mentioned .
However , it is our job to face up to difficult issues and to intervene in cases where society needs pointing in the right direction on political and legal questions .
Let us not forget that violence against women , which includes the violation of dignity , sexual abuse , forced marriages and mutilation , is not only a problem for members of the female sex .
It is a problem for the whole of society , and one which contributes to its widespread disintegration .
The total costs are underestimated in this respect .
Is it not the case that we all incur the expenditure resulting from such violence - the costs of medical care , psychological treatment , court proceedings and social care ?
The victims are frequently not capable of holding down a job .
The Member States should consider drafting a plan to combat gender-based violence .
in writing . - ( IT ) The European Parliament has approved the proposal for a resolution on the establishment of a new EU policy framework in relation to the fight against violence against women .
I strongly and ardently supported the resolution because I believe that the answer to this social plague must be provided on a single Union-wide basis by the European Union , through the instigation of coherent and efficient political action .
Violence against women , whether physical , psychological or sexual is an expression of incivility which Europe must repudiate .
It is a plague which leads to traumas which have repercussions of inestimable influence on the lives of women in society .
Statistics currently available portray a sad and distressing reality .
One European woman in four has been a victim of violence at least once in her lifetime .
I believe therefore that the priorities for EU action should be the identification of Union-wide legal instruments , the possibility to make use of free support , the creation of refuges capable of providing psychological and moral assistance and the creation of a single emergency number throughout Europe .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Gender-based violence is always primarily a criminal matter .
Society must therefore respond with punishment which is proportional to the seriousness of the crime .
In setting priorities for the allocation of society 's resources , it is important to have a clear victim 's perspective , since it is this group which currently needs special protective measures .
This does not exclude devoting resources to individual offenders by , for example , offering conversation therapy and other methods to counteract violent behaviour .
This form of alternative treatment for men who have committed serious assaults on women , however , should never replace the penalty imposed by criminal law .
Conversation therapy and other such forms of treatment can only supplement other forms of punishment , such as prison .
Violence is in large measure a consequence of unequal power relations between men and women , and is an expression of a domination / subordination relationship between the perpetrator and victim for these crimes , therefore , conversation therapy in which both victim and perpetrator take part must be regarded as out of the question since the crime is of such a nature that the two can never be equivalent and equal negotiating parties .
I voted in favour of this resolution because violence against women continues to be a scourge in Europe and the world , despite the campaigns that the international community has been carrying out for several decades .
It affects the direct victims in the first instance , but it also affects freedom and democracy themselves .
I also voted for the report because it sets out a series of immediate measures that are needed to guarantee women a decent life , and it is clear that long-term political , social and legal measures are required to eliminate gender-based violence .
Violence in general is to be condemned , but violence affecting those less able to defend themselves , namely children , the elderly and women , even more so .
In this specific case , it is a concern of Parliament to put together a series of infrastructural , legal , judicial , enforcement , educational , health , and other actions that can significantly reduce violence against women and its consequences .
I voted for the Svensson report on the new EU policy framework to combat violence against women because I am deeply concerned by that type of violence .
It is reckoned that between 20 % and 25 % of European women have suffered physical violence at least once during their adult lives , and more than 10 % have suffered sexual abuse .
I therefore believe that the time has come to put a stop to male violence , and this will only be possible by building true equality between men and women .
Furthermore , I am convinced that rape should be recognised as an offence throughout the European Union and its perpetrators brought to trial .
This report also proposes a new prospect for combating this blight on society , not just through criminal proceedings , but also through protection from and prevention of the insecure jobs , unemployment and poverty that mean women often find themselves in situations of dependence , and make it impossible for them to choose their future freely .
A European directive against gender violence is therefore becoming essential .
The Member States must adopt measures to this end at the first opportunity .
in writing . - Men 's violence against women is a structural violation of women 's human rights .
Counting all forms of male violence against women , 45 % of all women in Europe have been subject to and suffered from men 's violence .
It is estimated that the total cost of domestic violence within the 27 Member States could be as high as EUR 16 billion .
However men 's violence against women knows no geographical boundaries , no age limit , no class or race or cultural distinctions , it is still invisible and the victims are silenced .
In 2008 , I drafted amendments to the Latvian Republic 's Criminal Law regarding domestic violence .
Unfortunately , these amendments were rejected by the Latvian Parliament .
I voted ' for ' .
in writing . - ( DE ) Despite the fact that there has been progress in recent decades and years in combating violence against women and children , there is still more work to be done .
The apathy and pseudo-morality found in society should give us pause for thought .
The early stages of actual violence , such as intrusiveness , obscene remarks and harassment meted out by many migrants to western women on a daily basis are increasingly regarded as normal .
The disregard for women has reached peak levels when a German judge refers to the husband 's right to use corporal punishment anchored in the Koran as a decisive factor in her judgment on a Muslim divorce case .
By permitting migration , the EU has imported problems from every conceivable quarter , including honour killings , forced marriages and domestic violence in patriarchal family structures .
Culture , religion and tradition should not be used to justify acts of violence .
The proposed initiative includes a number of good ideas , but remains quite superficial overall , which is why I chose to abstain .
in writing . - ( DE ) The report draws attention to a number of serious cases of violence against women .
I am referring to sexual abuse , physical violence within the family , enforced prostitution , forced marriage and female circumcision .
Unfortunately , all of these terrible things can also take place in our society here in the EU .
The report picks up on this fact , but fails to get to the root of the problem , which often lies in parallel societies , archaic Islamic structures or organised gangs of traffickers .
We need to work on this area .
Therefore , I have abstained from voting .
I voted in favour of the report on violence against women , an initiative which will help women in Europe to live a dignified life .
According to the statistics , approximately one-fifth of women living in Europe have been the victim of violence and 20 % have experienced violence from persons close to them .
The provisions in this report for combating violence against women are important , because : it calls on the Member States to punish perpetrators in accordance with the gravity of the crime committed ( sexual abuse , human trafficking , forced marriages , female circumcision ) ; it provides the resources needed to help the victims of violence , such as legal assistance , and to create refuges for victims ; it provides legal assistance to victims and requires all forms of gender-based violence to be subject to public prosecution ; it makes provision for more information for young women through proper education in the risks which they run .
However , I voted against the proposal to increase the number of courts with jurisdiction to hear cases of gender-based violence , because any such proposal introduces unacceptable discrimination and conflicts with the principle of gender equality .
It is essential to break the silence surrounding all forms of crime , and in this case that based on gender .
Offences that take the form of violence in the home , sexual abuse , human trafficking , genital mutilation and other forms of violations of integrity that affect women and girls in particular should be made public in order that they may be combated more effectively .
In fact , greater knowledge of gender-based violence would make it possible to increase society 's sensitivity to this problem .
This own-initiative report on of the European Parliament seeks to put together a series of the measures required to ensure that European women have a decent life .
Despite violence against women having been a topic of debate for several decades , the international community has not succeeded in bringing this extremely destructive form of crime to an end .
In summary , I believe the European Union needs to adopt the necessary legislation to put an end to this violence , and the Member States need to draw up national action plans for combating gender-based violence .
For these reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Violence against women is an international as well as a European problem .
Gender-based violence covers offences in the form of violence in close relationships , sexual abuse , human trafficking and prostitution , forced marriages , genital mutilation and other forms of violations against personal integrity which particularly affect women and young girls .
To this end , it is necessary that we adopt a series of political , social and juridical policies so that we are able to guarantee a decent standard of life to European women .
In the initiative report , the European Parliament stresses that it is possible to eliminate this kind of violence by first of all instituting comprehensive and coherent legislative protection of women 's integrity .
It is also necessary to record the extent of this type of criminality , to make courts aware of what a sexual assault implies , to detect this kind of violence at an early stage through proactive and preventive measures , to ensure legal clarity during investigations and trials , to establish new refuges and an emergency phone number for victims , and to fund research in this area .
On the basis of observations made previously , I am voting in favour of concretely enacting all measures necessary to fight this type of violence and to draw up effective action plans to combat its occurrence .
in writing . - Despite the fact that violence against women has been a topic of debate over several decades , the international community has not managed to put an end to this extremely destructive form of criminality .
It is a complex problem which involves protecting the integrity of individual victims of crime but also protecting important common social interests , such as freedom and democracy .
Shelters for women must be provided at national level in order to enable women and children to live a self-determined life free of violence and poverty .
Such shelters should offer specialised services , medical treatment , legal aid , psychosocial and therapeutic counselling , legal support during court procedure , support for children affected by violence , and so on .
The Member States should ensure appropriate funding means in order that women 's shelters can fulfil international standards in working with women survivors of violence and their children .
The Member States should provide the required means for women 's organisation and NGOs in order to protect and prevent women and their children from violence and poverty , should guarantee social and economic rights of women so that they do not depend on a partner / husband financially and should promote and develop an integration of women on the labour market .
I voted in favour of this resolution because violence against women continues to be a scourge in Europe and the world , despite the campaigns that the international community has been carrying out for several decades .
It affects the direct victims in the first instance , but it also affects freedom and democracy themselves .
I also voted for the report because it sets out a series of immediate measures that are needed to guarantee women a decent life , and it is clear that long-term political , social and legal measures are required to eliminate gender-based violence .
One in four women in Europe have experienced physical acts of violence during their adult lives and one in ten have been victims of sexual violence involving the use of force .
In the face of figures like these , it is urgent that we act to combat this violence against women in the European Union .
I am therefore supporting the report by Mrs Svensson .
Rape , which at present is still not considered a criminal offence in several Member States , and other forms of sexual violence against women , must be recognised as crimes in all countries in the Union and the perpetrators must be automatically prosecuted .
In order to protect women migrants and asylum seekers , I also call for a legal framework to be established that gives immigrant women the right to hold their own passport and residence permit and makes it possible to hold a person ' criminally responsible ' for taking these documents away .
Furthermore , I call for easier access to legal aid , in order to allow victims to assert their rights .
I believe it is essential for this aid to be free and would have liked this point to have appeared clearly in the report .
, in writing - ( CS ) It is always important to combat violence against women , which takes many shapes and forms , leaving its marks both on the body and on the mind , and leading the victims of violence even to commit suicide in some cases .
I am pleased that we are creating a new framework for the EU 's fight against this unacceptable phenomenon , and I was therefore happy to vote in favour of the report .
However , I was unable to vote for the parts of the report leading towards support for the artificial termination of pregnancy , as I disagree with this , because the as yet unborn human being has a right to life .
in writing . - Violence against women is an international as well as a European problem .
Despite the fact that violence against women has been a topic of debate over several decades , the international community has not managed to put an end to this extremely destructive form of criminality .
It is distressing to see how we still fail to protect women against violence .
It is a complex problem which involves protecting the integrity of individual victims of crime but also protecting important common social interests , such as freedom and democracy .
The European Union must therefore shoulder its responsibility and introduce the legislation required to put an end to the violence .
I recognise the compilation made by the rapporteur of a number of measures in this strategic report which are absolutely necessary in order to guarantee women in Europe a decent life .
However , due to the fact that recital J establishes that prostitution as such is a violation of human rights , and given the effort we are making to regulate such practices , some members of our group had to abstain in the end .
in writing . - ( IT ) I would have liked to have voted in favour of the report into the fight against violence against women because its aim was to establish comprehensive measures to protect women who have been the victims of violence .
It tackles in a clear way sexual abuse , prostitution , female genital mutilation , stalking , human trafficking and domestic violence : in short , a series of violations of women 's rights .
As often occurs at the European Parliament , the problem is that every text exceeds itself by inserting matters that would be better handled in unrelated documents .
In this case , the report deals with the rights of migrant and refugee women , who are treated as a select category of women compared to other female European citizens .
For this simple reason I am abstaining , since despite agreeing with the aims of the document , I cannot tolerate the manipulation of policy .
I voted in favour of this particular resolution , because it introduces a framework for a new European policy to fight violence against women .
It proposes a series of clear-cut political measures to fight gender-based violence , including measures to combat human trafficking , which I consider to be particularly important , given the worrying increase in human trafficking to and within the EU , especially of women and children .
These gangs could be combated through transnational cooperation between the EU , which is the destination , and these countries , which are the starting point for these gangs .
I call on the Commission to take action in this direction .
in writing . - I will be supporting the Svensson report because it highlights the problem that exists with regard to violence against women .
This is not a new issue but it is an issue which has been ignored ; swept under the carpet ; kept within the family .
Now it is right to end this practice and do all we can , not only highlighting this problem but , in bringing forward measures , to tackle the problem and give women the protection against violence which is their right .
I agree we need to ensure that women suffering violence should have access to legal aid .
However , if Member States keep cutting legal aid budgets then this access will not happen .
I agree that judges need to be trained in the particularly difficult cases that violence against women raise .
But how do we do this when budgets are being slashed ?
We need Member States to make this issue a political priority setting out the minimum requirements and obligations that victims of abuse might expect .
This report provides us with a framework and deserves our full support , but with this framework we also need some action in this important area and that means action by Member States .
Violence against women is reprehensible and needs to be dealt with firmly .
The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) completely agrees with this report in that regard .
However , this report completely fails to mention the role of Islam .
The report mentions ' traditional or religious practices ' just once , and very generally , in paragraph 3 , despite the fact that it is well-known that , specifically in Islam , violence against women is the order of the day .
The oppression of women , after all , is an intrinsic part of Islam .
The PVV wants to see violence against women tackled , but is voting against this report because it fails to mention the motives and the background of the perpetrators .
By failing to explicitly mention Islam as a cause of violence , we are missing a great opportunity to tackle this specific form of violence against women .
in writing . - I supported this report which puts forward proposals to tackle violence against women across Europe and calls for all Member States to prioritise this issue .
in writing . - ( PT ) The problem of violence in general , and violence against women in particular , is a global issue that affects all countries in the world .
As there is no international definition of gender-based violence , the data is quite disparate , and does not give an indication of the real scale of the problem .
Some studies estimate that between a fifth and a quarter of the female population of Europe have been the victim of acts of physical violence at least once during their adult lives .
The forms and methods of violence used against women are many .
Its historical and structural dimension means that measures taken need to be at European and international level .
There is therefore a need to intervene in all areas of public life , in order to raise awareness and consciousness , using the six ' Ps ' : policy , prevention , protection , prosecution , provision and partnership .
I voted in favour of this own-initiative report , as I believe that any type of violence should be subject to social and legal penalties .
European legislation , in the form of a directive , based on education , the effective protection of victims , cooperation with non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) , and the implementation of a European Year of Combating Violence Against Women , is an example of measures for combating this social scourge , which has harmful consequences for European society .
in writing . - I fully support calls to make sexual and domestic violence against women a criminal offence in all Members States .
As a matter of urgency I urge the Commission to come forward with proposals that will put in place robust measures to counter gender-based violence and protect victims across the EU .
The discrepancies that currently exist between Member States must be addressed , with the introduction of coherent national laws .
I hope that this resolution will be a step towards a European directive to combat gender-based violence .
I voted in favour of the resolution negotiated by Mrs Svensson , Swedish MEP from the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left and Chair of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
Rape and all other forms of sexual violence must be recognised as crimes in all EU countries and their perpetrators automatically prosecuted .
I agree with my friend and colleague Mrs Svensson when she states that women are victims of gender-based violence ; however we must not view women , including those who are victims of this kind of violence , simply as victims .
The role of institutions is to help them rebuild their self-esteem and build a new and better life for themselves and their children .
We should also focus on the causes of this type of violence , starting with an examination of the gender stereotypes of which both women and men are victims , even from a very young age .
The resolution also provides for a legal framework to be established to give immigrant women the right to hold their own passport and residence permit , and for anyone who takes these documents away from a woman to be held criminally responsible .
We now therefore expect proposals for a strategy and an action plan from the Commission : we expect action .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of this report because violence against women is a worldwide problem which the global community has not yet managed to tackle .
Violence against women is found at all levels of society and is not specific to any particular culture , level of education , age or income .
Women are at greatest risk in their own homes - domestic violence is the most common cause of injury to women , more common than traffic accidents and cancer put together .
The victims suffer an extreme negative impact on their health , self-esteem and safety and can no longer participate in public life or in the labour market as they would wish .
The perpetrators of such violence cause life-long suffering to these women and their children , as well as representing a social problem because the follow-up costs in the areas of health and justice amount to several billion euros .
Accordingly , the perpetrators need to be held responsible for their actions and should be subjected to public prosecutions .
Violence against women must finally be brought out into the open and put to a stop .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 13 : 25 and resumed at 15 : 00 )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is Question Hour with the President of the Commission .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I see that our fellow Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) are still at lunch .
Mr President , I am glad to see you smiling at me - you were a little intemperate in your remarks about me earlier on , but you have obviously calmed down a little over the lunch break .
Commissioner Oettinger , someone I believe you know well , has said that there would be stress tests - oh , there he is - I did not notice him there .
Mr Oettinger , it is nice to see you .
Mr Oettinger , a well-schooled disciple of Mrs Merkel , is now also opposed to nuclear power .
He was a supporter of atomic energy , but Fukushima has been a road to Damascus for him and , like a latter-day Saul , he , along with several others , has seen a bright light in the sky .
At least he has revealed that , in his opinion , there were a couple of nuclear power plants that would not pass the stress tests .
I found this very interesting .
If you suspect , Mr Oettinger , that there are stress tests that will not produce the desired result because the systems to be tested may not survive the test , then why does the Commission not intervene straight away to close these plants ?
If the stress tests are anything like what happened with the banks , namely that we realise after the event firstly that the stress tests were not clear enough and secondly that the results did not reflect the actual situation , then the issue of nuclear power would be far more dangerous than the banks .
My specific question is therefore : How can it be that you are aware that certain systems will not survive the stress tests and yet do nothing about it ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , to know the result of the test we must make the test before .
Should any installation fail the test , the question of remedial actions remains open .
In cases where an upgrade is technically or economically not feasible , reactors will have to be shut down and decommissioned .
However , it is possible to envisage situations where safety upgrades are economically meaningful and technically feasible , so this is what we can commit to at this stage .
Mr Schulz , I believe it was important that the European Council , after intense discussions , agreed on the role of the Commission .
I can tell you that the beginning of the discussions was just about the coordination of national regulators and , after I insisted , the Commission was asked to come up with scopes and modalities and also given the task of presenting , before the end of the year , a full report on the findings .
We are going to do this for all the nuclear sites in Europe .
We are going to do this in full transparency .
It is important to acknowledge that fact .
I believe this is progress in terms of nuclear safety .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr Barroso , you are a very clever man , however you have not answered my question .
I will therefore ask you again : when Mr Oettinger says ' We suspect that some of the plants currently connected to the network will not survive the stress tests ' , I interpret this to mean that you are aware that safety at these plants is so poor that they will not meet the criteria .
So why not intervene straight away ?
I believe that this is a real and present danger .
President of the European Commission . - Commissioner Oettinger gave a very precautionary and very prudent statement .
It may happen , but to check if it can or not , we have to make serious , credible tests .
This is what we are going to do , in full transparency and based on the best available expertise .
As you know , it is not within the Commission 's competence to shut down the tests .
This is a national competence .
What we are going to do - and , unlike previously , before the last European Council , we have a clear mandate to do it - is work with the national independent regulators to conduct very serious , credible State stress tests .
We are now defining the modalities and the scope of those stress tests .
I would like to tell Mr Schulz that , in these various sensitive matters , we have to be extremely responsible and not create panic .
We have to proceed in a technical way , based on the best scientific expertise .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - We all agree that the European Union is more than just a common market and that it is also a political project to ensure that there is democracy on the continent , and that the rule of law and human rights are upheld , promoted and strengthened .
If this were not the case , I do not think there would be much difference between us and China .
This is the case in all Member States , including Hungary .
The government there has now issued a new draft constitution that is due to be adopted in mid-April .
It contains some worrying - in my opinion - references to voting rights for minors , bans on abortion , bans on same-sex marriages , irredentism and curbing institutions to see that they carry out the government 's will .
President Barroso , what will the Commission do to defend the common European constitutional principles of democracy , the rule of law and fundamental rights as set out in Article 2 of our Treaty , when these are at stake in Member States , as is the case today in Hungary ?
President of the Commission . - We certainly agree that the European Union is not just a common market : it is about values and it is a condition for any Member State to become a member of the European Union to respect those values .
One of the values is the rule of law and we have to respect our law .
As you know , the adoption of a national constitution is a key step for every Member State , a crucial process which belongs entirely to the people and institutions of that Member State .
It is for the Hungarian institutions to decide on the content of , and the adoption procedure for , the new Constitution , in line with their own national rules and , where relevant , with international and Union law .
We will follow the developments on this issue from an EU-law standpoint , but of course we hope that the Hungarian authorities will ensure that the new Constitution which is finally adopted will reflect the values upon which the European Union is founded .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - President of the Commission , I understand your answer , but you know that all 27 Member States have to modify their constitutions in accordance with European values .
Hungary did that before the accession to the Union .
There are even countries that have done this after accession .
Poland is doing it at the moment ; France is also doing it because there are contradictions between the Lisbon Treaty and some articles of the French Constitution .
It is important that you also oblige Hungary , even after its adoption of the new constitution , to apply these principles also .
It is important for the Commission to look into this .
President of the European Commission . - The constitution of any country has to reflect and be in accordance with European values : basic European values of democracy , the rule of law , human dignity and respect for fundamental rights .
This is a matter that should not even have to be discussed .
I have not yet seen a constitution of a European Union Member State which is against those values , but if , theoretically , that were to happen then we would have to act .
As you know , Mr Verhofstadt , we have a very good record on that matter .
We recently acted on several very sensitive issues regarding , for instance , the Hungarian media law .
The Hungarian Government said at the beginning that , if the Commission identified any kind of incompatibility , it would amend the law , and it has done so .
In other Member States where there have been issues of non-discrimination , the Commission has also taken a very strong stance .
From that point of view you can be sure that the Commission will follow these matters very closely .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - The application of the European Semester , starting with this year , will help strengthen budgetary discipline , macroeconomic stability and growth and it will oblige the Member States to change their economic and budgetary policies .
In the short term , these new policies could have a significant impact on European citizens ' lives in most Member States .
Has the Commission identified , or is it planning to conduct an evaluation of , the consequences that the necessary national procedures will have on the European economic , social and political landscape in the future ?
President of the Commission . - We are taking that exercise very seriously .
It was very important to agree on what we called the European Semester , because Member States have now agreed unanimously that matters of economic policy of one may also have an effect on the others , and that those of the others have an effect on their own policies .
We are going to make recommendations on this matter , depending also on the programmes that the Member States present to us .
But we are doing that to make the lives of our citizens better .
We are making it clear that all the efforts of fiscal consolidation , all the efforts of structural reform , are in fact for growth - for sustainable growth , for inclusive growth - which is the goal of the European Union .
This was the overall agreement on what we have called the Europe 2020 Strategy .
It is in the light of these priorities that we are going to judge the national programmes that are now going to be presented and on which we are going to work in partnership with our Member States .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - The most important aspect of this policy is discipline .
If the Member States all apply these requirements , the results will be positive .
If there are differences between Member States , the results will not be as we all expect .
President of the European Commission . - I fully agree with you , Mr Marinescu .
That is precisely why we need the institutions to be independent and to do their job in full independence and in a true Community spirit , because we have seen in the past that there are sometimes temptations not to adopt decisions or implement them in a uniform , coherent and credible manner .
That is why the Commission will try to do its best to ensure a level playing field and the principles of fairness .
Discipline , in terms of respect for agreements reached , is indeed fundamental for the success of the European Union .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr Barroso , within the last week the Commission has set down limits based on a regulation that is always triggered whenever problems arise with radioactivity that affect food imports , in this case from Japan .
Surprisingly , the limits that you have imposed for products from Japan in this case are much higher than those applied to the same products even in Japan itself .
They are also higher than the limits set for foodstuffs in such cases by the United States , for example , a country where nuclear power is extensively used .
These limits are also higher than those that applied for the European Union and for the countries from which we imported goods following the Chernobyl disaster and that still apply to caesium in some cases .
Why should this be ?
Why have we set such high limits ?
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I will , of course , happily respond to Mrs Harms ' question even if I thought there was an agreement to have two halves to the debate today - a general part and then one on Japan .
Mrs Harms , you have raised a very important issue .
First of all , the emergency measures adopted on 25 March , as regards the import of feed and food from Japan , ensure the safety of the EU consumer and a harmonised enforcement approach across the whole European Union .
We believe these measures are proportionate to the risk and they have a wider scope than the measures applied in other major parts of the world like the United States and Canada .
To the best of my knowledge , based on the scientific expertise I receive , we believe that these matters and this approach are safe .
Customs ensures that food and feed items can only enter the European Union market if there is assurance that they are safe for consumption .
Under the present arrangement , the Japanese authorities themselves - and it is true what Mrs Harms said - enforce even stricter requirements on food products for domestic consumption and exports .
Given the stricter levels that are being imposed in Japan we , the Commission , have decided that it would be correct to amend the present levels in force since 25 March as an additional safeguard measure pending further scientific analysis of the levels established under Euratom Regulation 3954 / 87 .
This analysis will be carried out by the Commission , together with appropriate scientific experts , before 30 June so as to arrive at standards that can be applied to imports on a uniform basis .
I should like to underline here that all the checks carried out up to now , by Member States , of Japanese food imports demonstrate negligible levels of radioactivity , which are significantly below current European or Japanese standards .
Let me inform you that the Commission will propose to the standing committee on the food chain next Friday a revision of our norms to align these with the Japanese norms .
These will then enter into force as of next week .
I should emphasise again that this is a purely precautionary measure , which allows initiating the necessary scientific assessments of current permitted levels throughout the world , so that the European Union can demonstrate it is once again applying the highest standards .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr Barroso , if I have understood you correctly , this would mean that fish affected by the radioactive fallout from Chernobyl and imported from Norway are required to meet more stringent limits than imported radioactive fish caught in the waters around Japan ?
I believe this is wrong and irresponsible and would like to know whether or not you are prepared to correct these limits , which are extremely high by international standards .
President of the Commission . - Ms Harms , we have to decide on those matters on the basis of scientific evidence .
I cannot take decisions solely on the basis of personal opinions .
We have a regulation that was established after Chernobyl .
It was based on the best scientific evidence .
Japan is in an extremely sensitive position with regard to food security , and there are many reasons for this .
It has a different threshold to the one we have in Europe .
So precisely because of these differing standards between Europe and Japan , we have decided that on a transitional basis we are going to implement the standards of Japan .
The levels permitted are lower , which means that their standards are higher .
We are going to implement this for Japan .
In the meantime we are going to consult the committee of experts at national level and at European level so that we can , if appropriate , establish common uniform rules for all imports .
I believe this is the best , most proportionate , scientific-based approach .
I do not think any other approach would be advisable at this time .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Unlike some of my colleagues , I still believe that the European Union is primarily an economic project and that the single market is the core of all that .
We have heard a lot about economic governance in recent days and weeks , perhaps too much for my own taste , but very little about growth and competitiveness .

As you know , Mr Barroso , the British Conservative Party forms the most substantial part of my group , and the UK Prime Minister , Mr Cameron , and eight other EU Heads of State and Government sent a letter to you and to President Van Rompuy setting out very clear ways of getting Europe back into growth after the financial crisis .

Last week , Mr Cameron also published a pamphlet entitled ' Let us choose growth ' , which I can only encourage all Members of this House to read .
So what are your particular intentions in the foreseeable future to deliver on growth , on competitiveness and on completion of the single market of the European Union ?
What practical measures do you intend to adopt in order to attain these goals ?
President of the Commission . - In one minute it is difficult to do justice to the importance of the internal market .
However , let me reassure Mr Zahradil that this month we will present the Single Market Act , a very ambitious set of proposals to implement the single market , to deepen it and to remove many obstacles to it with regard to services and the many administrative burdens that exist mainly for SMEs .
These are the concrete points I can announce today : concrete measures concerning access to finance for SMEs and the reduction of the administrative burden affecting our companies , especially SMEs .
Let me also say that the letter that was written to me by nine European prime ministers or heads of state was a very important document .
It is important at this precise moment , when there are such heavy constraints on our budgets , to unleash the full potential of the single market .
This is undoubtedly a source of growth for the European Union .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr Barroso , I do not want to jump into some kind of controversial debate and I believe in your good intentions .
However , you know the institution you are running .
The European Commission is sometimes a bit of a difficult animal to run .
So could you please tell us also how you would guarantee that the European Commission , under your Presidency , would avoid the tendency - that sometimes is all too visible - of over-regulating rather than deregulating or better regulating ?
President of the Commission . - Please , let us not take a prejudiced view of the Commission .
The Commission has a good record on this matter .
We have already made some improvements : a 31 % reduction of the administrative burden by the Commission , with 22 % already being agreed by the Council and Parliament .
In fact , the Council is resisting some of the measures to reduce the burden .
I believe you will agree , Mr Zahradil , that 27 different bureaucracies are worse than one bureaucracy .
So the Commission is doing a lot to make life easier for businesses across the continent , implementing the internal market .
In fact the resistance sometimes comes from the national administrations with , for instance , gold-plating of directives and so on .
We are going to be serious about the implementation of this agenda for better regulation , on which I believe we can agree .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) My question is similar to that of Mr Schulz .
For this reason I intend to focus on a particular aspect .
Naturally you will understand that , in the light of our experiences with the bank stress tests , we have become more sensitive about stress tests , including those relating to nuclear power .
My question relates to Euratom .
I do not wish to sit as judge and jury on the huge sums of money that Euratom swallows up on research .
In my personal opinion , this research funding is being spent on a technology riddled with risk .
I do not believe these risks are subject to adequate common controls , nor do I believe that there is sufficient scope for joint decision-making on this issue .
After all , nuclear power does not respect national borders .
That is precisely where the problem lies .
Is it not the case that decisions on nuclear power should be taken on a joint basis because radiation recognises no boundaries ?
President of the European Commission . - As the Lisbon Treaty clearly recognises , Mr Bisky , the energy mix is the national competence of the Member States .
It is not up to the European institutions to decide which energy sources each country should have .
However , the conclusions of the last European Council were a step forward because there was an agreement to test all nuclear plants in the European Union .
This exercise will be carried out under the responsibility of the European Nuclear Safety Regulatory Group and the Commission .
The Commission will also present a report which will be made public .
We are now in a position where those in favour of nuclear energy and those against - because there are Member States in Europe with different positions - at least agree that we have to upgrade all the conditions for nuclear safety .
That is more likely to happen with a European approach than on a national basis .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr Barroso , what would you think of the idea of establishing a European institution for promoting renewable energies , for the environmentally sensitive provision of energy and for energy savings within the framework of the EU Treaty ?
Do you think this proposal would be worthy of your support as it could rid us of the risks of nuclear power more quickly ?
President of the Commission . - We have already made some proposals on that matter , namely the so-called 20-20-20 agenda where , for instance , the Member States agreed unanimously - because unanimity is required in that matter - the 20 % targets for renewables by 2020 .
Let me say that we are on target to achieve that goal .
So European Union legislation that makes this binding on Member States already exists .
Are Member States ready to go forward ?
This is something we can discuss , but I can tell you that from my point of view , from my consultations , they now believe that they should commit to reaching that goal first .
So we probably do not need to create a new Community - a new institutional - framework , but we do need to commit decisively to the goals that we have agreed and even , if agreed , to set more ambitious goals .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr Barroso , I am confused .
Help me .
What is the EU 's policy on Libya ?
I got a letter on 1 April from the noble Baroness Ashton telling me that the EU had provided more than EUR 75 million in humanitarian assistance and that , although the situation remains uncertain , the EU has offered to assist in fostering dialogue .
Yet she wrote this many days after the bombing had begun .
That is what she has been saying .
On the other hand , we have got hard man Herman Van Rompuy , who has made it clear that regime change is the aim of this Libyan adventure .
He also said that the action in Libya could not have happened without the European Union , and that France and Germany could not have taken military action without first getting the support of the European Council .
So we have two big chiefs within the European Union directly contradicting each other .
Could you please shed some light on the matter , and tell us what is the European Union 's policy on Gaddafi and Libya ?
President of the European Commission . - The Member States unanimously agreed that Gaddafi should go .
There is no contradiction in engaging in dialogue with the people we think we should talk to .
That was probably what Lady Ashton was referring to .
For instance , we have received here representatives of the opposition to Colonel Gaddafi .
Having said that , the military action was not a decision of the European Union as such .
Some Member States on the United Nations Security Council decided , based on a consensus reached in the European Council , to implement a no-fly zone .
But it was not a decision of the European Union as such because there were some differences in the approach to the situation .
We have to recognise this .
The reality is that there were differences over the way in which we should handle the Libyan issue .
However , I also agree with what President Van Rompuy said : without this position taken by the European Council , the decisions of the Security Council could not have been made .
These were historic decisions in the sense that they implement the responsibility to protect .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Well there is certainly a broad range of opinions here .
I wonder whether Mr Barroso would agree with me that appointing as Head of your new Foreign Office and in charge of external security a woman who has been an extreme left-wing , life-long passivist , the former treasurer of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament , somebody who has proved to be incompetent in the job , was not in fact one of the better decisions of the European Union .
I can only say thank God for Baroness Ashton , without her I suspect all of us would be very much deeper into Libya .
President of the Commission . - The Member States ' decision , with my support , to nominate Catherine Ashton as Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy was , I think , a good one .
She is a very committed European .
She certainly does not share your views , but I do not think that is really a problem .
I think she is making a very honest and determined contribution to our goals , but let us be honest about this .
She has a very difficult and challenging job .
She is now doing something that before was done by at least three or four people .
In addition she has had to introduce the new European External Action Service .
I believe that those of you who do not seem to sympathise with her ideas should give her the benefit of the doubt .
I believe the fact that we now have a High Representative who is Vice-President of the Commission at the same time is an improvement .
I can testify to her enthusiasm , to her determination and to the very European approach that she takes in all these issues .
Mr President , can the President of the Commission foresee any circumstances in which all Member States , including the United Kingdom , are forced to adopt the euro against the wishes of their peoples - possibly expressed in a referendum - and even against the professed wishes of their governments ?
The preamble to the Lisbon Treaty commits Member States to establishing economic and monetary union : a single , stable currency .
The word ' single ' implies that it will not coexist with other currencies .
There is , of course , the protocol to the Treaty that states that unless the United Kingdom notifies the Council that it intends to adopt the euro , it shall be under no obligation to do so .
But the question is whether the protocol will protect the United Kingdom against the provisions of the Treaty .
Other countries outside the eurozone appear to be in a less-favoured position .
Article 140 of the Treaty states that Member States with a derogation will be examined every two years on the progress being made in achieving economic and monetary union .
President of the European Commission . - I did not understand the question , but if the question is whether the United Kingdom will be forced to join the euro , the answer is no .
Mr President , we know that the United Kingdom is protected by the Protocol , but the validity of protocols is a question that goes beyond the subject of a single currency .
There is a protocol providing the UK and two other countries with opt-outs from the Charter of Fundamental Rights , but the Commission 's own Legal Service has suggested that the opt-out is , at best , of limited application .
Might the protocol providing the UK with an opt-out from the single currency also be of limited value ?
President of the Commission . - If you want a full legal analysis , I will be happy to send the analysis by the Commission 's Legal Service .
But I can tell you - I am sorry if this disappoints you - that the UK is not going to be forced to enter the euro .
The next topic is the European response to the tragedy in Japan .
We have many colleagues on the list .
I would ask you not to raise a blue card if you want to be on the catch-the-eye list , because that is a quite different thing .
Please raise a white card - or any other .
The blue card is for quite a different procedure .
( ES ) Mr President , President of the Commission , following the serious accident at the Fukushima plant , the European Commission 's reaction so far has been characterised , with the exception of the odd unfortunate slip , by the required seriousness , prudence and thoroughness .
However , this painful event has led to a climate of heightened emotion , hostile to this energy source .
In order to reduce possible negative consequences at the ballot box , certain governments have suddenly changed position and decided to cancel their plans to build new plants or to prolong the useful life of existing ones .
Mr Barroso , given that nuclear energy represents 14 % of our energy consumption , given the constant and predictable increase in demand for electricity and given our goal of an 85 % cut in carbon dioxide emissions by 2050 , many of us , myself included , would ask you , in this potentially short-lived situation , whether the Commission is planning any legislative or political action to prevent this climate from putting our energy strategy at risk in the long term .
President of the Commission . - As I have already said in answer to another colleague , deciding on the energy mix is a matter that lies within the national sphere of responsibility .
As you know , there are Member States in the European Union that have nuclear energy , for instance your country , Spain , and others that do not have nuclear energy , for instance my country , Portugal .
So it is not up to the Commission to say whether or not Member States should have nuclear energy .
We have to act within our spheres of responsibility .
We have if fact now received new mandates as regards issues of nuclear safety .
I believe we can and should fulfil the goals already agreed for a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions .
I believe the 20 % target that was unanimously agreed is reachable if the Member States act with real determination in implementing all the measures that they can take to achieve what is a very important goal for the European Union and indeed for the world .
( LV ) Mr President , the world has now been following events in Japan with compassion and concern for several weeks .
I should like once again to express my respect for the Japanese people .
In our thoughts , we are with the people who are working day and night in the nuclear reactors at Fukushima in order to prevent a nuclear disaster .
They are heroes , who are sacrificing their health and their lives for Japan and for humankind .
Japan is faced with an intensive task of restoring its devastated territories , which will require significant resources , including inward investment .
That is why the European Union must open negotiations on a free trade agreement with Japan .
Knowing that it is a Japanese principle to open negotiations only when there is a strong resolve to conclude them and achieve a result , I am convinced that the existing grey areas will be resolved during the negotiations and that we can achieve a free trade agreement acceptable to both parties .
I should like to hear the view of Mr Barroso on whether the Commission supports the opening of negotiations on a free trade agreement during the forthcoming Japan-EU summit on 25 May , and , if not , then why not , and when could negotiations be opened ?
President of the European Commission . - Let me also start by conveying , on behalf of the Commission , our fullest admiration , respect and solidarity with the Japanese people .
I sent a personal message to Prime Minister Kan immediately after this catastrophic event .
I spoke with him again yesterday over the phone to have the latest information on the situation and he told me how grateful he was for the European Union 's solidarity .
Regarding the trade issue , last year 's European Union-Japan Summit agreed to examine the options for how to best to improve our relations .
One of the options on the economic side is the possibility of a European Union-Japan FDA .
This option will require a considerable degree of ambition on both sides and a willingness to tackle , inter alia , non-tariff measures and the removal of obstacles that hamper European Union companies ' access to Japan 's market for public procurement .
There have been consistent demands from the European Union side in discussions with Japan .
I am happy that the European Council has now clarified its position .
Yesterday I reaffirmed to the Prime Minister of Japan that we are ready to work with Japan , provided it addresses these matters constructively .
He promised me that it would do so in a constructive way , addressing matters of concern also to the European side .
Mr President , when we look at the news on the Fukushima accident and the debates on the consequences , we do not see the shareholders there .
We see neither the financial investors nor the members of the political class , but we see the employees : the workers are fighting this accident .
I fully support strengthening nuclear safety standards , but are you ready to invite the employee representatives , namely the trade unions , to the multi-stakeholder dialogue in order to strengthen and achieve standards and are you ready globally to promote the nuclear safety standards achieved ?
If so , how do you propose doing this ?
President of the Commission . - In fact the European Council made the decision to try to promote the highest possible standards , not only in Europe but with our partners .
For instance , Commissioner Oettinger has already been in contact with Russian partners .
Russia and the Ukraine said they were interested in working with us on that matter .
We are also trying to see if we can achieve the same level of cooperation with Switzerland and also , although it is not so advanced , with Turkey and Armenia .
Yesterday , in my phone call with the Prime Minister of Japan , he told me that he also wants to cooperate with us , and also in the international efforts to be made in the G8 and the G20 , to achieve higher levels of nuclear safety in the world .
We now have the conditions to make a real effort , not only at European level - that is now guaranteed - but also globally , working with the International Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant international bodies .
Mr President , a year ago in Haiti there was a feeling that the EU was slow off the mark in disaster and humanitarian relief .
Are you satisfied by the degree of operational coordination between the EU and Member States in the recent emergencies , especially in Japan ?
What has happened since the Commission communication of three years ago on reinforcing the Union 's disaster response capacity , which said that we needed greater coherence and effectiveness for a more integrated EU disaster response capacity ?
In particular , has recent experience in Japan and a rather different one in North Africa helped to advance Commission thinking on whether we need an EU rapid reaction mechanism for humanitarian disaster and reconstruction aid ?
President of the Commission . - In the response to this crisis , I am proud that the Commission , represented by Kristalina Georgieva , who is here with us , was the first to send a high-level delegation to Japan after the terrible events there .
I can assure you that Japan very much appreciated that gesture .
We have provided both political and moral support to Japan : our system has been working in an efficient manner .
In fact , the Japanese authorities were the first to ask us to coordinate the action of Member States because they preferred coordinated , rather than bilateral , support from the different Member States .
Even if Japan is a very rich country which is very able to face these kinds of crises , as a matter of solidarity we are providing humanitarian aid of EUR 15 million .

Of this , EUR 10 million comes from the European Union budget , arranged by the Commission , the remaining EUR 5 million or so comes from the Member States .
We are basically satisfied with the coordination efforts in humanitarian terms , but it is certain that we can always improve if the Member States are ready to accept a coordinated and coherent approach with regard to civil protection and crisis response .
Mr President , the March European Council confirmed the EU 's role as a promoter of the highest nuclear safety standards worldwide and in the EU neighbourhood .
At least two new nuclear projects at the EU 's external border raise serious concern , owing to a lack of transparency and of consultation with the countries affected .
New NPPs containing experimental reactors will be located in the Kaliningrad enclave in between two Member States and only 23 kilometres away from the eastern EU border in Belarus .
The EU , in cooperation with the relevant international bodies , should ensure that the developers comply with the highest nuclear safety and environmental standards right from the beginning of the development stage and should allow international nuclear experts to assess both projects , especially the site selection criteria .
The EU could effectively prevent unsafe nuclear development by refusing to contract energy that will be produced in unclean nuclear power plant stations .
What role does the Commission see in preventing unsafe nuclear development at the EU 's external borders ?
What measures could it take ?
President of the Commission . - A good example I can give you is that of our working relations with Ukraine .
I will attend the Nuclear Safety Summit in Kiev on 19 April 2011 , organised by the Ukrainian Government , and I will be there together with the UN Secretary-General , Ban Ki-moon .
In fact , we have been one of the most important donors - if not the most important - to Chernobyl so that it can be fully repaired .
As the European Council stated in its conclusions , the priority of ensuring the safety of nuclear plants obviously cannot cease to apply at our borders .
The European Union will request that similar stress tests be carried out in the neighbouring countries and worldwide , at both existing and planned nuclear plants and , in this regard , full use should be made of the relevant international organisations .
So , certainly , we are going to accord very high priority to nuclear safety in our relations with third countries , including some that you have mentioned .
( PT ) Mr President , the crisis in Japan has given further meaning to our collective commitment to creating a 202020 Strategy .
However , we continue to wait , whether on 202020 or on the 2020 Strategy , for there to be worthwhile and robust instruments that will pull Europe out of the situation we are experiencing , out of the recessive measures , unemployment and insufficient growth , and out of the uncontrolled problem of sovereign debt .
Is it not time for Europe to move forward with new European sources of financing , and to implement effective growth and cohesion measures based on another approach to the energy problem and to the problem of sustainable growth ?
That is my question .
President of the Commission . - ( PT ) It is with great pleasure that I answer you , Mrs Ferreira , although it is not exactly on the topic of the ' disaster in Japan ' .
With regard to the question of finding funds for finance , just this morning , during the debate , I said that we , the European Commission , are going to table proposals for this in the next financial perspectives that we are calling ' EU project bonds ' : that is , bonds for investing in certain projects , structural projects , such as projects for European networks , which will definitely include energy .
I would hope , Mrs Ferreira , that you will support these proposals , and would also like the support of the various governments .
This issue is one we all need to get behind .
The very lack of resources in many of our Member States because of cuts in investment budgets means the European Union must not give up investing in growth in Europe on this scale .
There are many areas in which I believe that one euro invested at European level yields more than one euro invested at national level , such as , for example , the area of energy .
( FR ) Mr President , first of all something positive , Mr Barroso .
I welcome the fact that you are going to adjust the European maximum levels in line with Japan 's levels , because at the time of Commission Implementing Regulation ( EU ) No 297 / 2011 , we realised that the levels proposed by the Commission were far too high .
I welcome this therefore , and would like to see it incorporated into this regulation .
My second point concerns imports of food products from Japan .
There is a fundamental issue here .
Are we going to be obliged to have contaminated food , although the contamination is below the maximum levels , in order to support the Japanese economy ?
I am sure you have children .
I think to myself , am I going to give my children milk containing 500 Bq of iodine when there is an alternative milk with 0 Bq of iodine ?
I wonder if the Commission should perhaps consider blocking food and feed imported from Japan because it may be contaminated and instead help and support the Japanese people themselves , either financially or with uncontaminated foodstuffs .
Lastly , I have an appeal to make to you Mr Barroso .
I have been approached by Areva , who have travelled to Japan where their equipment had been blocked and is in storage at the airport .
It is very important for you , if possible , to request the Japanese Government to release the equipment : the whole system including masks , robots and so on that has been blocked at the airport .
Colleague , you are talking in the place of other Members .
There is a long list of colleagues who are waiting to speak .
As regards this last point , I was not aware of this situation .
If I can have some information , I am sure I will be happy to intervene .
Concerning the issue of milk , you are right Mrs Rivasi .
Not only do I have three children but I also have a grandchild who at the moment drinks nothing but milk .
It is the only food he can have , and so I am just as concerned as you are about guaranteeing the safety of food and milk that we import into Europe .
Our information , based on all the expert reports we have had , is that the measures we have taken are sufficient to cope with the risks as they stand at present .
As yet , we have not had any reports of contaminated food containing levels that could present a health risk to our consumers and we will continue to apply the highest standards on this issue .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to ask the President of the Commission and the President of the Council to somehow pay homage to the 50 and more anonymous Japanese workers who are working in the knowledge that they will die .
In this Parliament we pay homage to activists fighting to save the brown bear , for example in the Himalayas .
With all due respect , did no one here think that we should also say something about these people who , even though they know they will die , have been working there for days on end ?
I should like to read exactly what one Japanese worker said who was able to give a short interview .
He said : ' I feel very strongly that there is no one apart from us to do this work and that we cannot go home until we have finished the job ' .
TEPCO 'S stock of anti-radiation suits ran out very quickly .
He and his colleagues were forced to invent spare parts .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam Tzavela , you have spoken for almost two minutes now , but you had only one minute , even if everything you have spoken about is very important for us .
President of the European Commission . - I would like to support the comments made by you , Madam .
I think that what you have said is extremely important .
I think that those men are heroes ; they have our greatest respect and admiration for their courage and their generosity .
And let me tell you about the Japanese people too .
Commissioner Georgieva was there recently , not far from the area of the accident , and one of the things that impressed Kristalina very much in fact was the resilience , the dignified attitude and the spirit of the Japanese people .
So I think it is more than appropriate that we here send , from Strasbourg , from the European Parliament , a message of respect and admiration to the Japanese people and specifically to those heroes who are sacrificing their lives for the good of all Japanese people .
Madam , I also agree with the President of the European Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , the area of northeast Japan will remain contaminated for the next 300 to 400 years and life will never regain its natural rhythm .
That is what the scientists are telling us .
In the meantime , plans to build a nuclear power plant in a very active earthquake zone are proceeding normally .
That is what Turkey has told us and , if a similar disaster were to occur in Turkey , if this goes ahead , it would put the survival of the whole of Europe in the balance .
That is what common sense tells us .
What does the Commission have to say to all this ?
In the cooperation agenda with candidate countries ( you mentioned three countries earlier , I am referring to the candidate countries ) , how high are environmental standards set for the use of nuclear energy ?
President of the European Commission . - Mr President , my answer is yes , but this also applies to candidate countries .
Some of the countries which are now members of the European Union and which were candidate countries some time ago were - according to the negotiations - obliged to revise their safety standards and , in some cases , shut down certain nuclear energy installations .
We are serious about this .
We will certainly put the question to our Turkish partners - I already mentioned that in the previous statement - and not only to Turkey , but to all the partners that are close to our borders .
I believe that special attention should be paid to this .
At the same time , we will share with them the information which we have about our own nuclear installations .
That is the right approach to trying to solve this issue constructively .
( DE ) As we all know , democracy means rule by the people , a principle that we took very seriously in Austria in 1978 .
We held a plebiscite on nuclear power and the clear result was that the country should remain a nuclear-free zone .
This led us to pass the Act for a non-nuclear Austria , which is now enshrined in our Constitution .
But what is happening at EU level ?
There are plans to carry out stress tests for nuclear power plants and to publish the results .
However these plans are not mandatory and do not include any specific obligation to deal with deficiencies .
For this reason , I clearly support the Austrian shutdown campaign .
I would also like to see this campaign spread to the rest of Europe .
We are all well aware that this is no easy matter because nuclear power remains in essence the responsibility of the Member States .
For this reason , President Barroso , I would ask you the following question : Will you press for uniform , mandatory European standards and will you finally ensure that the EU environmental standards , in particular the environmental impact assessments , are implemented correctly , and that sanctions are taken against those who break the rules ?
President of the Commission . - We will do whatever we can under the current Treaties .
As you know , the Treaties give the Member States some national competence in terms of energy , but we are also using the competence we have .
The conclusions agreed by the European Council that give the European Commission - together with national independent regulators - a very strong role in terms of nuclear safety efforts , represent progress .
We will do that publicly with full transparency .
But , of course , I am sure you know that from other matters where we sometimes have difficulties in implementing binding legislation and binding rules at European level .
Having said that , I think that the exercise agreed on by our Member States and European partners will be a serious one .
Mr Barroso , you have already partly answered this question , which concerns the food safety issues in relation to Japanese imports .
I wonder if you could just tell us how much food we import from Japan , so that we can allay some public fears in that regard .
Also , one of the issues about which I am starting to get letters is the fact that your services have based the recommended limits for radiation on two different regulations : one concerning Chernobyl and the other a general provision .
This is what is causing confusion .
I have read the relevant question and answer on the Commission 's website but I have to say that it is very complicated .
I wonder if you could throw some light on this .
Why are there two different regulations ?
If you cannot throw light on it today , could you at least clarify it on the Commission 's website so that my constituents understand exactly what the levels are , why they have been drawn up , and why there is a difference between Chernobyl levels and non-Chernobyl levels ?
President of the Commission . - I will try , but these matters are extremely technical ; I myself had to do a crash course to understand some of the language .
But first , as regards the amount of food and feed imported , it is really marginal .
The European Union imports feed and food with a total value of EUR 216 million from Japan , which represents around 0.4 % in value and less than 0.1 % in volume of total feed and food imports into the European Union .
For the Japanese economy it also represents very little .
I could give you a list of the products imported , but I have only one minute so I cannot do so on this occasion .
On the second issue , concerning why there are different values , those values were established after Chernobyl .
They were based on that scientific evidence , and that is why we believe they are sound .
Nevertheless , we have now had another tragedy , far away in Japan .
As I mentioned , Japan has very high food safety standards .
To avoid a contradiction between their standards and our standards , we have decided - as I announced today - on some kind of harmonisation , at least with Japan , while we are reviewing scientifically the global standards we can implement for any kind of imports to the European Union .
This explains why there are differences ; but they are , I believe , transitional differences .
President Barroso , thank you for your presence here in plenary with us , for all your answers , for the very lively discussion , and chiefly for your words on the very important EU response to the tragedy in Japan .
That concludes the item .
EU framework for coordinating national Roma integration strategies ( debate )
The next item is the declaration by the Commission on the EU framework for coordinating national Roma integration strategies .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I am presenting , together with my colleague , László Andor , the decision which the Commission has taken to present a new framework for national Roma integration strategies .
The EU framework comes at a moment when the situation of Roma has become a real focus of attention in Europe .
The EU has made available to the Member States a range of legal , policy and financial instruments to address the situation of the Roma .
We also have a whole legal framework based on non-discrimination , free movement of people and the enlargement strategy .
However it is very clear that the economic and social marginalisation of the Roma persists , and this is neither acceptable nor sustainable in the European Union of the 21st century .
Parliament , with support from across the whole political spectrum - and I would like to underline this - has drawn attention to the urgency of promoting the integration of Roma , through its recently adopted resolution on the EU Roma strategy .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Járóka , for her excellent work .
Determined action is needed , both at national and at European level .
We need to join forces and step up our efforts to end discrimination against Roma and make sure they enjoy the same rights as any other European citizens , because that is what they are .
When I say that , I of course have in mind a two-way process which requires a change in the mindset of the majority of our European citizens and of members of the Roma communities .
We all agree that there is a need for effective policy planning and implementation as well as for a strategic common approach .
We all know that the primary responsibility for the integration of Roma lies with the Member States .
We also acknowledge that the situation of the Roma varies greatly from one Member State to another .
That is why the Commission decided to present an EU framework to enable the Member States to take action commensurate with the challenge they have to overcome .
The Roma task force which was set up in September last year , and reported in December , showed clearly that , very often , not enough is being done .
The EUR 26.5 billion which are available under the Structural Funds are not being utilised as they should be .
Only EUR 100 million of this money was earmarked for specific Roma activities , while 70 % of the means for technical assistance , which would have been necessary in most Member States , was simply not used .
So the measures in place so far are not adequate .
It is now time to ensure that national , regional and local policies focus on Roma needs in a clear and specific way .
In our framework we concentrate on four main issues : education , employment , health and housing .
We want the EU and the 27 Member States to commit themselves to closing the gaps and to concentrate on the common goals in those four areas with targeted actions and sufficient funds to deliver them .
We want all Member States to build these goals into their existing Roma strategy , if they have one , or to develop a Roma strategy if they do not have one , for the period up to 2020 .
In order to check whether these efforts achieve their objectives , we need regular monitoring .
Therefore the EU framework lays the foundations for a robust monitoring mechanism to ensure concrete results for the Roma .
This monitoring mechanism will ensure that the national Roma strategies are implemented , that money intended for Roma integration reaches its final beneficiaries , and that there is progress towards achieving the Roma integration goals .
The Commission will report annually on progress made towards integrating the Roma population in the Member States .
The EU framework provides an opportunity for all stakeholders , at all levels , to join forces with the EU population in general and the Roma population in particular in order to put an end to the exclusion of more than 10 million European citizens , which we can no longer afford for the future .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Honourable Members , the socio-economic situation of Roma is at the top of the EU agenda .
Last month this House adopted the Járóka Report on an EU strategy on Roma inclusion .
And today , the Commission adopted a Communication on an EU Framework for national Roma integration strategies .
Both documents make significant contributions to the wider debate on Roma , and will feed into the conclusions to be adopted at the next Council meeting of Employment and Social Affairs Ministers on 19 May , which will be exclusively devoted to the integration of Roma .
Those documents articulate the EU 's political determination to address the situation of millions of Roma who are suffering from economic and social exclusion .
I would like to make three key points here .
Firstly , the Commission has set out an EU framework for national Roma integration strategies .
It acknowledges the Member States ' prime responsibility for designing and implementing Roma integration strategies .
It also reaffirms the Commission 's deep conviction that the European Union cannot tolerate any form of racism , xenophobia , discrimination or social exclusion of Roma .
The Union has a moral and political obligation to support the Member States in their efforts with all the policies and instruments at its disposal .
Secondly , as you know , the Union has agreed on a comprehensive strategy for developing the European economic and social model in a balanced way .
The Europe 2020 Strategy for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth is the right policy context for addressing the multifaceted problems facing Roma .
We must harness Europe 2020 's objectives , targets , flagship initiatives and reporting structures for the cause of the Roma .
The key message is that excluding millions of EU citizens from economic and social life is not smart , is not sustainable and is certainly not inclusive .
In short , there is no excuse for Roma exclusion to continue in the Europe we want to live in .
In particular , the Europe 2020 headline targets for employment , poverty reduction and education are key benchmarks for measuring progress in Roma integration policies .
The Commission 's Communication on Roma identifies four areas that are of strategic importance to overcome Roma exclusion .
These are as follows .
Access to employment : the big gap between Roma and non-Roma employment rates has to be addressed .
We will not achieve our Europe 2020 targets if we do not do it .
Access to education : all Roma children should have access to quality education and not face discrimination or segregation .
As a minimum , all Roma children should complete primary school .
Access to healthcare : reducing the gap in health between Roma and non-Roma .
Member States should provide access to quality healthcare under the same conditions as for the rest of the population .
Access to housing and essential services : where the situation of the Roma people is indeed much worse than that of the rest of the population , for example where access to water , electricity and other services are concerned .
The lack of an integrated approach has a negative impact on the overall integration of Roma people in society and leaves them in poverty .
Thirdly , the Union must put its money where its mouth is .
The Commission is currently drawing up a proposal for the multi-annual financial framework , which will be followed by specific proposals on the Structural Funds .
To my mind , the Structural Funds need to be brought into line with the Europe 2020 Strategy .
This applies to the policy areas for which I am responsible in general - employment and social inclusion - and it certainly applies to the socio-economic integration of Roma .
Making our financial instruments more effective is a key objective for me .
Let me stop at this point , so I can listen to your views and answer any questions .
President-in-Office of the Council . - The Hungarian Presidency welcomes the Commission communication on the EU framework for national Roma integration strategies .
I would like to express my gratitude and appreciation not only for the work done , but also for the personal dedication of Commissioner Reding , Commissioner Andor and all those who have cooperated on this truly significant achievement .
With the presentation of this strategic document , we have moved a giant step closer to the realisation of one of the chief priorities of the Hungarian Presidency .
I am convinced that it will prove to be an important contribution to the improvement of the economic and social situation of the Roma in Europe , together with the recently adopted resolution of the European Parliament on an EU strategy for Roma inclusion based on the report by Lívia Járóka .
Extreme poverty , discrimination and marginalisation continue to affect large numbers of Roma throughout Europe , so it is high time for improvement .
We cannot afford to say that it is their problem , and not ours .
Moreover , people must never be considered as a problem , but rather as a chance , an opportunity .
Given the current economic and demographic situation in Europe , the improvement of the economic and social status of the Roma can open up new human resources , thus contributing to economic growth in the long run .
The Hungarian Presidency has always believed that , besides the necessary fight against discrimination , a new policy mix is necessary , with three key elements : employment , education and housing .
If followed up properly by the Member States , integrated policy action in these three fields , complemented by adequate monitoring as proposed by the Commission , will make a difference .
The Member States will also have to make an effort to reach the goals of the EU 2020 Strategy .
Measures for the social inclusion of the Roma can be mainstreamed in various policy fields .
It is now widely recognised that measures inspired and coordinated at EU level can create synergy and added value .
What is next ?
The Hungarian Presidency intends to present and discuss the communication with the two Commissioners during the next Roma platform on 7 April in Budapest , to which I invite all who are interested .
The Council will deal with it in a horizontal manner .
Firstly , the April Justice and Home Affairs Council will discuss it on 12 April .
Then it will be the turn of the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council on 9 May , with the adoption of Council conclusions .
The Education Council will also receive the document , on 20 May , before the Hungarian Presidency presents its report on the results of the discussions to the General Affairs Council on 23 May .
The final moment of this itinerary will , hopefully , be an endorsement in the June European Council .
It will , of course , just be a new beginning for coordinated action at EU and national level for helping this truly European minority .
Madam President , Commissioners , State Secretary , based on Mrs Járóka 's report , and in conjunction with it , we are glad to progress further towards the implementation of the Roma strategy .
The reason for this is that 8 April is International Roma Day .
Incidentally , the fifth meeting of the European Roma Platform happens to take place on this very same day in Hungary .
Through these we can take a significant new step towards a joint action plan that is EU-coordinated yet can take into account local characteristics .
The European People 's Party has urged EU action on the issue of the Roma 's social integration for years .
Moreover , we hope that the European Roma strategy can really get under way at the Summit of Heads of State or Government on 24 June .
By doing this , an answer can be given at European level to address the European Union 's most serious human rights problem .
It is first and foremost the Member States ' responsibility to guarantee that basic human rights are enforced for their citizens .
The European Union can provide only frameworks for this , but it is up to each Member State to give substance to these frameworks .
The European Roma strategy can be a type of professional minimum .
However , I firmly believe that a long-term action plan that spans parties and cycles will be prepared through this which can effectively remedy the poverty and social exclusion affecting the Roma .
A few important points regarding the content of the strategy are that its target group is defined on an economic and not an ethnic basis ; it fosters the enforcement of the full spectrum of human rights and strengthens the principle of equal opportunity ; it takes into account the regional nature of exclusion , and alleviates the disadvantages concentrated in underdeveloped microregions .
For the strategy to succeed , the stakeholders , namely the EU institutions , the Member States , non-governmental organisations and Roma communities , need to make long-term , determined joint efforts .
For precisely this reason , this issue must not be used to foment opposition or for party political attacks .
Neither is collective labelling permissible .
It is impermissible to juxtapose the collective guilt of the Roma and the collective responsibility of the majority , the oppressors .
A solution to the Roma issue is a priority of the Hungarian EU Presidency .
I hope that the European Council adopts the planned strategy in June .
I ask for the support of the European Parliament in this matter .
Madam President , Commissioner Reding , Commissioner Andor , I would like to begin by congratulating you on the presentation .
I am pleased that , after many repeated calls by Parliament , the Commission is today finally presenting this European framework strategy .
In my opinion , it is also high time this happened , as the situation is starting to grow more serious .
Many Roma in the Union are faced not only with undignified living conditions , but also increasing terror .
Saturday 's torch march against the Roma in Hungary is the latest evidence of this , and I would hereby like to call on the Hungarian Government to draw the conclusions from this .
I would like to make some criticisms of the presented framework .
The situation is urgent , but even so we cannot accept the Commission 's decision to draft the framework without public consultations with the parties involved .
It is strange that , on the one hand , you emphasise in the framework itself the importance of cooperating with civil society , but in the actual drafting of this key document you have ignored both the Roma as well as voluntary organisations , international organisations and the like .
Such a closed approach to the framework does not add to its legitimacy ; rather the opposite .
However , I consider the actual content of the presented framework to be successful on the whole .
The Commission has correctly defined the competences for solving this Europe-wide problem .
However , the key competences continue to be at the Member State level .
I consider it extremely important , however , for the EU to take on the task of coordinating national strategies and supervising them , with the aim of ensuring the quickest possible genuine integration of the Roma .
In this context , it is also vital to mention the importance of monitoring the compliance of national strategies with the submitted framework , and monitoring the effectiveness of their implementation .
However , the Commission 's position seems to me rather unambitious in this direction .
The Commission should get tough , especially concerning its expectations of the Member States .
The framework correctly defines four key areas for Roma integration : access to education , availability of employment , access to health care and the availability of decent housing and basic services .
Together with members of our group , I have had the opportunity , during numerous visits to Roma communities all over Europe , to confirm that these really are the key areas where the Roma often face poor conditions .
It should be emphasised , however , that similarly formulated objectives also appeared in the Decade of Roma Inclusion programme .
It is now essential to ensure that they are fulfilled .
In addition to these four areas , I would like to add one more which is missing from the framework , and this is specifically the fight not only against discrimination , but also against verbal or physical expressions of racism .
Last but not least , I would like to draw attention to the question of financing the inclusion measures .
The Commission working group revealed at the end of last year that Member States have significant gaps in their use of EU funds .
The Commission should therefore focus on three things : that the drawdown of funds is not excessively demanding administratively , that the Commission takes effective measures to ensure that the funds released really do fulfil their purpose , and that the use of funds for practices involving segregation is restricted .
I would like to end by thanking and congratulating you , Commissioner Reding and Commissioner Andor , once again , and now it is up to the Member States to proceed effectively with Roma inclusion on the basis of this at the national level .
( The speaker agreed to answer a question indicated through the raising of a Blue Card ( Rule 149 paragraph 8 of the Rules of Procedure ) .
( DE ) Madam President , thank you , Mrs Flašíková , for taking my question .
You are obviously very familiar with this report and will certainly be aware that it also requires the Member States to pay penalties if they are found not to be in compliance or if strategies are not adhered to .
How do you stand on the fact that a Member State would also be liable to pay a penalty if the obligatory primary school attendance requirement is not met ?
Primary school attendance is mandatory in all countries .
Thus , if Roma children fail to attend primary school , is the relevant country liable to penalties ?
Do you not think that the parents have some responsibility in ensuring that their children go to school ?

- ( SK ) Madam President , I would like to say one thing on this topic : I am an unequivocal supporter of the view that when we establish rights , obligations must also be complied with .
It is also naturally the role of parents to ensure that all the rights of children are observed .
However , in my opinion , the EU Member States have enough instruments to establish such a space , and they will not be punished if parents do not comply with their obligations .
Madam President , I too wish to thank the rapporteur Mrs Járóka , as well as the representatives of the Commission , Council and Hungarian Presidency , because they have made many serious promises before us and assumed very important commitments .
When talking about Roma integration , we should not forget that we are talking about the most specific and , perhaps , the most complicated issue in Europe and the European Union .
This is an issue which cannot be resolved through funding alone , anti-discrimination legislation alone or by launching education programmes alone .
The solution to this problem can only lie in a combination of all these approaches and , actually , as part of a common political will .
At the moment , the Union is dealing on its own , more than ever , with its 12 million Roma .
Some still do not realise that these people are not simply just Bulgarian , Romanian or Slovak Roma , but are citizens of the European Union with identical rights and obligations , while also having limited prospects .
The situation , as we can see , is fairly complicated .
The greater the level of integration among the actions , initiatives and policies implemented by Member States and all the European institutions , the greater the success the European Union 's Roma integration strategy will enjoy .
Improvised and unilateral actions may even cause harm rather than good .
This is where I should mention that in some Member States knowledge about the Roma is inadequate and , in some cases , even wrong .
As a result , the Roma issue in Europe must be actively explored and its progress professionally monitored .
Otherwise , there is a danger that , instead of defusing the ticking bomb , we will only move it from one location to another on the map of the Old Continent .
A huge effort to provide education to the Roma must be at the heart of our ambitious strategy .
This means complete integration of their children into the education system , basic qualifications for young people and adult literacy provision .
The main aim must be to increase steadily in the coming years the proportion of Roma who are trained for the labour market and have an enlightened attitude towards the institutions and the rule of law .
This is the sole guarantee that in future the Roma 's life will cease to evolve , like it does now , as a wretched existence on quicksand which has needlessly swallowed up European taxpayers ' money .
Madam President , it is of course good news that we now have a concrete European framework that is going to place an obligation on every Member State to present its national Roma integration strategy .
Between now and the end of the year , the Commission will assess these strategies and then in roughly one year 's time we will need to debate the issue again .
Today , we are therefore in effect setting out a road map which should allow parliamentarians , public bodies and civil society to exercise ongoing , extreme vigilance in the very important areas you have mentioned .
I note that the Commission communication takes on board some of the points we set out in the parliamentary report .
I am talking for instance about the involvement of the Fundamental Rights Agency in the assessment of the strategies .
I believe the Agency has proven its competence in this area .
I am also talking about developing cooperation with the Council of Europe on training mediators from the Roma community .
This is an important strategic factor for the success of the projects at all levels , as is the attention devoted to Roma who are nationals of third countries and the enlargement aspect , which is taken into consideration in this report .
Lastly , I think that establishing common indicators to support the monitoring system is very much to be welcomed .
Nevertheless , I must emphasise certain failings in this communication .
I believe it is not sufficiently strong and insistent in its reference to the necessary participation of Roma at all levels , that is to say at the levels of preparing the projects , implementing the projects and evaluating them .
The communication talks about information and consultation , but the involvement of the Roma community itself is vital .
There is ample experience to prove this , because there have actually been good experiences in Europe as well .
I find this a weakness in the communication .
A second weakness in the communication is that it deals with the issue of non-discrimination as a cross-cutting theme in each of the four areas .
However , I think it is very important , or would have been very important , to have a special paragraph devoted to combating discrimination and violence and to access to justice for the Roma .
This anti-discrimination , fundamental rights , access to justice component is not included as a specific component in its own right .
I find this another weakness in the Commission document .
I think we also talked about the subject of mediators , a programme that was launched by the Council of Europe .
It is good that it is mentioned in this communication .
We could have mentioned , and you also could have mentioned the guidelines that have already been drawn up by the Council of Europe , so that we do not somehow end up with two strategies , or two types of framework for assessing the national strategies .
I feel this would have been a plus in this communication .
Finally , I think that the Commission 's work is not yet finished , and that the task force should continue its work , in order to ensure that Member States are constantly aware of the pressure on them from the Commission , civil society and local bodies to actually implement these guidelines .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , this proposal is an opportunity to better integrate the Roma people within Member States and to find ways to provide the Roma people with the full , equal opportunities and rights afforded to all EU citizens .
The main aim of the programme should be to achieve basic universal rights for all those people .
I fear , however , that once again this heavily burdened and complicated agenda , like previous programmes , may have to be cut back .
The competences of Member States in the areas of education , health and housing must be respected and , from what I have read so far , I fear the Commission may be acting ultra vires in a manner that is detrimental to the rights of Member States to determine their own policies in these areas .
However , I hope that this new strategy marks a new era in the way the EU addresses the issue by firstly listening to the Roma people .
For too long programmes have been too complicated and have simply not reached the people who need help most .
In nearly ten years little of substance has been achieved on the ground .
I hope the Commission will now focus on how best to simplify the procedures for accessing EU funds and how to better monitor , assess and implement its programmes .
If the EU is spending money in this area then it needs to be spent now in a better way .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a good thing that we are now to have a general strategy for the Roma , but I am afraid that that not everything in the garden is rosy .
That is because the overall proposals that the Commission has placed on the table are far behind the many years of discussions with representatives of the Roma , some of which were held in this House .
For years , representatives of the Roma community , both with and without a framework strategy , have been pointing out the need for targeted measures and clear , specific requirements .
We do not even have clear sanctions should this strategy not be adhered to .
Although there have been some proposals in this direction , no actual sanctions exist , so that the system is more full of holes than a Swiss cheese .
The strategy on the Roma must take account of all the significant areas .
This is what was agreed .
However , what does the Commission have to offer other than the four key points ?
There is no provision in the structures for the participation and inclusion of the Roma communities in all the decisions that relate to them .
There are no structures for the specific implementation of targets .
There is no gender perspective .
Something that also really irritates me and that I believe to be a scandal is the fact that you are unwilling to undertake any explicit action to combat discrimination against the Roma community .
You complain that the EU structural funds for the Roma are not used .
I would like to ask you quite openly : Is it not the case that discrimination against the Roma is also one of the reasons why the community has not made use of such EU funds to date ?
I think so .
We , as members of the GUE / NGL Group , are highly critical of this communication .
We do not believe it to be adequate and I expect the appropriate amendments to be made .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , despite being a Eurosceptic , I could be in favour of a plan , in view of the 2020 Strategy , to eliminate discrimination , difficulty and marginalisation if we were really being offered incisive action by the European Commission to control the behaviour of Member States .
What we have , however , are these speeches about a great future , about great control , spoken by a European Commissioner who still cannot explain to me how it is that in her country , in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , these travellers are forbidden to set up camp whereas they can instead instal themselves close to my home , in Italy and in France .
Thus we talk of giving a home to travellers , whilst in some European countries , specifically that of Mrs Reding , these people cannot even set up camp .
In today 's edition of the main newspaper in my country , Il Corriere della Sera , there is an article on a parent , who does not deserve to be called a parent , a traveller , who was arrested in Italy for selling her own little girl to traffickers who wanted to sell her into prostitution .
She sold her own little girl .
Others send them to do other things .
Often it is they who do not to send them to school , despite pressure and attention from the authorities , mediators and charities .
Do we want to talk about these problems as well ?
Do we want to do away with these salami slices of idiotic do-goodery and realise that many of the Roma 's problems are exclusively and principally of their own making ?
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The new European Roma inclusion strategy only serves to rehash old objectives which have proved impossible to achieve over the years .
They were credible at the time when the Decade of Roma Inclusion was launched in 2005 .
However , at the moment , when extremist behaviour and violence against the Roma are on the rise in the EU , we would have needed a strategy offering far more specific measures .
Tensions are rising in Hungary and the actions of the police are becoming increasingly heavy-handed .
If a firm stance is not taken , the situation will deteriorate .
Consequently , it is perplexing why the Commission has not tried to come up with proper solutions which will tackle specific problems , especially as it also had the resolution adopted in the European Parliament at its disposal .
The new strategy for coordinating national Roma strategies presented today by the Commission marks an important step for the EU .
The creation of national contact points for Roma integration , simplification of funding procedures , the assessment of national plans by EU institutions and verification of progress on Roma integration in Member States are measures which will help improve the economic and social situation of the Roma population in Europe .
Member States must scrutinise this strategy closely and set up as soon as possible an administrative body tasked with the strategy 's implementation and coordination with the other Member States .
I hope that , from this summer , the Commission will take on the lead role in coordinating the strategy in terms of developments in key areas such as the promotion of civic education , vocational guidance and employment .
I find it regrettable that the new strategy fails to make clear recommendations as to the types of programmes which will be developed and implemented for Roma in a similar manner in all Member States , with certain variations .
I call on the Council and Member States to come up with such recommendations for types of programme which the Commission will handle centrally .
Without such types of programmes , adapted to the nomadic nature of the Roma lifestyle , the European Union will never be able to make a full contribution to increasing the value added at EU level .
in writing . - The EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies provides an opportunity to join forces at all levels and with all stakeholders to put an end to the exclusion of the Roma .
The goals set up at EU level , covering four important areas for Roma integration - access to education , employment , healthcare and housing - will only be reached if there is a clear commitment from Member States .
It is now crucial to step up a gear and ensure that national , regional and local integration policies target Roma in a clear and specific way and that explicit measures address the needs of the Roma to prevent and compensate for the disadvantages they face .
The Member States should ensure that all Roma children have access to quality education and establish a concrete target for raising Roma employment rates within the context of Europe 2020 , increasing the proportion of Roma households with access to water , sanitation and electricity , and promoting non-discriminatory access to housing , including social housing .
The Member States should establish concrete targets with concrete timelines for raising the life expectancy of Roma , raising child vaccination rates to the level of the non-Roma population , and lowering infant and maternal mortality rates to the level of the non-Roma population .
At last , the Commission has given us some ambitious goals for Roma integration in Europe : guaranteeing at least a primary level of education for all Roma children , reducing child mortality and closing life expectancy gaps .
However , these ambitions still need to be put into practice .
One year on from the European Parliament 's adoption of an amendment to the ERDF Regulation aimed at investing in housing for marginalised communities , projects are having trouble getting off the ground .
It is important that Member States should invest and should report back on their actions in areas such as employment , education , health and housing for Roma people , but also that the Commission should ensure that it is rigorously monitoring use of existing European programmes .
Lastly , Roma people must seize this opportunity to take control of their own destiny , knowing that they can count on Europe 's support .
A wait-and-see attitude and hollow words will only feed the extreme right and mistrust among communities .
International Roma Day will be celebrated next Friday , 8 April .
I hope that on 8 April 2012 we will be able to celebrate the progress that has been made .
Estimates of revenue and expenditure for 2012 - Section I - Parliament ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr José Manuel Fernandes , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2012 - Section I - Parliament .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to express my thanks to everyone who took part in drawing up this report , with particular thanks to the shadow rapporteurs from all political groups .
This is a report that will enable Parliament 's 2012 budget to be an austerity budget , a containment budget , and a rigorous budget .
In truth , we have effectively cut around EUR 49 million from the initial proposal .
Regarding the position we have taken , which was voted on and supported by a broad majority here in the Chamber , we have gone further than we had committed ourselves to do .
We had said that the update would be around the rate of inflation .
We are a long way from the rate of inflation , which means that the 2012 budget will represent a reduction in real terms : a budget that will be below 20 % under heading 5 , which is where funds for the European institutions are posted .
We have not achieved this objective and passed the 20 % point for several years .
I also recall that the Conference of Presidents has set the objective for Parliament 's budget at 20-22 % , with this year below that figure .
However , as part of the implementation of the 2012 budget too , we will want savings using the principles of good management , economy , efficiency and effectiveness .
We want all expenditure to be supported by documentary evidence , and we want all variable costs to be the subject of a cost-benefit analysis .
In this way , we will also make additional savings during implementation .
The effort with regard to savings needs to be made by all institutions and provision made for the margin of heading 5 , which includes the administrative costs of all institutions , to have a surplus of around EUR 380 million in 2012 .
We then propose that EUR 100 million intended for administrative costs be transferred to the area of youth .
Why youth ?
Youth because it is the generation that has greatest difficulties in terms of access to jobs , with an unemployment rate that is double that of other generations .
However , there are also additional reasons for and objectives of our choosing ' youth ' as the priority for 2012 .
It already was in 2011 , and ' youth ' is also present in all five objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy , which gives the next financial perspectives direction but which also gives direction to Mrs Balzani 's 2012 budget .
Furthermore , with regard to school drop-out rates and education for the generation aged 30-34 , 40 % of that generation have university degrees , which makes two of the objectives exclusive .
I hope that any amendments that go against this proposal will be rethought , as I believe that the priority ' youth ' should be kept as a priority by this Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , as we all know , the House 's budget for 2012 is set against the background of a difficult economic and financial situation .
That is why I see it as a positive development that we have agreed in the basic guidelines that Parliament 's budget is to be drawn up carefully within the framework of only modest increases and that adjustments should not exceed the inflation rate .
I believe the target mentioned by Mr Fernandes , in relation to youth employment is very important because in our last budget we were very concerned that more money should be provided for youth than was previously the case because it is young people in particular who are affected by unemployment or who need special support , including from Europe .
That is why I believe the additional EUR 100 million is a very positive approach .
As the rapporteur on buildings , I would particularly like to point out that I believe it is extremely important for us to maintain a high level of efficiency in relation to the financing of our buildings and to monitor the financial situation with care .
In this context I believe it is right that financial resources that cannot be spent on Parliament 's budget over the course of the year should be used as prudently as possible to avoid interest payments .
In this regard it is also necessary to ensure that the monies are not spent in a mad rush at the end of the year , but rather that they are used to pay off buildings more quickly and more economically .
In relation to the House of European History , we shall ensure that the operating plan is carefully examined once again and that the construction costs are closely monitored so that , crucially , an orderly budget can also be presented after the building is complete following notification in accordance with Article 179 ( 3 ) .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , I would first of all like to pay tribute to the rapporteur for the way in which he has approached this budget and for his recognition that Parliament should avoid large increases in its spending for 2012 .
This is particularly appropriate as we know that the Council intends to cut its budget by 4 % , the Commission intends to increase its budget by only 1 % , the Committee of the Regions by around 2.9 % and the Economic and Social Committee by an even smaller amount .
I believe that the initial suggestion of 5.2 % made by the Bureau was far too high .
Reducing the increase to 2.3 % is therefore progress .
It is in fact a cut of about 0.5 % in real terms .
Personally , I would have liked to have seen an even smaller increase .
In the future , I believe we should produce a plan to identify savings in Parliament 's budget .
However , we should recognise that savings have been made .
I welcome the savings made on the Added-Value Assessment Unit - which will save us around EUR 1.3 million - the savings on information campaigns , buildings policy and stationery and on the proposal to reduce the contingency reserve by around EUR 3 million .

These all equate to real savings of around EUR 13.7 billion , in addition to the deferred spending on Lisbon and enlargement .
As I said , I believe that further savings could have been made , but we have at least found some savings .
Finally , could I also raise two important outstanding issues ?
Firstly , on the suggestion that the EUR 100 million from unallocated margins in Heading 5 should go to youth policy , as outlined by the rapporteur : along with other groups , we have said in Amendment 7 that this transfer could be considered but only in line with the priorities in the general 2012 budget .
This will therefore need discussion before a decision can be made on whether it should be done and where the money should go - in other words , where the money would be spent if that transfer takes place .
It is far too soon for us to commit ourselves to that .
Secondly , there is the issue of the House of European History .
It would be a good idea if we had plenty of money , but I believe that now is not the time .
We need a proper business plan and we need it to go through the proper parliamentary procedure , perhaps through the normal budget process later this year , so that Members can have their say and give their views on this project .
On this issue , I believe it is important that Parliament , as on other issues , should be seen to be taking the right decisions on our own budget .
Our own budget is important and we have to be seen to be making sure that we take the right decisions for the public .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I agree that the work of the rapporteur and our fellow Members has certainly borne fruit .
It is evident that money is not everything , but that nothing seems to work without money .
The same applies when it comes to making savings ; everyone wants to hold onto what they have and is unwilling to give anything away that might have the potential to lead to more savings .
In this context , the discussion of whether the inflation rate is 2.3 % , 2.5 % or 2.7 % is , in the final analysis , mere shadow-boxing .
Our task is to look and see where we can genuinely save money .
The decisive issue here - and it is important for the European Parliament 's Secretariat to take this to heart - is that the Committee on Budgets should be provided with all the key documents to enable it to see where savings can be made to the European Parliament 's budget , rather than simply receiving the Secretary-General 's savings proposals for it to rubber stamp .
The European Parliament 's budget consists of more than just these amendments .
As Mr Fernandes has pointed out , we have identified savings of EUR 49 million .
What he did not reveal , however , is that two thirds of these savings have simply been transferred to the 2013 or 2012 financial year , so that we will have to decide what to do about this money next year .
In relation to the original savings , I am pleased to see that the so-called smaller groups , including the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , have managed to come together to convince the two larger groups of the need for these savings in the area of information technology , in simple matters like cleaning or payments to political parties and foundations , in other words that we have an understanding in theory at least of where money can be saved .
The newly opened debate on the EUR 100 million to be spent on our youth is naturally something that no one could oppose .
On the other hand , we must be careful not to get side-tracked because this issue has nothing to do with this report .
It needs to be dealt with in other reports .
We cannot let ourselves be diverted from other important topics .
Nonetheless , we have made a good start and it is evident that we do not necessarily need more money , but rather greater discipline in how we spend it .
I believe that we can expect a fruitful cooperation with all groups .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in these economically difficult times it is quite right that the European Parliament should play its part and should be prepared to apply self-restraint and self-discipline , even though we are still engaged in building up our own institution and have been assigned new responsibilities under the Treaty of Lisbon .
I agree with the previous speaker that we did well to negotiate a reduction in the budgetary proposals from the Bureau , which originally involved an excessive growth rate of 5.2 % , down to an increase of 2.3 % .
However , an increase is still an increase , even if it is probably below the inflation rate .
So , we are not really making savings , but rather reducing growth .
We really should be honest enough to call a spade a spade .
With regard to the issue of the House of European History , let me say this : in principle the majority of my group is in favour of the idea of a service for the citizens of Europe informing them of our history since 1945 .
However , this also requires that a business plan should be put in place and that all the conditions currently being formulated for tomorrow 's vote by majority decision should be met .
This is the only way to pursue budgetary policies that are responsible , truthful and transparent .
This also means that if there is a genuine desire for this change in priorities , which will involve an investment of EUR 60 million in the coming years , then , in the opinion of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , we will also have to make savings in other areas , rather than just limiting increases .
For example , in the case of flights within the European Union of less than four hours ' duration , we believe there is no need to fly Business Class .
This would save quite a considerable amount .
More bicycles could be provided for the employees and Members of Parliament here in Strasbourg instead .
I would like to close with a comment on the political sleight of hand in reassigning funding for youth employment .
Of course the Greens also want to increase spending on youth employment .
However , this is part of the Commission budget .
If this money is taken out of the European Parliament budget , then we will be cutting the resources available to the new financial supervisory body or the Food Safety Agency , for example .
Is that what we really want ?
Is this the signal this House wants to give to our citizens ?
No , this is the wrong decision .
We need to strengthen these regulatory agencies , making them fit for purpose , and the funding for youth employment schemes must come from the Commission 's budget .
That would be the right thing to do from a political perspective .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , EU leaders are living in a bubble of illusion and self-delusion .
The best example of that happened this morning .
Leaders of EU institutions were saying that the financial crisis is largely behind us .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
As Wolfgang Münchau wrote yesterday in the Financial Times , Europe is facing a stark choice between default and bailout .
Both imply the absorption of a huge loss .
The only difference between the two is how the loss gets distributed .
In the case of a default , German , French , British , Italian and Spanish banks will suffer and the taxpayers of those countries will share the cost with Greek , Irish and Portuguese taxpayers .
In the case of a bailout , the total burden will be put on the back of Greek , Irish and - soon - Portuguese citizens .
It is in this context that I say that the proposal to increase the budget of Parliament by 2.3 % is still too high and unacceptable .
Let us go back to the drawing board and reduce it to 1 % , as suggested by Commissioner Janusz Lewandowski .
To show an increase well below inflation would earn some badly needed legitimacy for Parliament in the eyes of European citizens .
Not only the increase , but also the structure can be modified .
There are many ways to save money for the European taxpayer .
As Helga Trüpel has already said , we do not need to travel business class within the European Union .
An amendment jointly tabled by the Greens , the United Left and the ECR proposes to reduce travel costs significantly by using flexible economy class tickets for flights under four hours in length .
We do not need a shiny , glitzy fleet of black Mercedes-Benz cars here in Strasbourg .
Use the tram .
We do not need the House of European History , as Europe is losing competitiveness and geopolitical weight .
It will be a museum anyway .
There is huge scope for savings on energy costs .
Our offices have no temperature control or individually adjustable heating and air conditioning .
We waste a tremendous amount of energy every year .
There is large scope for savings on security and IT services .
In both cases , we need far better service for much less money .
We should review and revise our health insurance costs as well .
There is no need to have access to such an extraordinarily generous range of health care services .
Budgeting is about setting priorities , both positive and negative .
There is no shortage of positive ones , but responsible and prudent budgeting requires both , especially in times of crisis .
We Members of the European Parliament have the power to make decisions regarding our own salaries .
We also decide about money for employing people .
Between 2010 and 2011 we awarded ourselves an additional EUR 3 000 each per month .
It is also us who vote on the spending cap for our offices , assistance for expenses , allowances , and even how we travel .
We have absolute power in these areas , and so I ask myself and I ask you : have we been using or have we been abusing this power of ours , have we been wise and thoughtful , or have we instead not been able to resist the hold that this power has over us ?
Unfortunately , we have not , and that is why this debate is not about figures , this debate is about ethics and politics , it is a debate that qualifies or disqualifies us in the eyes of those who call us to account .
I am not to any extent an anti-party populist , nor do I believe that Members should have to work by candle light .
However , it is precisely because this sort of demagoguery exists in our countries that we need to be extremely strict when talking about making decisions relating to money and the perks that we receive .
I am sorry , but it is not normal for Members who always travelled in economy class to have changed to business class now that flights have started to be reimbursed by the ticket rather than by the kilometre .
The same criterion applies to our salaries and expenses .
In my opinion , they are excessive , and in some cases they are even extravagant , but that is not what is at issue here : what is at issue is knowing whether we have the courage to vote for these expenses to be frozen at least .
I do not understand how there can be Members of Parliament here who do not hesitate to advocate austerity policies and the reduction of wages and pensions in their countries , but when it comes to making decisions about their own money , austerity goes out of the window .
This is not just serious , my friends , this is indecent and very sad .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , the 2.3 % increase in the budget requested by this Parliament calls into question its sense of responsibility .
Going through the different expenditure lines , you can find many growing 50 % to 100 % without any reasonable justification .
At the beginning of this plenary session I asked this Parliament to postpone the vote on the Fernandes report owing to lack of accurate information on costs for the House of European History and a conflict of interest , but my request was voted down .
A sum of EUR 2.5 million has already been paid out without enough information .
It appears that MEPs are willing to operate in the dark and just hand over taxpayers ' money without asking the right questions .
I can only ask the British Prime Minister to accept nothing but a significant reduction of the whole EU budget for 2012 and hope that Parliament will be the one to bear the biggest cut .
( NL ) What can you cover in a one-minute speech on the European Parliament 's 2012 budget ?
The answer is not much , but still enough .
This report provides no vision .
It is instead a collection of empty words that once again highlight the fact that the European Union provides no added value at all .
There is waste to be seen in the 2012 budget , specifically in connection with a project as ridiculous as the House of European History .
The cost estimates are lurching out of control while the Chair of the Committee on Budgets , who has to take the decision on funding , is also a proposed member of the supervisory board .
No other Parliament would accept a conflict of interests of this kind , but of course this House , this European Parliament , does .
This is too crazy for words !
Mr Lamassoure yesterday said that he was willing to step down from office .
The Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) will now work flat out to bring that about .
I hope that the waste of money for the coming year is kept to a limit and actually stops .
In the meantime , I will continue to monitor and report on behalf of the citizens .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I must thank the rapporteur Mr Fernandes for the estimated budget for Parliament , for having succeeded in balancing the requests from the Secretary-General and the suggestions of Commissioner Lewandowski with regard to the containment of the administrative expenditure of the European institutions .
This Parliament wants to give out a message of responsibility , meeting requests to increase allocations at below the rate of inflation , in a moment of difficulty for the public finances of Member States .
I hope that the Council , which will have to assess the rapporteur 's proposal to reduce the ceiling under heading 5 in order to finance policies to support young people , will give its support .
I believe it is vital that we find the additional funds to support youth employment , which is currently at an all-time low in most of Europe , so that we can put our foot down on the accelerator on the road to achieving the main aims of the Europe 2020 Strategy and revive economic growth , which relies on our young people and on their ability to access high-level training .
( SV ) Madam President , the fact that those fellow Members who are against the whole idea of the European Union want to cut the European Parliament 's budget is perhaps not that strange , but it is quite clear that there are populist motives behind it .
What is more important is the fact that those of us who are in favour of the European Union also think it is time to have a rethink when it comes to administrative expenditure .
For the first time , we make the decision in this report not to accept a development that entails an increase in Parliament 's budget at a time when the Member States ' budgets are experiencing difficulties and when many ordinary citizens are suffering under the effects of austerity measures .
We must now start to take this matter seriously .
For the first time since I have been a Member of Parliament we are now cutting Parliament 's budget .
I think that we should do more .
I agree with the rapporteur and several previous speakers that we should take a more strategic approach to this .
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament has therefore tabled an amendment regarding a long-term , strategic review of Parliament 's administrative expenditure .
We now need to show that we can take this task seriously and that it is not just talk .
We must start work on this review .
The second thing I would like to mention is the House of European History .
Many people have questioned whether it is the task of a parliament to run a European history museum .
It is questionable , but I believe that there is a point to the project , namely that no one else has started such a museum .
It is perhaps time that someone did .
However , it must be done according to transparent principles , with complete responsibility for the costs and taking genuine responsibility for the activity .
I am therefore very pleased that we have now been able to reach an agreement between the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the S & D Group and the rapporteur to vote for the most important parts of our amendment , which will mean that we will now have a genuinely transparent decision-making process with regard to this House of European History .
I am pleased about that .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Madam President , I have a question for my honourable colleague .
What is wrong with populism , seeing that parliamentarians are the voice of the populus , the people ?
( SV ) Mr Hartong , populism usually means that someone does not really take something seriously , that they are merely reacting instinctively without thinking through a proper strategic response .
What is most important with regard to what we are doing now , of course , is the fact that those of us who really do believe in the European Union also want to ensure that we take responsibility towards taxpayers and carry out a proper review of the administration in the EU .
It is very much easier for those who do not want a European Union , like Mr Hartong , because he would like to put an end to all of it .
However , that is not taking responsibility ; that is populism .
( The speaker answered the question and agreed to take another blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
( PT ) Madam President , Mr Färm , I have a question which is as follows .
From the initial proposal by Parliament 's bureau it would appear that this report makes some savings , but if we compare it with the budget implemented in 2010 , what is proposed for 2012 is an increase of 11 % , or EUR 175 million .



It is not difficult to see what is essential : EUR 43 million on furniture , EUR 33 million on parliamentary assistants , EUR 18 million on temporary employment contracts , and EUR 7 million on information campaigns .
I do not think I need to go on .
Madam President , Mr Portas does not need to continue .
Basically I agree with him .
I also wanted to go further .
I am not happy that we ended up with an increase of 2.3 % .
I think we could have gone further , but it was a compromise between the Committee on Budgets and the Bureau .
This is also the reason why we have tabled an amendment seeking a long-term strategic overview of Parliament 's costs .
With more modern management and a real effort to make long-term savings , I think we can end up in a much better situation when it comes to administrative expenditure , and there we will certainly listen to some of the proposals made by Mr Portas .
( SV ) Madam President , some of the things we are now debating in a rather savage tone are issues that we already debated last year .
At that time , the will to review certain things was lacking .
I am pleased to hear my fellow Member from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament say just now , for example , that there is a will to consider what we can do in the long term .
That is probably the most sensible way to approach this .
This discussion also shows that it is easy to turn an administrative debate into a competition to determine who comes top of the populist list .
Unfortunately , there seem to be rather a lot of people here in the Chamber competing for first prize .
However , there is no doubt that we need to review our costs and the only sensible way to do that is to take a long-term approach .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe proposed a number of savings both last year and this year .
We were among those who were pleased that we were able to reduce the increases originally proposed by the Bureau .
In this regard , I would like to thank Mr Alvaro for his excellent work .
With regard to the proposal for a House of European History I have to say that the idea does not particularly appeal to me , but at the same time I believe that it is good to remember that this is a long process and it was started during the previous parliamentary term .
Now we need to consider how we can take a decision on this matter .
I think it would be good for the issue to be put to the vote , providing those who definitely do not want a museum with a real opportunity to say ' no ' .
It may well be that I will then be among them .
However , I do not believe that we will gain anything by competing over who comes top of the populist list in this regard .
It is better to reflect carefully on where we can make cuts .
( NL ) In the current economic climate I find it self-evident that the European Parliament must put in place an austere budget .
The rapporteur is absolutely right to opt for restraint , but unfortunately he does not go far enough in so doing .
The current proposals are for us to have a budget that is 2.3 % higher than at present .
That is not in line with the view of the Commission , which is proposing a 1 % increase , and certainly not in line with the wishes of the Council , which is even considering a decrease of a couple of percent .
Indeed , it is the last of these proposals that we need to fall in line with .
We need to make more savings , and it is possible to do so .
We can make more savings .
Maybe it was decided earlier to build the House of European History , but it is still possible to undo that decision .
Let us do so , then , as a matter of priority .
Let us put a stop to this project - the House of European History - that will waste millions .
I now turn to us , the Members of this House .
We are still receiving many thousands of euros in general expenditure allowance every month without there being any requirement for accountability in respect of the sum in question .
If we were to now monitor and investigate that there would be a good deal of money to be saved in this area , too .
Let us , then , focus our efforts on this idea - let us make greater savings !
( PT ) Madam President , there has been a lot of debate in relation to this report , about Members ' salaries and allowances .
I would like to reiterate that , in contrast to the majority of Members , we were opposed to and voted against the current financial statute for Members of the European Parliament , because , inter alia , it involved virtually doubling Members ' incomes in the case of some countries .
Mainly , however , because it broke with a principle that is essential in our view : the existence of a link between the average salary level of the citizens of a country and the salary level of their representatives .
The breaking of this link is another symptom of the degradation of democracy , of the gap between representatives and those they represent , of ethical decline , and of a system that , imposes antisocial policies on the population through generalised cuts whilst protecting those who implement them from their effects .
Is it not time to review this financial statute ?
I would like to end , Madam President , by saying that it is also important for it to be clear that the draft amendments to this report , while promoting savings in Parliament , should not seek to create exceptions that are more favourable to funding European parties and European political foundations .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the estimates for the European Parliament for the financial year 2012 rightly stresses the absolute necessity of containing expenditure .
The compromise of increasing expenditure by 2.30 % seems acceptable , since this figure is actually lower than estimated inflation and would represent a theoretical saving .
We are , however , still far from meeting the requests made by the Commissioner for Financial Programming and Budget , who had hoped that the institutions would contain their needs to a single percentage point rise , which some institutions , such as the Council , have managed to achieve .
I shall leave the issues surrounding this increase , which is probably justified by the greater number of responsibilities after Lisbon , aside for the moment , and say a few words instead on the House of European History .
Insane figures were circulating at the Committee on Budgets with regard to the House of European History , both for its creation and its management .
It seems truly absurd that we are even considering investing tens and tens of millions of euros in a project of extremely dubious utility at a time like this , totally out of place and at completely the wrong moment in time .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we should highlight the fact that , in the light of the continuing structural crisis in our Member States , the European Parliament is taking a cautious approach to its budgetary plans for 2012 .
The tasks facing all the institutions are continually on the increase due to the expansion of the EU , the Treaty of Lisbon and new activities , and expenditure is rising accordingly .
Nonetheless , cost-efficiency is the golden rule .
It is therefore only logical for Parliament to follow a strategy of consolidation in the area of personnel , reducing expenditure on the day-to-day running of the House , missions and business trips .
I particularly support the proposal of the Secretary-General that the House 's environmental policy should continue .
I would emphasise that in this draft budget the European Parliament recognises the importance of a constant , consistent supply of information to Europe 's citizens .
The idea of the House of European History is supported in many quarters .
For this reason it is to be welcomed that the budgetary authority has now been informed about the project .
Here too I would offer a reminder that costs need to be reduced significantly and that complete transparency is required on all points .
( DE ) Madam President , I believe that the budget poses us a challenge every year , requiring us to be thrifty with resources on the one hand , while also using these resources efficiently on the other .
I think that we in this House can certainly achieve a great deal when it comes to efficiency .
It would be a very positive step if we were to establish our own points where Members of the House and staff could submit their suggestions for improvements , thereby promoting efficiency in Parliament .
On the other hand , since the Treaty of Lisbon , we have had ministers with specific remits who have sufficient resources in their Member States , their own specialist personnel , cabinets and financial resources , which they could have used to help explain European policy more clearly to our citizens .
For our part , we in the European Parliament are responsible for making the public aware of the daily decisions taken in the interest of the people of Europe .
Parliament must also be given adequate resources for its new competences in the areas of energy , world trade and foreign policy , as well as the areas of competition , the environment and social affairs , which affect us all .
I am also very much in favour of fiscal consolidation , as this would naturally allow us to make the requisite savings .
Anyone who believes that Economy Class is adequate to his needs on short-haul flights should naturally fly Economy .
There is no doubt about that .
Or , for example , if someone does not use every last penny of their secretarial allowance , that is all right too .
It is up to each of us to decide how much work we have and to what extent we wish to communicate with the citizens of Europe .
This should remain something that the Members of this House should decide for themselves , because it is naturally also extremely important that we should explain the benefits effectively .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when I listen to the debate on the House of European History , it seems to me that there are only two types of Members in this House : the budget specialists , who attend this debate and who are largely critical of this project , and everybody else , who seem to find the whole thing to be just fine .
The worst thing here is that when it comes to the issue of the House of European History there are so many cooks that people have actually lost sight of the point of the whole exercise .
Thus , the Daily Telegraph today reported that documents have come into its possession indicating that the cost of this project has risen to the astronomical figure of GBP 137 million .
I can only invite the Daily Telegraph to forward these documents to the Committee on Budgets and to let us see from it some of the transparency that the press demands from the Members of this House .
I would welcome an opportunity to examine the evidence .
Does this project make sense ?
Naturally it makes sense to foster an awareness of what the European Union and European integration have meant for people 's lives .
Should a parliament operate a museum ?
No , definitely not .
That is why the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have followed two guiding principles on this project .
The first is : we demand that the project should have a business plan .
The second is : we want clarity on the follow-up costs , that is , how this project is to be funded going forward .
We might add a third principle : we should avoid any duplications or overlaps between the Infocentre and the House of European History .
( DA ) Madam President , I would also like to say something about the House of European History .
It is clearly not the intention for Parliament to run a museum , but I think it is a good idea for us to have better facilities for visitors to Parliament in Brussels , and I think a House of European History is an important element in this regard .
I would also like to say that the majority of my group is in favour of the House of European History .
However , we very much agree with the views put forward by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament that we should have more openness and transparency with regard to the financial aspects relating to this house and how it will be run in future .
That is very important , but I do think that the idea is a good one and I definitely support it .
That said , we do need to know what financial obligations we are taking on in the longer term .
Mr President , at this particular time budgets are bound to be controversial , and especially here in the European Parliament .
At the same time it has to be said that everybody has an opportunity to express views here and it is good to hear all the views expressed .
That is one of the great strengths of the European Parliament : everybody can come , have a view , make a point and be listened to .
Regarding the budget itself , obviously we are in a difficult situation economically and any increase is going to be perhaps misconstrued , perhaps understandably so to a certain degree .
However , the bottom line here is that there is a 2.3 % increase when inflation is expected to be 2.8 % .
The other point that must be made is that the European Union has to deal with something in line with the overall context of the 27 countries , whereas some countries , particularly my own country , are suffering very badly at present .
We have just come from a meeting , thankfully , with Commissioner Rehn , who was very obliging with us .
Obviously in that situation people cannot understand any increase whatsoever , even if it is less than inflation .
Be that as it may , I think we have to make overall decisions , we have to give commitments to various things we have to do , we are going to see growth in terms of extra MEPs as a result of the Lisbon Treaty and , hopefully , also when Croatia joins .
One point I would make before I conclude is that all this brings to mind the point which President Barroso has been making quite frequently : we do need to have a full and frank discussion on own resources and , perhaps , particularly project bonds , because the more finance the European Union can get independently , the less controversial budgets are going to be and the less we will be asking from the Member States .
Ultimately , I think we should be following the line of President Barroso .
( NL ) Madam President , in this House , I represent the most pro-European party in my Member State , the Netherlands .
It is precisely because I believe in Europe so strongly that I am very critical of it and also of the budget of our own institution , the European Parliament .
I therefore believe that , in these difficult financial times , we must budget very frugally .
I am therefore not in favour of this budget increase .
More than anything , I was surprised by the original budget that the Secretary-General produced , which put forward an increase of over 5 % , much as I was also surprised by the fact that he is not here today .
I would have liked to have had him here , as I would like to remind him of paragraph 6 of the resolution , in which we ask the services to go through the budget with a fine toothcomb with the aim of identifying potential savings .
I want to ask him to do that before 1 July this year so that we are able to come up with tangible savings .
Finally , Madam President , I would like to call on my fellow pro-European Members to not give those who want to wreck Europe any ammunition with which to set about that task .
The populace of which they always talk is best served by a prosperous and vigorous Europe .


( ES ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Fernandes , and I would thank Mr Gerbrandy for what he has just said , which I consider most opportune .
This is a more austere budget , in line with what the Commission and Council requested .
It is being kept within the 20 % limit , thereby observing the ' gentlemen 's agreement ' , even though that does not exist .
We all talk about savings , some of us with partisan intentions , but we all have some shared priorities : for example , we Members want legislative output to be improved ; we are called on to respond to the new priorities of the Treaty of Lisbon ; we are asked to work more professionally in co-decisions ; we are asked for more meeting rooms , more internal security , greater efforts in communication policy , better IT networks , and so on .
Does this or does this not all have to be paid for ?
We have to comply with all the agreements concluded regarding property .
It is being said that we could stop financing them , but we know that it does not work like that .
If we are being responsible , we will have to accept that , will we not ?
Youth is never a controversial area : youth is a necessity .
For example , my country has 50 % youth unemployment .
These problems are not solved by EUR 100 million for youth policy , but that does respond to Parliament 's priorities .
I know that moving this money from heading 5 to heading 1 is controversial , and it could even be - and has been - argued that it contradicts budgetary procedure , but we are a living institution and we must adapt to the needs of the moment .
I do not think that there is anything more urgent than solving the issue of youth unemployment .
I am sure that is the priority for all of you .
Finally , I will be voting in favour of the shared House of European History .
( FI ) Madam President , first of all , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Fernandes , for his excellent work .
This 2.3 % increase is certainly a lot easier to accept and justify than the 5.2 % proposed by the Bureau .
Parliament needs to be very selfcritical in this budgetary procedure .
In the report that is the case , but this work should be continued very intensively .
I think that it is important that savings have also been sought in the small things , and in different areas .
Certainly , making savings on cleaning and upkeep , for example , is one solution , but perhaps we also need more ambitious agendas than merely saving on soap .
This year Parliament voted to change a double partsession in the autumn to make it a weeklong sitting in Strasbourg .
Ending this Parliament 's monthly plenary rally would mean considerable savings , and these would also be reflected in Parliament 's budget .
( PL ) Madam President , when examining Parliament 's budget , it is apparent that transport accounts for a significant proportion of expenditure , and this will remain the case in future , since we have to travel from 27 Member States to sittings in Brussels and Strasbourg .
I have calculated that the total cost of travel for Parliament 's Members and officials exceeds EUR 100 million per year .
I think that we could look for more savings here .
We are very frequent travellers .
I cannot understand why we pay the same for airline tickets as people who only travel occasionally by air .
I would therefore urge Parliament 's leaders to engage in talks with the airlines .
I believe that there is a chance that we could obtain significant reductions .
This is normal practice in every country ; the government and ministries are entitled to reductions of 20-30 % .
Thank you very much .
- ( SK ) Madam President , the report on the estimated revenues and expenditure of the European Parliament in the 2012 budgetary year refers in points 17 and 18 to the continuing work on the House of European History , and proposes creating budgetary reserves to cover further costs connected with the implementation of this project , included in an item of Chapter 10.1 - Unforeseen Expenditure Reserve .
I do not know whether the continuation of the House of European History can be considered as unforeseen expenditure , but I listened carefully to Marta Andreasen , who pointed out to us when the programme was approved that the costs stated in the report for the House of European History are substantially underestimated .
I do not know the motivation of the people who are so stubbornly pushing for the implementation of the House of European History in a period of continuing financial and economic problems in the EU .
I do know , however , that the wider European public regards this as an outrageous waste of taxpayers ' money .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would therefore like to ask you , in all seriousness , to reconsider continuing the funding of this controversial project to the tune of EUR 60 million .
- ( SK ) Madam President , I would like to focus on one very important aspect of the report .
That is the ambition to keep a closer eye on the efficiency and thriftiness of European institutions .
In a time of economic crisis , when many EU citizens have lost their jobs , the running of institutions funded from their taxes is a highly sensitive matter , and it has to be said that this is perfectly justified .
It is therefore important for the budget to enshrine the obligation for strict management .
There is a need to concentrate on several items in order to avoid the unnecessary squandering of public funds .
It is important to create and apply a strategy for electronic administration .
The use of videoconferencing should be encouraged for meetings , as well as the use of new environmental technologies .
In order to save natural resources , and particularly paper , we must bring the wireless network into operation in all of our workplaces .
However , the saving of resources must not , on the other hand , lead to loss of quality in the work we carry out in the European institutions .
I consider it important , for example , that committee meetings do not lack interpreters , and I would like to take this opportunity to thank all of the interpreters , both male and female , for the work they do .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to congratulate Mr Fernandes on his excellent work and on the climate of positive cooperation between the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets , which has allowed us to reach an agreement on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2012 .
As has become clear during the debate , starting from a proposal based on a suggested rate of increase of 5.2 % compared to 2011 , we arrived at an overall level for the Preliminary Draft Estimates which represents a rate of increase of 2.3 % .
Furthermore I believe the estimate of a EUR 100 million transfer for youth projects is important , since Parliament identified this policy as one of its priorities for 2011 , and these funds will be helpful in financing mobility , education , and employment projects for all the young people of Europe .
I hope , finally , that in the 2012 budgetary procedure , it will be possible , through the determination of all the institutions , to optimise resource management .
. - ( SK ) Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for what is really a very good report .
Both he and everyone else who has spoken today have pointed out the shortcomings , while also finding real potential solutions .
However , the only proper solution is for us to examine the entire issue in a truly objective way , rather than each of us looking individually for something we may or may not find .
The only objective view would be to take an x-ray of Parliament from the outside .
This is surely what the Court of Auditors once did , and we saw the administrative cost savings that followed hard on the heels of the external audit .
This means , I am pleased to say , that the Members on our committee also supported my amendment proposal for Parliament to look at some of its areas in earnest from the perspective of an outside observer , so that we might discover everything you were talking about and perhaps even more .
The next step , as mentioned by Göran Färm , is then to monitor this expenditure in the future .
That is the only solution .
( LT ) Madam President , given the current difficult financial , economic and social situation the European Union faces , Parliament 's budget resources should be managed with rigour and efficiency .
It is proposed that the European Parliament 's overall budget in 2012 should increase by 2.3 % , which is below the current rate of inflation .
This really is positive , but in future Parliament must make greater savings and tighten management and monitoring procedures .
I agree with the rapporteur 's proposal for a long-term review of the European Parliament 's budget in order to reduce costs .
The services of Parliament must increase their efforts to modernise and rationalise administration , reducing their dependence on external services , and applying strict management of human resources .
I believe that these measures would enable European Union money to be used more efficiently , thus saving taxpayers ' money and reducing Parliament 's current level of expenditure .

Madam President , firstly , it is important to mention a figure : administrative expenditure for all European institutions is around 6 % .
There is no budget of any institution , in any Member State , that has such a tiny proportion of the overall budget , of the European Union budget .
Parliament has new powers .
There are 27 Member States , the Treaty of Lisbon will bring in another 18 Members of Parliament when it comes into force , there is set to be an enlargement involving Croatia , and it is clear that all of this will involve costs .
However , the truth is that there has been a real decrease in this budget to well below inflation .
One more word on the issue of youth .
We are well aware that the initiative has come from the Commission and that the Council needs to adopt it unanimously , but we also know that it was important to send a signal , and the allocation to which we are referring is heading 5 out of all of the administrative expenditure , where there is due to be around EUR 380 million and we propose EUR 100 million .

On the issue of Members ' salaries , it is not Parliament 's responsibility to update salaries .
It is the Council , following proposals from the Commission , that sets salaries .
The Commission 's current proposal for updating salaries is 0.9 % .
Salaries are also in something called the ' Statute for Members ' , and are indexed to the salary of a judge of the Court of Justice .
Parliament alone cannot amend the Statute for Members .
The approval of the Commission and the Council are required .
Some Members need to read the regulations , and they also need to read the Treaty of Lisbon , specifically Article 223 .
( PT ) Madam President , Mr Fernandes , with regard to salaries , it seems clear to me that Parliament is perfectly capable of taking the initiative to propose a review of the Statute for Members .
The regulations were adopted in this House , and may be changed in this House , even if there are institutional steps to be taken .
In fact , only salaries are indexed to increases decided by the European Council ; by the governments .
Only salaries : no other major item of expenditure , which are strictly under the control of this Chamber and nobody else .

As Mr Portas himself says , it is not Parliament 's responsibility to update salaries .
It therefore makes no sense to talk about freezing salaries in a budget of this type .
However , it would make sense to table a motion to amend the Statute for Members , for example .
Regulation ( EC ) No 31 could also be amended , specifically Article 64 .
What certainly does not make sense is to try to enable Members of this House to set their own increases when this cannot be done under law , as this would be a way of seeking to deceive those listening to us , and of engaging in demagoguery .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the report by Mr José Manuel Fernandes will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Protection of Communities ' financial interests - fight against fraud ( debate )
The next item is the report ( Α7-0050 / 2011 ) by Mr Cătălin Sorin Ivan , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual report 2009 - .
Madam President , this report on the protection of the European Union 's financial interests is based on the report drafted by the Commission according to Article 325 of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union .
This article refers in no uncertain terms to the fight against fraud , while the Commission 's report fails to give a very clear indication as to what percentage of the irregularities are due to fraud and what percentage are simple errors .
It is of paramount importance that we define very clearly what is meant by fraud because the use of this term means an act of deliberate infringement .
We are talking about corruption in the proper sense of the word , whereas mistakes are unintentional .
While we may agree to tolerate errors , we can , in no way , tolerate any act of fraud .
There must be zero tolerance of fraud when it comes to European funds and the European Union 's budget .
Another major problem relates to the collection of data and information .
We must have a very serious discussion about the way in which Member States pass on to the European Union , to the European Commission to be more exact , information about the way in which EU funds are used .
In my view , the content of the national management declarations will be of a higher quality when they entail much greater political responsibility at national level .
I ask the Commission once again to ensure that these national management declarations are signed by the relevant minister or a minister from the national government .
In another respect , the EUR 16.7 billion contained in the European Union budget are own resources and mainly revenue from customs duties .
Seventy per cent of imports come through the simplified procedure .
I would like to quote at this point from Special Report No 1 / 2010 from the Court of Auditors of the European Union , which points out the following : ' the control carried out on these simplified procedures is very limited , while the number of errors identified by the Court is alarming ' .
It is of paramount importance that , in this case , the Commission evaluates the financial impact of these irregularities .
I wish to congratulate OLAF for the Diablo II operation , aimed not only at protecting the European Union 's financial interests but also , at the same time , at combating counterfeit products .
Apart from the detrimental impact these counterfeit products have on the European Union 's fiscal framework and budget , there is also the risk to European citizens ' safety and the adverse effects in the European Union 's economy .
I will continue to refer to the costs involved and to mention , on the one hand , the use of European funds and , on the other hand , the recovery of funds which have been allocated without justification .
On the subject of the use of European funds , we must mention the Integrated Administration and Control System , which is an excellent system but causes huge problems when it has been implemented because it is based on incorrect databases and is also hampered due to the identification of the parcels to be used .
In addition , on the subject of recovering European funds , the only thing I can say is that I find it worrying that 42 % of agricultural funds are recovered and only 50 % of the cohesion funds .
These are extremely alarming figures and we must keep a very close eye on fund recovery .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ivan , for his constructive report .
I will concentrate my remarks on six very important elements of it .
Firstly , the question of the information provided in the report on the protection of financial interests .
The 2009 report already includes new detailed information on levels of fraud and irregularities , and indicates the suspected fraud rate per Member State for the 2000-2006 Cohesion programmes .
Further improvements are always possible , and I will take due account of your suggestions .
Secondly , on the issue of the Convention on the protection of financial interests , I am preparing a communication for next May , together with Vice-President Reding .
It will present a strategy for the protection of EU public money against all forms of illegal conduct , including fraud , and will look at procedures , substantive criminal law and the institutional framework .
Thirdly , turning to own resources , in 2010 the Commission started to visit all Member States to examine simplified customs import procedures .
It will report to Parliament as soon as enough information has been gathered for a meaningful analysis of their implementation and performance .
Fourthly , on cigarette smuggling , agreements have now been concluded with four tobacco manufacturers .
We will continue to push for a Protocol on the elimination of the illicit trade in tobacco products under the WHO Convention on Tobacco Control .
On the fifth point , I fully agree that failures in applying public procurement rules are an important source of errors and fraud .
The Commission vigorously implements financial corrections with rates of up to 100 % of the allocated funding , depending on the gravity of the irregularities .
We propose simplification and clarification of EU procurements directives by 2012 , in line with the Green Paper published earlier this year .
Finally , I share the view that the recovery of unduly paid funds is a key element in protecting the EU 's financial interests .
For multiannual Cohesion programmes , the Commission is making extensive use of the interruption and suspension of payments , avoiding payments to Member States where management and control systems are found not be effective .
In 2010 , more than EUR 2.4 billion of payments under the Regional and Social Funds were preventively interrupted .
The Commission will continue to push Member States towards more efficient management of recovery from final beneficiaries .
The situation is improving .
In the agricultural sector , for example , the recovery rate at the end of 2010 went up to 53 % for new 2007 cases , compared to 10 % for cases dating from before 2006 .
Let me stress , however , that for multiannual programmes the full picture is only seen when the programmes are closed , after any irregularities have been satisfactorily dealt with by the Member States .
To conclude , the Commission will endeavour to actively follow up the actions which Parliament has proposed . Thank you for your attention .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , I believe we have to talk about what we need to correct , so I will refer to the critical issues .
The first of them is the fact that the Commission 's report did not provide information on the estimated level of irregularities and fraud in individual Member States .
Therefore , we lack a clear picture of the problem at Member State level .
In addition , the Commission dealt broadly with irregularities but failed to look at fraud in detail .
We expect that to change in the report for the following year .
The second issue concerns public procurement , which , as we all know , is the area with the highest risk of fraud and corruption .
What we call for in this report is for the Commission to focus on regulating public procurement : to apply uniform systems of procurement ; to define and implement clear conditions for participation in public procurement ; to implement criteria for decision-making on public procurement and bring transparency to these decisions ; and also to review public procurement decisions and ensure transparency and accountability in public finances .
We expect the Commission and the Council to finalise the adoption of the public procurement reform and to consult with us on this .
The third issue concerns the transparency of beneficiaries ' funding .
There is a page on the Commission 's website where we can see some of the beneficiaries of European funds in the Member States .
However , we need to improve this greatly .
We need one-stop transparency .
We need a single website that publishes all the beneficiaries of EU funds on the basis of standard categories of information to be supplied by all the Member States in at least one working language of the Union .
Otherwise we will be lost in a lot of diverse information that fails to provide any overall picture and cannot offer transparency .
As the Commissioner said , there is always room for improvement , and I hope to see improvement in the areas I have mentioned .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Šemeta , We know that 80 % of the EU budget is administered in a shared management arrangement , which means that money is administered and spent in the Member States , which is exactly where the errors , irregularities and fraud occur .
The annual report on the protection of the European Union 's financial interests is a bit like the Member States ' list of sins , which is why I would like to thank Mr Cătălin Sorin and the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups for their hard work .
I found the Commission 's report on the protection of the European Union 's financial interests contains one remarkable sentence - on page 11 in the German version .
It reads : ' For the Objective 2 programmes , the very high irregularity rates of the UK and the Netherlands , which mainly benefit from this type of programmes , may have influenced the overall rate . '
The United Kingdom and the Netherlands are two of the countries that have proposed cutting the European budget .
From my position I can only call on them to make sure that European taxpayers ' money is spent correctly and to combat the level of irregularities in their countries .
I would be very interested to hear whether you have anything else to add in this context , Commissioner .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Reporting fraud and irregularities is very important for the legislator , as it gives us an insight into how resources are spent .
It provides us with an insight into what may be going wrong .
It provides us with an insight into what can be improved .
In that context , this report is very important indeed .
I think that , following the debate in Parliament 's anti-fraud committee , we can stand by the following conclusions .
First of all , the reports need to be more precise .
They need to provide a real insight into the actual scope of irregularities and fraud .
Secondly , the Member States need to improve their reporting .
This is sub-optimal at the moment , and I use the term advisedly .
We therefore need to put pressure on the Member States to improve this , with sanctions if necessary .
Thirdly , those resources that are wrongly spent must actually be recovered , and the Commission must take the necessary steps to ensure that this is the case .
We should also discuss this when discussing the granting of discharge in Strasbourg next month .
Italy is a problem child in this regard .
Fourthly , we need to better monitor the mandatory notification of irregularities by the Member States .
The lack of reports from Spain and France is particularly odd in this regard .
I am the permanent rapporteur for own resources and , as such , I would also like to direct a word of thanks and congratulations to the Commission and , above all , to the European Anti-fraud Office ( OLAF ) and its anti-cigarettes and tobacco fraud unit , whose results have been quite staggering and very impressive .
Operation Diabolo II - it is said - was a peach of a collaborative operation , and the agreements reached with British American Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco were equally outstanding .
This will yield us EUR 500 million .
There is just one thing though - it is important that this money does not simply disappear into the national exchequers of the Member States .
This money must actually be used - by the Commission , yes , but predominantly by the Member States - to strengthen anti-fraud measures in the Member States .
This is really a very important point .
The money that results from this agreement must be put to use in the fight against fraud .
Madam President , I welcome this report , which strives for greater transparency in the fight against corruption , and which deserves support .
In the autumn of last year , at the presentation from the European Court of Auditors , we were already discussing the responsibility of Member States for monitoring the overall issuing of EU funds .
In my opinion , it is right and proper that every Member State should protect the financial interests of the EU by ensuring reliable controls at the national level for the detection of irregularities and fraud .
In connection with this , there is also a need for Member States and the Commission to cooperate in the provision of comprehensive and reliable information .
The mandatory declaration of a report at the national level must be duly checked by the national monitoring body .
The Convention on the Protection of the Financial Interests of the European Communities is surely an appropriate supporting instrument .
However , the Czech Republic , which is mentioned in the report , has not yet ratified the Convention , because it requires the introduction of criminal liability for legal entities .
The law of the Czech Republic is traditionally based on the criminal liability only of natural persons .
The matter is now under discussion , however , on the floor of the Parliament of the Czech Republic .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , the EU tends to term what in many cases is fraud and corruption as errors .
Worse , the Commission has decided to move from zero tolerance to tolerable risk .
To add insult to injury , the recent revelations about members of this House who agreed to amend or write legislation in exchange for payment further erode the credibility of this Parliament , particularly in its efforts to fight fraud and corruption .
Only two of the four whose names were revealed have effectively resigned .
Will this Parliament review the legislation these four MEPs have worked on ?
One MEP has even gone so far as to question OLAF 's power to investigate these cases , declaring - incredibly - that in some countries such action would not be considered illegal and would not even be investigated .
This report should spur the British Government to withhold all payments to the EU until fraud - to use its proper name - is meaningfully tackled by this Parliament .
( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to primarily consider political fraud and political corruption during the time I have available .
I very much regret that we are only dealing with this report at a time when three Members of the European Parliament have been entrapped and are suspected of corruption on solid grounds .
It does not bear thinking about that the ensnared MEPs are only the tip of the iceberg here in the European Parliament .
That is to say , according to some calculations , about 50 % of European Union tenders and public procurements , which have been mentioned a lot here , are embezzled , defrauded and lost in corruption , and get into the pockets of certain politicians .
Well , this is intolerable .
Moreover , the mere financial aspect of this is secondary , because society is turning away from politics .
If people turn away from politics , a mood of resignation will govern which will be unable to prevent school closures , rising food prices and loss of jobs .
This is why the European Parliament must set an example and we must waive our privilege of immunity from judicial process .
Moreover , Jobbik recommends that sentences be doubled for politicians . Thank you very much for your attention .

( DE ) Madam President , Mr Šemeta , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's report on the Protection of the European Union 's financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual Report 2009 introduces several new provisions .
Firstly , the Commission is trying to determine the extent of irregularities and fraud .
Unfortunately the report also makes obvious attempts to use statistics to play down the problem of irregularities and fraud at every turn .
Commissioner , I was not at all pleased to read this .
The report also offers more important news , namely the implementation of the reporting system for dealing with irregularities , known as IMS .
Data can now be entered at 800 offices throughout Europe , rather than 50 offices as before .
Accordingly , the proportion of irregularities in the agricultural sector rose by 43 % and in the area of structural funds by 23 % , while the total figure in the structural funds area actually rose by 109 % .
This system needs further improvement .
It is painful to see that the Commission is still showing a great deal of patience in relation to implementation in the Member States , which continues to proceed at snail 's pace .
This is also evident in the report .
Hence our call for the full implementation of the IMS .
We will only have credible data when the system is up and running correctly , enabling us to deal with quota irregularities and fraud .
We are very unhappy with the situation in Italy .
This country is way ahead of the rest when it comes to fraud .
The EU accounts up to 2004 were audited and 60 % of suspected cases of fraud were attributed to Italy .
For this reason it would make sense to help this country with an action plan and a series of special measures .
I would like to express my sincere thanks to OLAF and its staff for the important work completed .
You have our backing , which is why we are calling for greater support from the Commission for the European Anti-Fraud Office .
Why are problems encountered with access to databases if the Commission claims that it supports the work of OLAF and considers it just as important as we do ?
Commissioner , we would be grateful to hear some answers and to receive appropriate remedies in the legislation introduced by the Commission .
- ( SK ) Madam President , I would like to express my support for the rapporteur in his wholly justified criticism of the Commission 's annual report .
The Commission has focused only formally on what it was notified of by the Member States .
Commissioner , you should look more deeply , with the help of the specialised bodies .
You simply have to make a greater effort , and you must try to apply the latest methodologies for measuring the extent of irregularities and fraud .
If we continued with the methodology represented in the Commission 's annual report for 2009 , we would have only estimates for many of the suspicious items .
For example , some large States receiving a high level of funding report a very low level of irregularities and fraud .
Is the situation in these States really so positive , or is the national methodology for identifying these aberrations simply lenient in some way ?
I fully agree with the rapporteur that the Commission is putting a disproportionately large effort into convincing us in Parliament of the need to introduce a tolerable risk of error , rather than trying to persuade Member States of the need for mandatory national management declarations .
( PL ) Madam President , I agree with the rapporteur that we should not confuse serious fraud with accidental errors , because doing so means that the accidental errors divert attention from the most serious matters .
I also agree with the criticism levelled at the Commission 's report , which is too vague , and which contains too little information about specific instances of fraud and abuse .
Our debate on this issue would be much more to the point if we had more specific information .
We are fighting corruption .
We should start by fighting corruption ourselves and , when we come to adopt the various legal texts in this Chamber , we should ensure that they are always transparent , that there are clear criteria for taking decisions and that conflicts of interest are avoided , in order to ensure maximum transparency in EU spending and to ensure systematic and ongoing checks .
These are the basic tools we should use to fight corruption .
( NL ) Madam President , I am pleased with this report .
The reason for this is quite sad , however , as it consists of the observation that large amounts of fraud are committed within the European Union .
I quote : the Commission fails to consider fraud in detail and deals with irregularities very broadly .
Large amounts of EU funds are wrongly spent .
There is a disproportionate rise in irregularities in Poland , Romania and Bulgaria .
Spain and Italy are responsible for the highest number of cases of irregularities .
Over recent years , only 10 % of legitimate recoveries were actually recovered .
Finally , Bulgaria perpetrates the most fraud in connection with the Special Accession Programme for Agriculture and Rural Development ( SAPARD ) .
These were just a few facts from the report .
It is a good thing that these facts have been noted , but what is the European Union actually going to do about it ?
How much longer will fraud continue to be tolerated and for how much longer will the citizens have to pick up the tab ?
( The speaker agreed to take a blue-card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) .


( NL ) Madam President , I listened carefully to your speech Mr Hartong , but I also listened to Mr Geier , and at one point he said that two net contributors , the United Kingdom and the Netherlands , are also seriously failing .
What , after having condemned a whole group of other Member States , will you do in your own country to ensure that the Netherlands , too , does not end up failing .
( NL ) Madam President , I thank Mr Staes for his question .
If you have read the report thoroughly you will also have been able to observe the facts : namely that the Netherlands - I cannot speak for the United Kingdom but I am speaking now on behalf of the Netherlands - is one of those countries with the lowest percentage of fraud , while it is also stressed that , where fraud occurs , it is to be tackled very hard .
Let me be clear - I am a great advocate of this .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I admire the work achieved by the rapporteur , Mr Ivan .
I must say that unfortunately this report reveals a certain lack of attention on the part of the Commission in its dealings with Parliament , which even in last year 's work had signalled to the Commission several specific measures to be taken in response to this aim that we have set ourselves to protect the financial interests of the European Union and the interests of taxpayers in combating fraud and fighting illegality .
In fact , as Mr Ivan has made clear , concerns over the improper use of European funds have not diminished , and the percentages of irregularity and incidence of suspected fraud are still very high .
Therefore , if the objective of our controls is to ensure the recovery of resources , we are bound to admit defeat in the light of the figures reported to us .
As we already stated in the report presented last year , the Commission should take responsibility for intervening in cases of serious concern , which I would group into three categories , as fellow Members before me have also said .
In the first instance , Member States must take on responsibility in particular by working on detection and reporting mechanisms .
Secondly , the clarity of regulations .
It is vital that we arrive at a single and clear definition of fraud , irregularity and error .
Finally transparency , which means not only maintaining reliable detection records from which to draw conclusions , but also going ahead with the publication of these data on a website , which is instead experiencing something of a slowdown .
On the first point , in particular that of giving Member States more responsibility , I would also like to draw attention to the fact that the lack of harmonisation between national systems creates significant differences in terms of the amount of time needed to verify cases of fraud and irregularity .
Italy has often been discussed in relation to this subject .
Italy is also mentioned in Mr Ivan 's document .
We certainly have insupportably long verification periods and we are trying to work on the timings involved in legal and criminal justice .
However , I must say that if there is no uniform criterion for the definition of fraud and irregularity , it is clear that the time taken to recover losses in states like Italy will seem excessively long .
( HU ) Madam President , for my part , too , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
I believe that the activity performed by Parliament , the Court of Auditors and the national audit offices of countries , Member States alike is highly important .
It is extremely important that we do our job transparently and , if possible , impeccably .
Naturally , the most important concomitant of Parliament 's credibility is that we ourselves are all beyond reproach .
With regard to itself , Parliament certainly needs to introduce rules for itself that are better and more effective than at present .
At the same time , I would like to emphasise that it is very important to distinguish between irregularities and fraud because irregularity is not the same as fraud .
Defrauders must be punished .
For irregularities a different method must be applied .
The goal must be that all spending organisations of all Member States know the rules precisely to ensure that as few mistakes as possible are made .
It is no coincidence that we see that in the new Member States , where the debate has now begun and the use of funds has started , inexperience is one of the contributing factors .
Madam President , can I just congratulate the rapporteur and indeed her shadow , my colleague Monica Macovei , for their work on this report .
It is an important one , because taxpayers want to know that their money is well spent .
I think it is important to emphasise , as did the last speaker , the difference between irregularities and fraud .
For the public , fraud is carried out with criminal intent , but many people make mistakes which could be classified as errors , or commit major or minor breaches of European Union rules , and they should not all be lumped together .
There is a very distinct difference .
In relation to agriculture , which was mentioned by some colleagues , it is important that we have full transparency on payments in the agricultural sector .
Huge improvements have been made in this area .
But it is important , as we move towards reforming the common agricultural policy , that we continue to make those improvements .
I refer in particular to paragraph 24 , which talks about the control systems .
I know that , in the Member State that I represent , farmers are getting new maps out and have got to resubmit .
A huge amount of patience and attention is being paid to this issue , and rightly so .
I will finish by saying that individuals are sometimes caught by the system , whereas major players and others who might be more guilty of an element of fraud are perhaps less likely to be caught .
That is something that we need to be aware of .
Let us not terrorise the individual .
( LT ) Madam President , I would like to thank my colleague Cătălin Ivan for his excellent work preparing this important report .
European Union taxpayers ' money must be used appropriately and efficiently .
To that end , it is necessary to ensure that the Member States have effective control mechanisms and adequate fraud detection capability .
It is important for the Commission and the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) to be provided with high quality , accurate , reliable and comparable data on irregularities and fraud .
The current recovery rate is very low and intolerable .
It is therefore necessary to take action to recover all European Union money that has been misused .
In this fight it is crucial for proper attention to be paid by the Council and the Member States to the facts presented in Parliament 's report and the Commission 's annual reports on the protection of interests , and for OLAF to be able to take all necessary steps to strengthen anti-fraud measures in this area .
( BG ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately this report still contains worrying findings regarding the high proportion of resources which have been wrongly spent and the inadequately prompt action taken to recover them .
Nevertheless , the European Commission 's data is not completely adequate either for determining measures to be used to discipline the Member States with the highest rate of irregularities and fraud .
Most fellow Members have already mentioned the difference between fraud and irregularities , which is not emphasised clearly , because the report fails to consider fraud in detail , which is deliberate wrongdoing , while adopting a very general approach to irregularities , which does not give us an opportunity to make any effective recommendations on the issue .
I am pleased with the Commission 's conclusion that compliance with reporting requirements in the agricultural sector has already reached 95 % .
However , at the same time , I find low and zero rates for fraud and irregularities in some Member States suspicious , which could mean that fraud control and detection systems are not operating properly .
I think that control over the spending of European funds would improve considerably if there were specific data and methods available for assessing the management and control systems deployed in the Member States where the national agencies ' efficiency is evident .
This is why it is totally plausible that countries with a zero irregularity rate simply have a poor control system which fails to detect the problems , whereas countries with efficient national agencies may discover more fraud and irregularities , thereby making the levels for these considerably higher .
According to the data from the Court of Auditors of the European Union , at least 30 % of the errors could have been detected and rectified by the national agencies prior to certifying them to the European Commission .
I hope that all Member States will make more effort to improve their mechanisms for detecting and rectifying errors .
I want to call on the European Commission to take the necessary measures to guarantee sufficient information about the control and management systems deployed in Member States , as well as adequate measures for promptly removing any deficiencies detected where the control systems are used .

( ES ) Madam President , I too would congratulate my colleague , Mr Ivan , on the rigorous way that he has set about an issue as controversial and difficult as fraud detection and protecting financial interests .
I would like to thank him for his interest in identifying the definitions of fraud , because , in general , suspicions of fraud and irregularities or errors are often mixed up , leading to figures that cause a fuss without really being rigorous .
I should also like to stress his interest in raising the issue of deadlines .
Specifically , the delays being caused by Member States between detection and reporting are also leading to difficult situations .
It should also be remembered that , in the end , the final figures appear when a cycle is finalised and that , at the moment , the last full cycle to have been finalised was that ending in 1999 : in the new cycle - 2000-2006 - we have only reached the end of 2004 .
Therefore , only the final figures for that cycle can be taken into account .
I should , of course , like to support the European Anti-Fraud Office 's means for fraud detection in relation to China and Asian countries , within the ethical code .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ivan .
The report lists the innovations introduced in the changes to control and reporting systems .
These too bring out a greatly varied picture , especially in terms of Member States ' reporting of irregularities and fraud .
The report repeatedly highlights the unusually low levels of fraud and irregularity reported by various countries in relation to agricultural expenditure , structural funds and pre-accession funds .
It is here that we really must have some clarification on the statistics which have been submitted .
The context is made more complicated by the unresolved inefficiencies in recovering losses .
In any case , one figure seems clear and confirms a long-running trend .
The struggle for legality and transparency in the expenditure of European resources , in comparison to tax avoidance and evasion , cannot yet count on the full collaboration of Member States and governments with the European institutions .
In this light , it seems that the calls for reform of the EU 's public procurement rules and the need for what I would call a public European register for the beneficiaries of EU funds are timely .
( EL ) Madam President , I too should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his exceptional work on the annual report on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests and on the fight against fraud .
The report covers in detail all areas in which the Member States implement the budget , such as agriculture , cohesion , pre-accession funds and collection of the EU 's own resources via customs duty .
I absolutely agree that we need to improve supervision of pre-accession funds , given the experience in 2009 , and that we need to monitor OLAF 's work constantly , not only when the annual report is debated .
Finally , I should like to stress that our report provides important findings which we can use in the debates which have started both on the review of the Budgetary Regulation and for planning political cohesion post-2013 .
( BG ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for his extremely diligent work on this report .
We have proved on several occasions that Parliament is an institution which pays particular attention to the way in which European taxpayers ' money is spent .
Many fellow Members raised the issue .
I too wish to add my voice to those who are insisting on the Commission adopting much clearer rules for the methodology which Member States are considering , because mixing up the concepts ' abuses ' , ' errors ' and even ' suspected abuses ' , which appears , produces statistics which cannot be used to make clear-cut decisions in Parliament .
I also support those sections of the report which encourage the Commission to introduce much clearer rules for national accountability to include properly audited national declarations required from Member States .
The latter must adopt measures automatically to eradicate the deficiencies .
( RO ) Madam President , the level of economic and financial crime must be reduced in every Member State .
Large amounts of EU funds are spent on other purposes , while the incidence of VAT recovery fraud is on the increase .
I have already mentioned it before and will again : one effective method for possibly eradicating corruption in public procurement is to introduce an online tender system .
As a country located at the EU 's border , Romania has increased responsibility for mitigating the impact of illegal activities .
In this regard , the country 's authorities have carried out large-scale actions during the last two months , aimed at eradicating customs corruption .
Cooperation and exchanges of experience must be stepped up with the Western Balkans region in order to provide more effective protection for the EU 's financial interests .
I am referring , for example , to cigarette smuggling , which is a major , direct obstacle to the European budget .
( DE ) Madam President , errors are made through carelessness or ignorance .
However , fraud is not something that just simply happens , but requires a high level of criminal activity .
Those who seek financial gain from the Brussels juggernaut by making false claims are sometimes seen as latter-day Robin Hoods rather than as criminals .
However , this does not just inflict damage on the EU , but also misuses the taxes paid by our citizens .
We must give new strength to the weak mechanisms for combating fraud .
I am thinking of significant financial penalties , as well as exclusion from subsidy schemes as a consequence .
In the final analysis , what we need is greater transparency and clear areas of responsibility when there is reason to suspect fraud and negligence .
We cannot allow the institutions , in particular the European Parliament and OLAF , to impede one another 's investigations .
Finally , a word about our major headaches : cohesion policy , pre-accession aid and agencies .
We need to rethink our strategy here and to take decisive action to establish order .
( DE ) Madam President , let me start by saying that subsidy fraud and the abuse of financial aid are problems that have significantly declined in recent years .
Despite all the progress made in terms of transparency and controls , public perception remains critical .
This critical attitude is justified when we consider the way that some Member States have dealt with improperly apportioned grant payments .
The fact that only a fraction of this money has been returned to the European budget represents a blow against all taxpayers .
The Commission must recover this money immediately .
An even better solution would be to pay out a correspondingly smaller level of subsidies to the relevant Member States in the next financial year and to continue to do so until the improperly distributed funds have been returned to Brussels .
However , we are equally uneasy when very few irregularities are reported , according to the principle : if I report nothing then I do not need to worry about recovery and the money will remain in my country .
As demanded in the report , I also call on Spain , France and other countries to place their cards on the table , while also calling on the Commission to further strengthen its controls .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like once again to thank Mr Ivan for a very constructive and good report and also all Members for the contributions made during this debate , which will certainly be taken on board by the Commission when preparing the report for 2010 .
The Commission will further improve the format and content of the Article 325 annual report on the protection of financial interests and will take into account the suggestions that were made during the debate .
As I mentioned , we have already improved the statistics , but of course there is still room for more improvement .
We are asking Member States to present more information and also to distinguish better between fraud and irregularities in order to be able to present clear information on both fraud and irregularities .
I fully agree with Mrs Grässle that we can make improvements in the irregularities management system , and we are working on it very seriously .
The issue was raised of transparency of beneficiaries as well .
We are improving this and the ideas that were presented here will also be analysed by the Commission .
The Commission also shares the view that , although measures have been taken by the Member States to make control systems in the fight against fraud and corruption more efficient , there is still room for further improvement .
Regarding the points made by Mr Geier : fraud has no specific national borders .
It is not just a problem for several Member States or new Member States but also for the Member States that you mentioned in your intervention .
Of course , we have to address this issue seriously throughout the European Union and my intention is to really improve the content of the report for 2010 .
I and my services have been working seriously on it and I believe that the report for 2010 will be of the highest possible quality .
Madam President , I too wish to thank the Commissioner and all my fellow Members who contributed to this report , whether today during the debate or through their amendments .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs with whom I enjoyed excellent relations .
This report is the result of the collaboration and excellent cooperation I had .
I would like to reiterate that the difference between irregularities and fraud must be clearly defined .
While we may agree to tolerate errors and irregularities , there must be zero tolerance of fraud .
Secondly , the national management declarations must be signed by the national politician responsible for this , such as the relevant minister .
Thirdly , we are awaiting with great interest the check being carried out by the Commission on the simplified procedure because it is of paramount importance for the European Union 's own resources to be collected in the most efficient way possible and for the budget to be consolidated as effectively as possible .
Fourthly , with regard to the public procurement law and bureaucracy relating to the use of European funds at national level , we have to tackle excessive red tape in many Member States , which is intended , on the one hand , to combat fraud but , on the other hand , creates opportunities for corruption and making fraudulent use of European funds .
Otherwise , as they are highly politicised , the funds go to political beneficiaries .
Last but not least , and as the final point in my speech , I want to welcome the proposal tabled by my colleague Jens Geier on introducing a system for automatically suspending European funds when any suspicion of fraud arises .
I think that this will ensure that Member States too respond much more quickly when we sound the alarm bell .
The debate is closed .
The vote on the report by Mr Cătălin Sorin Ivan will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .

Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
I have already given my support to the submitted report in the Committee on Budgetary Control , but I would still like to point out a number of important findings from the report .
I would first like to highlight the appeal made in the report to countries that have not yet ratified the Convention on the Protection of the Financial Interests of the European Communities , in other words Malta , Estonia and the Czech Republic .
Unfortunately , the current Czech government has done nothing to intensify the fight against fraud and corruption .
On the other hand , I would like to applaud the report for stating that the Czech Republic , along with Estonia , Latvia and Slovenia , had a zero level of fraud in drawdowns from the pre-accession SAPARD fund .
I am alarmed by the finding of the Court of Auditors that more than 30 % of errors identified by the Court in a sample from 2009 could have been discovered and corrected by the Member States before confirming the payments to the Commission , on the basis of information that the Member States had in their possession .
I would like to join the call for OLAF , in accordance with the request raised in last year 's report on protecting the financial interests of the Community , to provide a detailed analysis in its next annual report of the strategies and measures introduced by each Member State in the fight against fraud and the prevention and detection of irregularities in the use of European funding , including cases where these resulted from corruption .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0210 / 2011 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
Subject : Provision of humanitarian aid to countries in North Africa
Recent events in North African countries ( Egypt , Tunisia , Libya ) have merely aggravated the already very difficult conditions for many sectors of the population .
Economic poverty has led to considerable migratory flows towards Member States on the Mediterranean .
Has the Commission adopted economic , medico-pharmaceutical and humanitarian aid measures following the crisis in North Africa ? If so , what measures ?
What measures does it intend to adopt with regard to Member States on the Mediterranean which are receiving refugees from North Africa ?
What problems do the ongoing military operations pose for the provision of humanitarian aid ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , on 25 February 2011 , the Commission adopted an EUR 3 million emergency decision on humanitarian aid operations in connection with the Libyan crisis .
Those funds were mobilised immediately , and were actually the first significant contribution to arrive .
This initial amount was increased to EUR 30 million on 3 March in view of the rapidly increasing humanitarian needs .
An additional amount of EUR 6 million has been mobilised under the civil protection budget line for the co-financing of assistance in kind provided by the Member States .
EU humanitarian assistance is implemented through our partners , funded by ECHO or through assistance in kind from the Member States , and mobilised and coordinated via the EU civil protection mechanism .
It covers the provision of assistance to people fleeing Libya on the borders with Tunisia , Egypt and Algeria , support for the repatriation of third-country nationals to their countries of origin , the provision of assistance and humanitarian protection to people with refugee status who cannot go back to their countries - they have no countries to go to - and to Libyans fleeing Libya , the financing and prepositioning of emergency stocks to provide relief aid inside Libya , and the financing of medical supplies , emergency surgery and food assistance inside Libya , to be implemented as and when specific areas become accessible .
Currently , not the whole territory is accessible .
For the time being , we can operate in the east but not in the west , which is controlled by Gaddafi .
The Commission and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy jointly adopted , on 8 March 2011 , a communication on the partnership for democracy and shared prosperity with the southern Mediterranean .
It presents a strategy for Europe to support the momentous changes in the southern neighbourhood .
The Commission has also mobilised its instruments to support , if needed , Italy and other Member States if a massive influx of migrants from North Africa were to materialise .
This response includes operational measures and financial assistance .
The Frontex joint operation - Hermes 2011 - was launched on 20 February with assets and experts from a number of Member States .
We are closely monitoring developments and preparing for different scenarios .
If required , Frontex operations could be strengthened to help deal with possible new inflows .
The Commission is ready to mobilise additional financial assistance from funds such as the External Borders Fund and the European Refugee Fund , which amount to EUR 25 million in total .
A large number of Member States are prepared to provide very welcome specialised personnel and technical assets .
Compared to the status quo , current military operations have not affected the level of humanitarian access , because it was restricted from the beginning of the crisis by forces loyal to Gaddafi .
Ongoing negotiations between the authorities in Tripoli and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ( UNOCHA ) have not yet resulted in an agreement on humanitarian access to western Libya .
( EL ) Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for her detailed reply .
I consider it particularly important that the European Union is at the global vanguard when it comes to granting humanitarian aid , that it shows its humanitarian face .
There is of course one question - a long-standing question - as to whether humanitarian aid reaches the real recipients and transparency plays a very important role here .
I note , Commissioner , the reticence of northern European countries to go beyond the contractual framework and open up the European market , open up its borders to exports of agricultural produce from these countries , from North Africa , to the European Union .
However , it cannot be southern Europe , because that is where the competition is , that pays yet again .
The South is under pressure from immigration ; we cannot have an agricultural problem there too .
Member of the Commission . - Firstly , on the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance from the beginning , from the outset of the crisis , the most dramatic humanitarian impact so far can be split into three parts .
First , the outflow of migrant workers into Tunisia , Egypt , Algeria and Niger - there the Commission and the Member States have been very effective .
We have mobilised both air and sea deployment of Member States assets so we can take people home , and a humanitarian injection into the International organisation for migration and the UN organisation for refugees so that they can help with a huge amount of people - 420 000 people - fleeing Libya .
Second , in the Eastern part of Libya to which we have access , we have provided support for medical treatment as well as for the prepositioning of food supplies .
This is not yet a food crisis , but this is a country that imports 90 % of its food , so we must be ready .
There we also are helping sub-Saharan Africans , in particular Chadians , who found themselves in a very difficult position because of the risk to their safety , being perceived to be mercenaries , being perceived to be fighters , when of course many of them are not .
Helping them to get to safety , mostly in Egypt , has also been a priority .
Third , we know that in Gaddafi-controlled areas there are humanitarian needs but we are restricted in getting there .
We have set aside EUR 9 million even when conditions allow for us to be mobilised .
We actually gave instructions to the World Food Programme as well as to other humanitarian organisations , to be ready to help .
On the second part of your question , access to markets , this is at the heart of the southern Mediterranean initiative which I outlined .
It is about making sure that we can offer a prospect of a better future for jobs and prosperity to these countries .
There we are putting a very strong emphasis indeed on trade , trade with Europe , but also trade among the countries of the Mediterranean .
( LT ) Madam President , Commissioner , the situation that has come about in North Africa has really forced the European Union to face major challenges .
The Commissioner was quoted in the Financial Times as saying that the European Union had successfully evacuated its citizens from Libya .
However , at the same time the country was left without healthcare specialists , the majority of whom were Bulgarians .
As you mentioned , the European Union is providing various forms of humanitarian aid , but as the same time we are facing another emergency , because we really have left this country without the medical assistance required .
How do you plan to address this issue ?
Member of the Commission . - Let me first say that the evacuation of European citizens has been very successful .
We managed to achieve coordination between our Member States and deployed the monitoring and information centre to provide a platform for this coordination .
As a result , we got the vast majority of our citizens out of Libya in the fastest and safest manner .
By the time this massive evacuation was completed , there were only around 200 people left who wanted to be evacuated .
Right now - as we speak - some of them have been safely evacuated by a Russian aircraft .
On the question of medical services , as we evacuated European citizens the law of unintended consequences kicked in , because some of these European citizens had been providing medical services as part of the Libyan health service .
Many nurses were evacuated , though not so many doctors .
We are now making every possible effort to enable humanitarian organisations that specialise in medical care to provide access to such care for Libyans and third-country nationals in Libya .
Once again , the critical importance of Gaddafi allowing humanitarian organisations to operate in the western part of Libya cannot be over-emphasised .
Unfortunately this has not yet happened .
We have a team of our own experts in the eastern part of the country .
They have returned from an assessment mission and reported that , although there are increasing numbers of wounded people in need of medical care , the medical supplies and support - including personnel - that the intentional community is providing are broadly sufficient in the eastern part of Libya .
That is not the case , however , in cities like Misrata and other areas controlled by Gaddafi .
As you probably know , attempts are now being made to send in medical ships by sea as a means of increasing the availability of medical treatment .
Subject : Discrepancies in healthcare in the Member States
There are still major discrepancies in the regions and Member States of the EU in healthcare services and unequal treatment of patients in terms of access to high-quality services and reimbursement of medication for complex illnesses such as Alzheimer 's .
Does the Commission intend to take any action in this regard ?
If so , what action will it take to promote the formulation of integrated national or regional strategies aimed at reducing inequality in healthcare and ensuring that patients in the EU have access to high-quality healthcare services ?
Member of the Commission . - Dear members of the Parliament , according to the Treaty the competence for addressing these issues lies with the Member States .
The European Union carries out actions to support , to coordinate or supplement Member States actions , to protect and improve human health .
Having said this , the Commission believes that all citizens across the Union should have universal access to high quality care .
The Commission has therefore launched a number of initiatives in this regard and I am happy to answer the question by the honourable Member of Parliament .
In 2009. the Commission adopted a communication on ' Solidarity and health : reducing health inequalities in the European Union ' and this communication stresses the need to bridge inequalities in health .
Last December , the Commission services further launched a joint action with 14 Member States on reducing health inequalities in the framework of the health programme .
Universal access to high quality care is also a focus of the open method of coordination on health and long term care .
In this context Member States have agreed specific objectives concerning health care systems , access to health care , quality of health and sustainability of health care policies .
In addition with the new directive on patients ' rights in cross-border health care , EU patients will have the opportunity to get information on treatments that are available abroad and will be able to seek possible reimbursement of costs .
Finally , the health sector is one of the funding areas under the current cohesion policy .
Measures financed in this context , such as modernisation of hospital infrastructure , purchase of medical equipment or the training of medical staff can help improve citizens ' access to healthcare , particularly in the poorest regions .
( LT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you very much for your very comprehensive answer , but if we are talking about sufferers of complex diseases , my constituents often raise one particular issue .
Really the most important issue is care , but often that care is delivered by patients ' families .
Carers are no longer able to participate fully in the labour market , and their situation is very vague .
Do you not feel that as well as harmonising healthcare services , it is necessary to regulate this issue , so that carers also enjoy social protection ?
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , given that the directive you referred to on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border health care has not yet entered into force , I should like to ask you : are patients already entitled , if they seek medical services in another State , to obtain compensation from their insurance fund ?
I would simply remind the House that the European Court of Justice has already ruled in favour of this .
( RO ) I would like to ask the following question .
In relation to national health services and the fact that , unfortunately , many Member States have reduced their health budgets as a result of the economic and financial crisis , what measures is the Commission intending to take so that Member States do not need to reduce their health budgets ?
Any patient who is not treated in good time entails an additional cost for the health service .
Member of the Commission . - What I can say in general is that we have to address all these problems bearing in mind that what we have here is a competence of the Member States .
So we have to respect that .
I can understand your point that discrepancies persist but the Commission will nevertheless do everything it can to facilitate Member States in harmonising the situation between them .
Our priority is to facilitate cooperation among Member States to reduce the inequalities .
Another thing we can do is to pursue the issue as part of the Process on Corporate Responsibility in the field of Pharmaceuticals launched by the Commission .
On the question raised by Mr Chountis , what I can say is that when the directive is in place we will provide a clear legal framework regarding rights to reimbursement for cross-border health care .
We then propose to reduce the inequalities inherent in divergent implementation of European court decisions .
Citizens will then be sure about when and on what basis they will , or will not , be reimbursed for care received abroad .
Until then we have to wait , I 'm afraid .
Subject : Enabling technologies
Given Europe 's ongoing weakness in translating R & D into commercial products , can the Commission give an overview of where we currently stand in terms of strengthening Europe 's position in key enabling technologies ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , honourable Members , as regards enabling technologies , on 30 September 2009 , the Commission adopted a Communication that laid out a common strategy for this area .
In that Communication we emphasised that despite excellent research and development capacities in certain key enabling technologies , we are not managing to achieve proportionate success when it comes to transforming those results into manufacturing products and services .
I believe therefore that it is important that we define a strategy that aims to further the deployment of key enabling technologies in European industry .
This approach has also been outlined in initiatives by the Commission , in particular in the initiatives for industrial policy , the Innovation Union and the European digital strategy .
Following the adoption of the Communication , in July last year the Commission set up the High-Level Expert Group on Key Enabling Technologies .
Their work was launched by three Commissioners : Vice-President for the Digital Agenda Nelly Kroes , the Commissioner for Research , Innovation and Science , Máire Geoghegan-Quinn , and by the undersigned as responsible for Industry and Entrepreneurship .
The group was given a one-year mandate to formulate recommendations on policy measures to adopt in order to promote the industrial deployment of key enabling technologies in Europe .
The group consists of 27 representatives from the administrations of Member States , from the research community , from the European enabling technology sector , from the European Investment Bank and from associations of small and medium-sized enterprises .
In February this year , the group presented a mid-term working document to the European Commission , which illustrated the main challenges related to the commercialisation of key enabling technologies in Europe .
The first internal working document can be consulted on the Directorate-General 's site ' Enterprise ' .
The definitive report by the expert group will be presented to the Commission at some point this July .
This report will represent a significant contribution to the Commission 's reflections aimed at creating a single strategic framework to bring together initiatives to support research and innovation .
Key enabling technologies ( KETs ) are of fundamental importance for our economies , because they represent real instruments which would facilitate the emergence of future products and services and would therefore represent the basis of our industrial platform , for what we could call our third industrial revolution .
Those who know how to avail themselves of these technologies in Europe will also be able to make our industries more competitive and will be at the forefront in the transition towards a low carbon-emission economy , which is efficient in the consumption of resources and based on knowledge .
Not making use of KETs means losing European leadership in sectors in which we are strong and losing innovative capacity in applications that are of strategic importance for our Union .
At the same time , these technologies offer an enormous market potential in terms of growth .
I should like to quote certain symbolic figures .
According to our estimates , their volume on the global market is between EUR 950 billion and EUR 1 100 billion per year , with an expected annual growth rate of between 5 % and 46 % .
Emerging technologies represent therefore an extraordinary opportunity on which all industrialised economies will root their competitiveness , an indispensable instrument for future growth .
To pass over this opportunity would be an error and the Commission intends to play its role .
We need the support of the European Parliament , particularly after the Treaty of Lisbon and the increase in competencies awarded to the European Parliament , and I believe - and I say this as a former Member of the European Parliament - that this collaboration between the European Parliament and the Commission will lead us to achieve good results also in this sector , which is so crucial for growth and competitiveness in our European economy .
Commissioner , thank you for your reply and , indeed , congratulations to the Commission on its work for trying to ensure that Europe remains at the forefront of what you called ' the third industrial revolution ' .
The high level group dealt with a number of issues , but one of them was this ' valley of death ' , in other words this chasm that separates the creative idea from the market place , and it pointed out the fact that Europe often loses its first-mover advantage .
It also spoke about a number of roadblocks that are there , for example the absence of a European IP patent and the need to reduce the fragmentation of the regulatory framework already in place .
So I suppose my question is , what steps , if any , has the Commission taken to address any of those issues ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) I thank Mrs Harkin both for underlining the work that the Commission is doing , and also for calling for greater commitment on the part of the executive .
We are currently at the stage of awaiting policy recommendations from the expert group before identifying the Commission 's final strategy
In the mid-term working document the expert group proposed a three-pillar bridge to overcome this gap in innovation .
Each of the three pillars represents a condition that must necessarily be met to allow key enabling technologies ( KETs ) to be deployed in the European Union .
The first pillar concerns technological research .
Europe must develop more competitive technologies up to patented prototype stage .
This goal requires the Union 's research programmes to be more focused on technological research .
The second pillar concerns product demonstration .
We must succeed in transforming technological successes into competitive products and this goal requires a rebalancing of the Union 's research programmes to facilitate demonstration projects .
The third pillar is global-level industrial competitiveness .
Europe must maintain current production capacities or create new capacities so that our innovative products can compete in a global market in terms of price and dimensions .
We therefore need to improve the framework conditions for investors to encourage them to invest in the European Union .
Thus we need to attract investment , but at the same time improve all EU programmes which could support this highly important sector , and try to overcome the gap between research and application which is characteristic of many productive sectors in the European Union .
This transition from research to application is a problem that the entire industrial sector confronts .
That is why I am in favour of and why we have supported the cluster policy - we have around 2 000 of them - which enables connections between research and industry , universities , research and industry and innovation , so as to make our industrial system more competitive .
That is the state of the art , Mrs Harkin .
We shall continue our work and I shall carefully examine all suggestion coming from the European Parliament and I shall take to heart all instructions that this House will send me .
Subject : Future of EU fishing industry
The Commission has indicated that the majority of EU fisheries are being worked unsustainably .
Will the Commission indicate what is its assessment of the future for the fishing industry , and for employment within it , if current policies and practices continue and no reforms are introduced to reduce overcapacity , curb the discard of fish , and introduce measures to promote sustainable practices ?
Member of the Commission . - When my services started to prepare the reform package for the common fisheries policy , they carried out a thorough impact assessment of a number of possible reform options .
One of these options was to continue the current policy beyond 2013 .
This status quo has been used as a benchmark for comparing the impact of other possible options .
This status quo scenario takes into account new long-term management plans , the Control Regulation and the Regulation on illegal , unreported fisheries .
The results of the status quo scenario option are clear : if we do not change our policy then , by 2020 , sustainability of stocks will in general be out of the question .
Regarding environmental sustainability , only 6 % of the stocks analysed would reach maximum sustainable yield by 2020 .
This should be compared with our obligation to achieve maximum sustainable yield by 2015 .
So if we continue under the status quo situation there is no way we will fulfil our obligation to achieve maximum sustainable yield by 2015
With reference to the economic performance of our fishing fleets , under the status quo scenario only some fleets will be economically viable .
The catching sector as a whole will have profits close to zero or even worse .
Finally , the picture for social sustainability is the same .
Employment in the catching sector would continue to decline at the same pace as is the case now ; wages would remain low , which would make the profession of fisherman increasingly unattractive to the younger generation .
So the status quo is really not an option for the Commission .
We need the reform and we are working for it .
The Commissioner has spelt out a very depressing picture , saying that , if we carry on as we are , the prospects are bleak , with fishing fleets in many cases economically unviable and job opportunities for fishermen declining .
However , is it not the case that decline might be better than the alternative ?
The fact is that we do not know .
We do not have the scientific knowledge for 50 % of our fisheries .
We know that fish stocks are low in many cases , after decades of over-fishing .
The reality is that the situation is very fragile .
We are very vulnerable .
Commissioner , you could not rule out the possibility that , if we carry on as we are , a number of these fisheries will collapse altogether .
( IT ) I share with my fellow Members concerns over the fishing sector in the Mediterranean and I also share concerns for the protection of marine ecosystems .
However , considering the socio-economic difficulties affecting marine industries , and in particular those maritime communities trapped by the rigidity of European regulations , I ask whether the Commission intends to find balanced and immediate solutions , so as to protect both the ecosystems and the many European citizens who work in the sector at the same time .
The Commissioner paints a rather depressing picture .
One of the problems that was highlighted by Mr Davies in the question , is the whole question of discards .
Now I met a fisherman recently who said that he had discovered or invented a net that would put an end to discards with regard to tuna fishing .
Would the Commissioner consider looking at that ?
Does she believe the technology can be implemented that will end discards , or at least curtail them ?
Member of the Commission . - If we continue with the status quo , then yes , we have to face the possibility of the collapse of a lot of stocks , and that is out of the question .
I can only agree that our situation is very fragile .
If we have to face an extreme situation then the consequences will be very bad .
That is why we need the reform and that is why we are going to examine the best way forward in order to achieve a balance between the sustainability of stocks and the socio-economic impact that the reform will have .
However , let me be clear : it is not that we are prioritising environmental care over care for our fishermen .
We care about our fishermen and about the generations to come .
That is why we need the reform because , to be honest with you , if we do not have any fish stocks then fishermen in the Mediterranean and all other European waters will have no future .
In order to be sure that our fisheries industry has a future , we need the reform .
We intend to bring forward some sound proposals and we intend to secure the livelihoods of our fishermen .
This is something we want to do .
Another Member referred to the selectivity of fishing gear .
Our services will be very willing to examine any new gear and any innovation in relation to selectivity .
I would also like to say that , within the framework of our new funding system , we intend to allocate money in a generous way , despite the crisis , in order to be sure that improvements in selectivity are implemented .
I very much welcome all the initiatives by the industry - by our fishermen - to bring about improvements in the selectivity of fishing gear .
In general , I would like to repeat that the status quo is not an option .
It is not an option for the sustainability of the stocks , for the livelihoods of our fishermen or for the future of our coastal communities .
That is why we need this reform .
Subject : Proposed ban on shark finning
In light of the recent support by the Members of the European Parliament for the banning of shark finning , and given the fact that Congress in the United States has introduced legislation banning the practice and that other jurisdictions feel very strongly that such legislation should be implemented , what does the Commission propose in terms of giving legislative effect to the concerns of MEPs ?
Member of the Commission . - I would like to thank the honourable Member for his question because it gives me the opportunity to inform the House about shark finning .
Finning has been banned since 2003 , via a Council regulation , on EU vessels fishing anywhere in the world and on all vessels fishing in EU waters .
In general there is a ban on shark finning .
However , the current regulation allows - and this is the problem we face - under certain conditions , on-board processing involving the removal of fins on board vessels , while making obligatory the retention of all shark carcasses on board .
This is why we have faced the problem of shark finning in recent years .
We presented a plan of action in February 2009 and have since taken a number of measures .
We are also actively working with regional organisations to put effective management regimes in place for the most vulnerable shark species and to ensure their sustainable exploitation .
So the problem we are facing with a view to addressing this situation is the need for a public consultation , and we have now already had a public consultation for some months .
The consultation document presented three of the main options that are currently being discussed by experts worldwide to improve controls and to ensure full compliance .
Many stakeholders , such as the fishing industry , scientists , managers and NGOs , as well as the general public , have sent us their comments .
I would like to assure you that I take the issue of protecting sharks very seriously .
I have therefore asked my services to thoroughly study all the contributions received .
We will then prepare an impact assessment which , as you know , is required to modify the regulation .
It is my intention to have a legislative proposal adopted as soon as practically possible .
I would like to inform you that I have made this issue a priority in order not to lose any more time .
I would also like to say that the Commission has taken a lot of measures to ensure the sustainable management and protection of sharks in general , beyond shark finning .
We presented a plan of action and have since taken a number of measures .
We have prohibited fishing for porbeagle , basking shark and white shark in EU waters .
We have banned gill nets below 200 metres to protect deepwater sharks .
Last year - and I would like to underline this - we proposed a sustainable and science-based quota for various sharks .
We had a very rough time negotiating this in the Council .
It was not an easy task , but in the end we were successful and we have a sustainable proposal for this year and , I hope , for next year .
Madam President , cutting the fins off sharks is barbaric .
It is inhumane ; it is barbaric .
Dumped back into the sea , they die .
It is a practice that should be banned .
While the Commission has referred to the 2003 regulation , it is simply not working .
I appreciate that it is very difficult .
How do you police it ?
We need to put in place a regulation banning this practice completely .
What we are talking about is the wiping out - the total extinction - of a particular species .
The figures speak for themselves .
For example , it is currently estimated that , in 2009 , the fins of 26 million to 73 million sharks entered the global trade .
It is a very lucrative business indeed .
We need to ban it completely .
It is barbaric , it should not be countenanced and we need to ban it once and for all .
We should take the lead in that regard .
In 2003 , shark-fin fishing was banned .
By analogy , we now have the whole situation with regard to the mackerel situation in the European Union , where there is an agreement at European level and at European Economic Area level on a reduction in mackerel fishing .
Yet we see that both Iceland and the Faroe Islands have caught 150 000 tonnes each and this is impacting directly on the sustainability of European fishing fleets .
So what actions can be taken on that ?
In particular , can trade sanctions be taken against those two areas ?
With the lions disappearing from Africa and the sharks disappearing from our seas , I commend the Commissioner for what she is trying to do , but this is very much market driven .
There was a huge demand from Asia for shark fins , and there is a great deal of money to be made from them .
The only way of ensuring that we are properly able to police and quantify what is going on is to ensure that fins are landed attached to the shark 's body .
That way we can retain control .
I hope the Commissioner will bear this in mind when she draws up her proposals .
Member of the Commission . - I agree with the Members of Parliament that although there is a ban , we cannot be happy with this situation .
I agree with you and we know the reality and how it works .
We know that there is a very profitable industry behind all this discussion .
But we have to take measures consistent with our legal framework , so let me explain .
The problem exists because the industry can now land the fins and the sharks at different ports .
They can land the fins which , as we can imagine , are more precious because of the demand for them , especially in Asia , and they can land the bodies of the sharks somewhere else , making control very difficult .
This is why all this happens .
This is something we have in mind .
That is why we came forward with this consultation procedure because we would like to deal with this very difficult situation .
So what I can tell you is that we are going to have an ambitious proposal and , by the end of the year , I hope we will have a new legal instrument on shark fins that will have some concrete results .
We are going to regulate this situation once and for all .
As regards the analogy on the mackerel situation , what I can say here is that the European Union has done its best .
I would like to say that the Member States around this area were very cooperative and our fishermen and our industry had to suffer a lot of sacrifices in order to secure the sustainability of the stocks .
That is why we were very upset when Iceland and the Faroe Islands came with unilateral approaches and increased their own quotas by themselves .
This is something we simply cannot accept .
So we are now working on this - my services are working with the Cabinet and the services of the Trade Commissioner , Mr de Gucht - and we are going to launch a legislative proposal for a legal weapon to use in such cases .
We have some weapons now , but the legal weapons at our disposal now refer only to fresh fish , including mackerel , and not to the products of mackerel and especially not to fish oil and fish meal which are the main export products from Iceland and the Faroe Islands .
So we have to be productive on this .
The Commission is going to do its best to ensure that during the next fishing season the sustainability of the stocks will be protected .
Subject : New maritime strategy for the Mediterranean
In view of the new challenges arising from developments in the Mediterranean Arab countries , it is necessary to adopt a maritime strategy as part of the 25-point integrated plan of action for the Mediterranean .
The EU has drawn up legislation and strategies to promote the sustainable use of the sea , the conservation of maritime eco-systems and the protection of the resources essential for maritime activities of a social and economic nature .
Will the Commission adopt new maritime policy objectives as part of the new Euro-Mediterranean strategy ?
What progress is being made by EU initiatives in this area , for example with regard to pollution in the Mediterranean ?
What instruments does it have at its disposal to facilitate the adaptation of the Mediterranean area to climate change and avert the serious risks arising from flooding , coastal erosion and further land deterioration ?
How do Mediterranean energy transport policies fit into the maritime strategy ?
What measures are being taken and what forms of cooperation with Mediterranean partners are being envisaged with a view to protecting shipping and curbing illegal immigration by sea ?
Member of the Commission . - I thank Ms Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for her question because it gives us the opportunity to refer to this very difficult situation in the Mediterranean .
I would like to inform Parliament that the Commission recently adopted a communication on ' A partnership for democracy and shared prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean ' , which sets out a series of proposals to address the challenges that the region currently faces following recent developments .
As you know , this is an extreme situation which is very fragile and very worrying .
The Commission is highly satisfied with the general approval for its initiative .
This communication has been received in a very positive way by all the Member States and , I hope , by Parliament .
Let me explain a few actions that we have taken to date towards the objective of a new maritime strategy for the Mediterranean .
Firstly , in relation to an integrated maritime policy , we have already established a working group on such a policy , involving all the Mediterranean coastal states and regional conventions .
We plan to take this forward as a cross-cutting forum on all maritime-related activities , cooperation and funding in the region .
As part of this initiative , we also have the first technical assistance project , which was launched under the European Neighbourhood Policy , dealing with the integrated maritime policy for the Mediterranean .
I would also like to inform Parliament about an initiative I took recently in launching a joint cooperation project in the Mediterranean together with the International Maritime Organisation and the European Investment Bank .
I am counting on this initiative and I hope it will be fruitful .
We will define targeted actions for maritime growth , jobs and maritime training , which is very important for the Mediterranean region .
We will also include measures for integrated maritime surveillance , and we will have private-sector involvement because , with regard to maritime issues , I believe this to be absolutely necessary .
In parallel , the Commission intends to support the organisation of a forum for Mediterranean coastguards throughout the region .
We will also step up our efforts in the area of fisheries control through training , workshops and joint control in cooperation with Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations ( FAO ) .
Regarding protection of the environment and climate change , at EU level the Commission is now working with the Member States to achieve good environmental status in its marine waters by 2020 .
At regional level , the EU and its Member States cooperate , in the framework of the Barcelona Convention , with Mediterranean partner countries to promote the prevention of pollution , and improve the response to it , in all the regional seas bordering the Union .
With regard to migration-related problems and the recent developments in the region , the Commission is committed to assisting and supporting EU Member States that face sudden migratory pressures and is ready to mobilise financial assistance .
We are now working on identifying financial emergency envelopes under the External Borders Fund , and possibly the Return Fund and the European Refugee Fund , in addition to funding already earmarked for 2011 .
As regards the surveillance of external borders , the Commission is in constant contact with Frontex , which has launched the Hermes 2011 joint operation to control the EU external border in the region .
Frontex , together with Europol , has also started preparing a targeted risk assessment of potential exploitation of the volatile political situation by criminal and terrorist networks , and monitoring irregular migration flows .
( EL ) Thank you , Commissioner , for referring to the European Commission 's plans and new guidelines and for the personal undertaking which you expressed in terms of preparing for the new situation in the Mediterranean .
I should like to ask a specific question : how do you rate the plans already under way to decontaminate the Mediterranean and for energy transfer , how do they fit in with maritime policy and what added value do you expect the new policy plans and programmes which you mentioned to have ?
( IT ) Commissioner , in the context of the new Mediterranean fishing policy and considering the context that you have just described concerning the situation of the countries on the southern shores of the Mediterranean , which are experiencing extreme crisis , do you believe that cross-border cooperation , in the framework of cohesion policy , can validly and jointly face up to the issue and find agreed solutions through cross-border policy and fishing policy which would allow us to restore stocks in the Mediterranean and facilitate recovery in this economic sector ?
( SL ) Madam President , I would like to ask the Commissioner a question on the subject of many European countries trying to offload their problems , fisheries problems , onto a country which does not , formally and legally , exist .
I am referring to Western Sahara .
The Commission has extended , or rather been given a mandate to negotiate a fisheries agreement with Morocco .
Would you be kind enough to explain what guarantees we have that the resources we will receive from this agreement will be used for the benefit of the people of Western Sahara , and not just for meeting the needs of European fishermen .
Member of the Commission . - I would like to agree with Mrs Grässle that there is , indeed , a strong possibility of pollution because of the energy transfer in the Mediterranean .
There is a risk here because the Mediterranean is a rather closed sea and it cannot stand the burden of possible pollution .
So what we are going to do now is to increase and enhance our cooperation , the Commission 's cooperation , with Member States .
I would like to say to Mrs Grässle that Commissioner Potočnik and myself will be visiting Greece next week and we are going to organise something about the pollution of the Mediterranean .
I would also like to inform her that Mediterranean countries could also better prevent and detect pollution from ships by participating in EMSA 's satellite-based monitoring system , such as safe sea nets or clean sea nets .
We have these systems and we are going to encourage our Member States around the Mediterranean to participate in these systems , to detect possible pollution from ships .
I would like to say that we are going to incentivise not only our Member States , but also our neighbours through discussions and cooperation in order to fulfil this aim .
With regard to regional cooperation , yes , we are going to take some initiatives on it and we have a lot of initiatives in the framework of the General Committee for Fisheries in the Mediterranean Region ( GFCM ) , and we are also now working to have a new strategy , a maritime strategy , in the Adriatic and Ionian region .
We are now working with the governments of the Member States around the Adriatic and Ionian seas : Italy , Slovenia and Greece but also other neighbours around there , Croatia , Montenegro and Albania .
We are trying to have a maritime cooperative strategy for this region .
I would like to underline that this will really be an opportunity for cohesion funds , as the honourable Member has already said .
Lastly , a brief remark about Western Sahara : yes , we had a lot of concerns about the right of the real beneficiaries to take advantage of the money we are giving to Morocco as part of this fisheries agreement .
That is why we have asked the Moroccan Government to give us data with regard to not only the implementation of the agreement in general , but also to the regional approach of this agreement and to the distribution they have in different regions in Morocco .
We are going to renew the protocol for a transitional period of one year just to find out if we can go with it or not .
This is the way we are moving , very cautiously , towards this direction .
Subject : Training of researchers and assessment of universities in the flagship initiative on innovation
The Europe 2020 flagship initiative ' Innovation Union ' ( chapter 2 ) published recently by the Commission refers , among other things , to the obligation of the Member States to announce strategies for training enough researchers to meet their national strategic programme targets and the Commission 's intention , in the same year , to support an international multi-dimensional system to benchmark the performance of European higher educational foundations .
I ask the Commission : How will it ensure the target of 3 % for research by 2020 will be met across the board without variations in investments being seen between the Member States ?
Does the Commission think that the fiscal crisis in the eurozone Member States could put the intended targets at risk ?
What are the criteria for benchmarking higher educational foundations in Europe to identify those which show the best performance in the field of research ?
Member of the Commission . - On the 3 % R & D intensity target the state of innovation urgency in Europe calls for the support of smart growth and a commitment to tackle societal challenges .
The Innovation Union Scoreboard shows that the EU is losing ground to the United States and Japan , while Brazil and China are closing the gap with the EU .
The 3 % R & D intensity target has a crucial contribution to make in meeting this challenge .
The European Council invited Member States to set ambitious and realistic national targets , taking into account the initial level of R & D investment and the key structural characteristics of their economies .
Last year Member States and the Commission engaged in bilateral dialogues .
Nearly all of the Member States have now set national R & D intensity targets , to be finalised in their national reform programmes by the end of April 2011 .
On 12 January this year , the Commission adopted the communication on the annual growth survey .
It comprises the list of national R & D targets , which are generally both ambitious and realistic and marks the start of a new cycle of coordination in this field .
An assessment of the national research and innovation policies and achievements will be performed , aiming at identifying the main bottlenecks impeding growth and recovery in a post-crisis scenario where the financial constraints are still effective .
An excellent research base is vital if the 3 % R & D intensity target is to be achieved and if Europe is to become more innovative .
Europe will need at least one million more research jobs if the R & D intensity target of 3 % is to be reached by 2020 .
The number of new researchers required is significantly higher as many researchers will retire over the period .
Research excellence by universities and also , of course , by industry will benefit the wider society .
Progress is related to the high quality of higher education institutions .
The Innovation Union Scoreboard uses internationally recognised indicators to benchmark the performance of Europe against that of our competitors .
Three of these indicators are : new doctoral graduates per 1 000 population aged 25 to 34 , quantitative , international scientific co-publications per million population and scientific publications among the top 10 % most cited publications worldwide as a percentage of total scientific publications of the country , both qualitative .
The United States has increased its lead in international co-publications and is now 37 % above the EU level .
Pending the results in June of a feasibility study , the Commission will support an independent multidimensional international ranking to benchmark the performance of higher education institutions .
This study will cover performances , not only in the field of research , but also in other important fields such as innovation , education , regional engagement and internationalisation .
The multidimensional character of this concept will allow students , policy makers and the universities themselves to select the dimensions and underlying indicators of interest to them and make their own personalised ranking tailored to their needs .
Stakeholders are actively involved in all stages of this feasibility project .
( EL ) Thank you very much , Commissioner , for your reply .
However , I would remind you that , when we were planning the Lisbon Strategy about eight years ago , in 2003 , we said more or less the same : that we should rely on innovation and research in order to achieve a more competitive economy .
You have been Commissioner for over a year and I think that you have sufficient experience to tell us : what makes you believe that we shall be successful this time , in the new 2020 Strategy , and that the results will not be similar to those from the previous strategy , which was ultimately a resounding failure .
Regarding higher education institutions , I want to ask the Commissioner whether she is satisfied that the European institutions have both the will and the capacity to raise their game , improve their ranking on the world stage and develop their ability to cooperate with one another in order to avoid duplication in research .
Member of the Commission . - I will try to be attentive to the interpreters .
A precondition for carrying out the ex-post auditing activity is the availability of a sufficiently important number of cost claims submitted by the beneficiaries .
For the Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Technological Development , or ' FP 7 2007-2013 ' , the first reporting period takes place 18 months after the start of the project .
As a consequence , the number of FP 7 cost claims available to be audited reached critical mass only in 2010 .
Moreover , the Commission 's control strategy for research is designed to provide reasonable assurance on the legality and regularity of research expenditure on a multiannual basis over the whole period of the Framework Programme .
As of 31 December last year the Commission has closed 345 FP 7 audits , covering 432 participations in FP 7 projects .
In the same period , financial corrections amounting to EUR 4.482 million due to errors were proposed as a result of auditing EUR 88.633.047 million of FP 7 contributions .

Research framework programmes are implemented mainly through cost- sharing grants based on the reimbursement of eligible actual costs .
The main risk is that beneficiaries include ineligible costs in their costs statements .
The risk is exacerbated by the conflict between the eligibility criteria and the usual cost-accounting practices of certain beneficiaries , in particular the requirement for beneficiaries to allocate personnel and indirect costs to projects while deducting various items considered ineligible for EU co-financing .
In view of this the Commission issued , in April 2010 , a Communication putting forward possibilities for the simplification of research funding rules and procedures .
Simplification and clarification of rules and procedures can reduce the scope for error and increase assurance of the regularity of expenditure , but also facilitate the participation of researchers in the framework programmes and the achievement of EU research policy objectives .
Following the overall consensus on a number of issues that could still be implemented under the current overall legal framework , on 24 January this year the Commission took short-term simplification actions comprising concrete measures with immediate and retroactive effect on FP7 projects .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to thank the Commissioner for her detailed reply ; however , I would note that , with a sample of 0.4 % , the error rate rises to 4 % or EUR 2 million in 50 billion .

I hope that the model is not linear and that , where 4 % audits are carried out , we do not have a 40 % error rate .
I also understand that it is very difficult , on the one hand , for us to ask the Commission to simplify management procedures under the 7th FP and to make provision to simplify the 8th FP and , at the same time , to demand more detailed audits .
This would appear to be contradictory , but I do not think that it is .
I think there is one good thing here : that we are all interested in research and know that it is Europe 's and the Member States ' only hope .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I think our aim has to be to keep things as simple as possible for our stakeholders and to ensure - insofar as we can - that beneficiaries can directly apply their usual cost accounting practices for personnel costs , avoiding the need to implement a parallel accounting system as they had to up to now .
That obviously brings complexity and a risk of errors .
At the end of the day , we accept - I think everyone has to accept - that researchers are not interested in being involved in the misuse of EU funding .
They are rather interested in the real , pure basic research that they do , which can lead on to the wonderful innovations that we can see in countries , not just throughout Europe but indeed throughout the world .
So we make things as uncomplicated as possible , as simple as possible , for stakeholders .
Subject : Involvement of SMEs in European research and innovation
On 9 February 2011 the Commission launched the Green Paper From Challenges to Opportunities : Towards a Common Strategic Framework for EU Research and Innovation Funding .
Following public consultation , the Commission will develop a common strategic framework to facilitate both the guidance of research and innovation ( R & I ) activity , to address the challenges of today 's society , and the simplification of the procedures for accessing European funds for R & I , reduction of the amount of time taken to introduce the outcomes of research within the market , and greater involvement of European enterprises in R & I activities .
Within the context of the EU 2020 Strategy , the EU has set itself the target of the funds allocated to R & I activities reaching 3 % of GDP by 2020 .
Because the private sector has a low level of financing for R & I , I would like to ask the Commission : what measures does it envisage to stimulate the involvement of this sector in the funding of European R & I ?
What measures does the Commission envisage to help SMEs overcome the difficulties encountered in accessing European funds for R & I ?
Does the Commission plan to allocate a European funding quota solely for SMEs ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is committed to facilitating the access to financing of small and medium sized enterprises in EU research and innovation programmes and to helping them ultimately bring the fruits of their innovation to market .
This is a priority for the Commission , as stated in the Communication on Innovation Union adopted on 6 October last , in the Small Business Act for Europe adopted in June 2008 and in the review of the Small Business Act adopted on 23 February this year .
In addition , the Green Paper ' From Challenges to Opportunities : towards a common strategic framework for EU Research and Innovation funding ' , identified the key questions for future EU research and innovation support , including a number of specific questions on how to better meet the needs of SMEs .
An overall aim of the common strategic framework is to make participation in EU programmes more simple and attractive , in particular for SMEs .
For the future , important elements to consider in this context are a single entry point with common IT platforms , more standardised rules , a streamlined set of funding instruments that cover the full innovation chain , and simpler and more consistent procedures for receiving funding .
Following the Green Paper consultation , the Commission will bring forward its legislative proposals for the common strategic framework by the end of this year .
We have already introduced in the latest Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) work programmes - a number of measures specifically targeting SMEs , including earmarked budgets .
The budgetary share of SMEs is forecast to grow from the current 14.3 % to over the 15 % target foreseen in the legislation .
SMEs need support on their doorstep .
Easier access to FP7 is provided by the Enterprise Europe network , a partnership between the Commission and nearly 600 business organisations such as chambers of commerce of industry , chambers of crafts , innovation agencies and regional development agencies .
More precisely , based on agreed guidelines , this network , together and in cooperation with the national contact points of FP7 , assists SMEs by providing support for awareness raising , capacity building for participation in the framework programme , engaging new SMEs in the proposals , partner search , joint actions addressed to SMEs and conducting consultations on inclusion of SME-related call topics in work programmes .
Several hundred SMEs were able to submit FP7 proposals with the support of the network .
Madam President , SMEs encounter many difficulties in accessing EU funds for research and development .
Either they do not obtain a loan to ensure the co-financing part , or the red tape is too much of a burden for them .
Does the Commission have any plans to elaborate a common and simple set of rules in order to increase the participation of SMEs in EU research programmes ?
Does the Commission intend to allocate , let us say , about 30 % of EU research funds just for SMEs ?
Member of the Commission . - Three concrete measures were adopted on 24 January this year , with immediate effect , on the management of EU research grants in the Seventh Framework Programme ( FP7 ) , and each of these responds directly to concerns that have been expressed repeatedly by participants - and would-be participants - in FP7 .
One is allowing more flexibility as to how personnel costs are calculated .
Another is that SME owners whose salaries were not formally registered in their accounts can now be reimbursed through flat-rate payments .
And a new steering group of senior officials , taken from right across the Commission services , is involved in removing inconsistencies .
This is very important for the application of the rules that are there already .
We designed an e-learning platform specifically targeted at SMEs .
It is going to go online this year , and it aims to facilitate the access of SMEs to R & D projects .
The exploration of its results will offer free online training and customised information and , very importantly , a communication forum .
All of those taken together improve substantially the situation for SMEs and obviously , under the common strategic framework , I have no doubt that we will get other very good ideas about what else we might be able to do to help them .
Subject : Air pollution in German cities
How does the Commission assess the state of air pollution in German cities , for instance in Munich , and what measures does it propose ?
Member of the Commission . - The ambient air quality directives set several limit values for several pollutants with different attainment deadlines .
Apart from promoting good practices at the implementation committee meetings amongst other fora , the Commission focuses its efforts on checking if compliance with the limit values set in the directive has truly been met .
Since 1996 , the directive has required that Member States develop and implement an overall strategy , including long and short-term measures .
The latter category is particularly relevant to address situations where there is risk of exceeding the particulate matter PM 10 limit values , for example .
Plans must be prepared as soon as the limit values plus the margin of tolerance are exceeded , to show how compliance will be reached by the attainment date .
Whilst the air quality plans have to be communicated to the Commission within two years of the exceeded limit measured , the competence and responsibility for deciding on the measures to be included in the air quality plans rests entirely with the Member States .
This is in line with the subsidiarity principle and acknowledges the fact that national and / or local authorities are best placed to identify the most efficient and tailor-made measures to address high concentration levels in their air quality zones .
The Commission 's compliance checking focuses mainly on whether limit values are met , less so on how they are met .
The latest data submitted by Germany for the year 2009 confirm that 70 out of about 80 air quality zones continue to show an excess for PM limit values .
Most zones were granted an extension of the compliance date until 11 June this year because they had prepared an air quality plan with a clear timetable and measures showing how compliance will be met by the exceedance deadline .
Munich is one of these zones .
The time extension was granted , provided that the competent authorities adjust the air quality plan to include short-term measures that are effective for controlling and , where necessary , suspending activities that contribute to the risk of the limit values being exceeded .
As far as NO2 is concerned , the Commission expects that many Member States will face similar problems as with PM .
Exceedances prior to 2010 , possibly extended to the end of 2014 , do not constitute a breach of European legislation at the current time but trigger the requirement to prepare an air quality plan .
Member States have until the end of September 2011 to submit the data for the year 2010 .
( DE ) Thank you , Mr Potočnik , for your very good and precise answer .
I have two brief additional questions .
Firstly , does the Commission check that the individual Member States really do apply the same criteria and carry out measurements with equal stringency , or are there differences here ?
Secondly , do you have any specific proposals for reducing air pollution - in the cities at least ?
Member of the Commission . - The criteria are the same for all countries .
It is true that owing to geographical conditions , sometimes cities like Milan in Italy have a more difficult job to reach the same criteria than other cities .
However , it is of the utmost importance that all citizens in the European Union be guaranteed the same level of health and protection .
That is the issue in this respect .
Of course , if there are issues that are locally or regionally specific , we award attention to that and we do try to address these issues in a collaborative way with the authorities so that we find the proper solutions .
Our aim is always to target and find a solution - to be strictly helpful and helpfully strict , if you like .
Concerning the second question , we normally do not give specific recommendations to any of the cities or regions , simply because we believe that the authorities there are much better placed and know the situation better than we do .
We do check if compliance is met , but normally the kind of standardised approach that gives good results is a mixture of various measures , some which are more short-term orientated and others are more structural .
Our next question comes from Mrs Kadenbach , who is replaced tonight by Mr Arsenis .
Subject : EU Biodiversity Strategy
In 2010 , the International Year of Biodiversity , the European Council adopted an ambitious 2050 vision and 2020 target for biodiversity conservation in the EU .
Subsequently , under the Convention on Biological Diversity , the world 's governments adopted an ambitious global vision and 2020 mission for biodiversity conservation , and a Strategic Plan setting out 20 testing targets .
When does the Commission expect to publish an EU Biodiversity Strategy , setting out the ambitious measures needed to achieve the EU and global biodiversity conservation targets ?
Can the Commission confirm that the new Strategy will call for no further negative changes in the conservation status of all protected habitats and species across the EU , both within and outside Natura 2000 sites , by 2020 , with a view to restoring all habitats and species to favourable conservation status by 2050 ?
Other than ongoing training for judges , and guidance documents previously announced by the Commission , what concrete measures are planned to improve the implementation of EU environmental law ?
Does the Commission have any plans to set up an EU environmental inspection force and adopt legislation on environmental inspections , as called for by Parliament ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is putting the finishing touches on the new EU Biodiversity Strategy , which will provide a framework for action to tackle biodiversity loss over the next decade .
We are aiming for adoption in early May .
Because the draft strategy is still under internal consultation within the Commission , I am not able to provide many details on its contents .
I can however reassure you that it responds to both the EU 's ambitious mandate set by the Council last year and to the global commitments the EU signed up to in Nagoya last October in the framework of the Convention of Biological Diversity .
The strategy will be developed around six sub-targets focusing on tackling some of the main drivers of biodiversity laws and the pressures exerted on biodiversity : nature conservation , restoration and green infrastructure , agriculture and forestry , fisheries , invasive species and the European Union 's contribution to global biodiversity .
The strategy will benefit substantially from implementation of the EU 's existing legislation , including effective and adequately financed management of the Natura 2000 network .
It will also be essential to consider how reforms to the common agricultural policy and common fisheries policy and the future cohesion policy can help deliver the necessary support for this strategy .
The 2020 EU headline target requires the halting of biodiversity laws and the degradation of ecosystems and the services they provide .
I can therefore assure you that the strategy will contain actions geared to reaching this objective .
This will include actions aimed at stepping up implementation of the Birds and Habitats Directives and ensuring significant steps are taken towards achieving a favourable conservation status for species and habitats of European importance .
As regards the implementation and enforcement of the EU 's environmental legislation more generally , the Commission intends to come out with a new communication on this issue later this year .
The aim is not to replace existing relevant communications but rather to improve upon them by focusing on the overall general structure and knowledge-base that underpins the implementation of this environmental acquis .
In the context of this initiative we will recall in detail all possible options for strengthening monitoring and control capabilities at EU level and the national inspection systems .
It should be recognised that the EU 's legal framework on environmental inspection has already been improved during the last years , notably with the adoption of a recommendation providing for minimum criteria for environmental inspections in the Member States as well as the inclusion of various provisions in sectoral environmental legislation .
The communication is still under preparation and the precise content has not yet been agreed on .
We will hold stakeholder consultations , including with Parliament through its relevant committees , so that its members will have the opportunity to express their views and give us their input .
Thank you , Commissioner , for the detailed answer .
We are looking forward to seeing the new EU Biodiversity Strategy and , of course , Parliament will have a lot of ideas and we are going to elaborate on this .
Going further into the issue we discussed Nagoya and the strategy , could you please comment on how we are progressing in implementing the Nagoya decisions and in particular the ABS protocol ?
What progress has been made ?
What are the deadlines there ?
On marine-protected areas , have we had any progress ?
There is special mention of this in the Nagoya targets .
How are we progressing there ?
Also , you mentioned that there will be efforts for biodiversity in the CAP , which is one of the instruments we have to protect biodiversity , but Parliament has also asked for protection of wilderness and road-free areas .
Finally , we need more communication on the Natura 2000 areas , especially for farmers .
What are you planning to do on this ?
( DE ) I should simply like to ask you a question , Commissioner . Are you concentrating particularly on nature protection and the protection of wild animals and plants , or are you also concerned with old domestic species and arable crops the diversity of which is also very much under threat ?
There is one thing I would like to add . We are talking about biodiversity .
One issue that is urgent at the moment is that some Member States - among them mine - are trying to get lower targets from the European Union on nature legislation .
I would really like to know whether the Commissioner agrees that we could go for lower targets or whether we should stick to the current ones .
Member of the Commission . - Concerning Nagoya and how we are getting on , things are developing pretty well with regard to the ABS , so there is no problem .
There are small problems with translation but we are well on track concerning the substance , and we are already planning to start preparation of the legislation after it has been signed so that we can then go on to the ratification process .
It is taking some time , but I do not see any serious obstacles .
Concerning marine protected areas , we are lagging behind still .
We are trying to push things ahead , and owing to the commitments we made in Nagoya we will have to do more in Europe than at present - also owing to Natura 2000 itself and the commitments which we have made .
On the CAP and Natura 2000 financing , I am trying to do my best to ensure that this is represented very well in the first pillar and in the third pillar and that biodiversity gets proper attention in the future common agricultural policy .
Commissioner Cioloş , Commissioner Hedegaard and myself prepared a joint letter which we sent to the last Environmental Council of Ministers .
In that letter we agreed on the issues , and on the direction in which we want to go .
On the question by Mr Posselt , the whole Natura 2000 protection story as agreed is currently protecting 18 % approximately of European land in the shape of the so-called Natura 2000 areas , and then we have two directives .
One is the Birds Directive and another one is the Habitats Directive , under which it is clearly specified what is protected , how , on which level and so on .
So basically it is pretty broad legislation and is not only covering some specific endangered and disappearing species or other .
We want to act in such a way that we have broad protection , but the fact is that a lot of species in EU areas which have been identified as being endangered are in a pretty bad condition , so we would certainly have to do more .
On the question of targets , the answer is pretty simple .
At this moment we should not focus on the question of lowering targets , we should rather focus on the serious question of the implementation of Natura 2000 , which means preparing the management plans and reserving enough financing .
This will not be easy in this situation , but it is certainly a kind of financing for the future .
Subject : Waste management in Greece
In its answer of 9 August 2010 to Written Question the Commission said that it ' considers landfill disposal to be the least and last desirable manner for managing and treating waste ' . In Greece there are plans to construct 61 landfill sites with cofinancing arrangements .
These plans have naturally met with opposition from local residents in many areas ( Lefkimi , Grammatiko and especially Keratea ) , who are forced to accept this ' least and last desirable ' solution .
According to the press , environmental organisations , political parties and local authorities , the government 's persistence in seeking to impose this technology and methods for collecting and managing waste are connected with certain corporate interests , something that could result in a fresh political and economic scandal .
Can the Commission answer the following questions : Independently of the choices made by each country , does it consider it preferable from an ecological and environmental point of view to use the option proposed by environmental organisations ( WWF , Greenpeace , SOS Mediterranean , and so on ) that waste should be sorted by households at source rather than recycled at waste plants ?
Will it undertake to study these proposals without delay and send a representative to the areas concerned to hold discussions with all the bodies affected ?
Member of the Commission . - The new Waste Framework Directive has set up a five-step hierarchy for waste management .
Waste prevention is regarded as the most desirable option , followed by preparing waste for re-use , recycling and other ways of recovery , including energy recovery , with disposal such as landfill as the last resort .
Deviations from the hierarchy for specific waste streams are possible .
However , Member States departing from the hierarchy would need to provide a sound justification .
Therefore , waste disposal in landfills that lie at the bottom of the waste hierarchy must be considered by the Member States as the least favourable waste management option .
High purity of waste materials , such as paper and glass , is a prerequisite for the use of waste as a secondary raw material by manufacturing industries .
That is why separate collection of recyclable waste streams at source is usually the most favourable method of waste collection .
Under the Waste Framework Directive , Member States are obliged to introduce by 2015 separate collections for paper , metal , plastic and glass .
Again there is certain flexibility for Member States to adapt their waste collection systems to the specific national circumstances , notably in cases where highly efficient and advanced sorting technologies are available .
In the absence of such technologies , however , separate collection at source is the cheapest and the easiest method to obtain high quality secondary raw materials from waste .
Greece faces serious problems with illegal landfill disposal and was condemned , as you know , by the Court in 2005 due to the huge number of illegal landfills that had been operating in its territory .
This issue has not been resolved yet .
Nevertheless , in December 2010 , the Greek authorities provided an action plan according to which all the legal landfills will be closed by the end of June this year .
The Commission welcomes this plan , including the construction of new landfill sites , under the condition that this is unavoidable as a last resort option to maintain the waste disposal network that meets mandatory sanitary standards in line with European legal requirements .
The construction of landfills complying with the standards of the EU Landfill Directive is already progress compared to the practice of illegal dumping of waste .
The Commission urges the Greek authorities to complete their planning and the construction of the landfill sites - programmes that benefit already from EU funds .
However , Greece must steadily go beyond these measures and move away from landfill as a predominant waste management option towards a modern waste management policy based on waste recovery and recycling .
According to the latest Eurostat statistics , in Greece around 82 % of municipal waste is land-filled whereas the average in the European Union is 38 % .
Additionally , the performance of the recycling sector in Greece is very low and only 17 % of municipal waste is recycled .
The implementation of the waste directive is a top priority both for the Commission and for me personally .
We will monitor the national waste policies through the assessment of the Member States ' waste management plans .
We are waiting for an updated waste management plan from Greece .
In addition , we are carefully monitoring the implementation of the Greek action plan and the process of closing all the illegal landfills , including the plan for the EU-funded projects .
We will also monitor the use of EU funding to ensure that the projects to be financed are consistent with the objectives and requirements defined in our waste legislation .
In the case of Greece , it is essential to reduce landfill and to increase recycling rates through separate collection and recyclable materials .
Proper waste management should be seen as an opportunity as it can create business and jobs across the country .
It is also essential to achieve the new resource sufficiency objectives through the application of best practices .
Finally , tomorrow I am flying to Greece , where I will be on a two-day full visit and we will , of course , discuss all these questions in detail there .
( EL ) Madam President , the Commissioner 's final comment gives me some cause for hope .
As you are leaving for Greece tomorrow , Commissioner , you should visit an area close to Athens , where there have been daily clashes between residents and the police forces camped there for four months now , with injuries and other incidents , in connection with the landfill facility , given that , as you explained , we have to close landfills .
The question is : if this is the last desirable solution , why do you accept environmental impact assessments when , in numerous facilities , such as that which you will probably visit , we basically have waste ending up in streams .
This is scandalous and the environmental damage - if you do not intervene , if you do not stop this economic scandal , because these installations are cofinanced by the European Union - will be unavoidable .
Please intervene immediately , because things are not as theoretical as you explained but , be that as it may , I thank you .
Member of the Commission . - I am going to the places close to Athens .
I will be having a debate on the first day with three committees from the Hellenic Parliament and we will certainly discuss this issue too .
I am aware of that and of the seriousness of the issue .
Maybe I could tell you why we are actually in favour and we are even co-financing some of the landfill , even if we do believe that this is on the lowest level of the preferred options in the waste hierarchy .
The first and absolutely most important thing that must be considered of course is human health , so we have to be sure that this is protected by all means .
I think it is important that we definitely look for and try to find the best possible options but sometimes it is simply necessary to go step by step .
I have seen from the data I receive from all across Europe that once a country starts seriously on separate collections , the route to very high levels of recycling and very low levels of municipal land filling is very short .
So separate collection is the fundamental thing and when this is done well then things can move fast .
But sometimes , unfortunately , land filling is still the only possible option and , if we want to take care of human health in this context , we simply have to provide that .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 20 and resumed at 21 : 00 )

Political parties at European level and rules regarding their funding ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Giannakou on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the application of Regulation ( EC ) No 2004 / 2003 on the regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding ( A7-0062-2011 ) .
Mr President , Parliament is being called upon today to debate the report which I drafted on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding by the European Parliament .
Despite the fact that there is a similar regulation , European political parties have not enjoyed a statute in keeping with the Lisbon Treaty and the European Union in the past , by which I mean a statute as defined in Article 10 ( 4 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon , which talks of political parties at European level helping to form European political awareness and express the will of the citizens of the Union .
Obviously , this does not mean that European parties will operate as international non-governmental organisations at the level of the Belgian State .
That is why , having accepted the Secretary-General 's report on party funding and his proposal to create a statute and the European Parliament 's proposal in the previous 2003 report on the need for such a statute - except that the Treaty of Lisbon had not yet been adopted then - and , finally , the Bureau 's decision of 10 January , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , following a serious hearing with all the political parties , chairmen and secretaries at European level and distinguished professors of economic and constitutional law and following a hearing of Transparency International and the EU Court of Auditors , approved this report , which calls on the European Commission to table a corresponding proposal , so that we can have a real European statute for political parties .
Of course , this statute will have certain criteria , as defined in the report : national parties in at least seven countries or regions , where the regional authorities of those countries have legislative powers , must be members .
At the same time , a distinction will be made between recognition of European parties and their funding .
In order to obtain funding , they must have elected at least one MEP .
Of course , individuals , simple citizens , as well as parties , will be able to join .
The proposals cover not only European political parties , but also their foundations .
They call - and this is important - for a legal , political and fiscal status for European parties , within the framework and under the aegis , of course , of the European legal statute and European laws in general .
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs debated the issue at length and arrived at this proposal , with slight differentiations , of course , which are shown in the amendments .
Basically , it arrived at the conclusion that this is a question of strengthening democracy , of achieving a stronger presence for citizens within the European institutions by creating such a statute and , of course , as regards the question of funding , it stipulates that 10 % should come from own resources and that donors should be able to give EUR 25 000 , rather than the current EUR 12 000 .
Thank you , Mr President . Naturally , I hope that plenary will vote in favour of this report .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank you for the opportunity to discuss with you the report on European political parties and their foundations .
I would also like to thank Mrs Giannakou for preparing this own-initiative report .
We in the Commission consider that report to be a very important one .
We know that European political parties play an important role in European integration .
In particular they contribute to ensuring that political issues are presented and discussed from the European perspective in time , before the elections to the European Parliament , thus avoiding situations where these elections are dominated by purely national issues , which , as we well know , is very often liable to be the case .
I therefore welcome the forward-looking tone of the report and look forward to discussing its content tonight and in the future as well .
Article 12 of Regulation ( EC ) 2004 / 2003 stipulates that the European Parliament shall publish by 15 February 2011 a report on the application of this regulation and the activities funded .
The report shall indicate , where appropriate , possible amendments to be made to the funding system .
We welcome , as I said , Mrs Giannakou 's own-initiative report and the accompanying resolution as a positive step , but it must be underlined that information on the actual implementation of the current regulation and the activities funded could be more precise and improved .
In this context and in the light of the vote by Parliament tomorrow , the Commission could be called upon to act through a further revision of Regulation ( EC ) 2004 / 2003 and the Financial Regulation , or through new legislation .
Should Parliament come to the conclusion that the relevant existing legislation requires modifications , or that new legislation is required , the Commission will seriously examine these conclusions and , if it agrees , will take the necessary initiatives .
The Commission will also reflect on how Regulation ( EC ) 2004 / 2003 could be further improved in the longer term in order to support the development of stronger and genuinely transnational political parties and foundations at European level , with a view to developing a truly political European public space .
On the specific issue of a legal statute for European political parties , I am aware that this is not the first time that Parliament has called for such a statute .
This issue is addressed in some detail in a study that was commissioned by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs ( AFCO ) and I believe that the study itself clearly demonstrates that a range of complicated constitutional , political and practical issues are at stake with regard to establishing such a statute .
The matter therefore requires a very careful and detailed analysis indeed .
The same can be said about some of the other issues brought up in the report .
For the proposals that would require amendments to the Financial Regulation , the Commission also sees the need for a wider reflection on legislative solutions and the timing of the possible changes .
In conclusion , Mrs Giannakou 's report and the accompanying draft resolution raise issues that are at the heart of European integration and its democratic nature , and which therefore need our full attention .
I look forward to the debate on those issues tonight and in the future as well .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to express my sincere thanks to Mrs Giannakou , since she has carried out a great and intelligent piece of work .
When we talk about political parties , we must take two problems into consideration .
Firstly , parties are not much esteemed in any country .
Secondly , when European elections take place , political parties are generally considered to pursue the interests of their national state and not the interests of Europe as a whole .
At the level of public opinion , there is therefore a lack of positive esteem either for the parties or for their function in relation to the forging of Europe .
We must therefore act urgently .
Not only in the Treaty of Lisbon , as has already been noted , but in many constitutions , in almost all European constitutions , the function of the parties is considered to be of national interest , and thus crucial in the creation of democracy and the pursuit of common interests .
It is important to stress that I am speaking about constitutions , and not ordinary laws , and that thus I am referring to the fundamental structures of the States and the European Union as a whole .
It is thus pressing that we define a statute for parties that are truly European-facing , and not only an algebraic sum of individual national formations that have no permanent European structure on the ground .
We need to see parties that think and act in a European context instead .
The need I am describing is much more pressing if we really do want to see a uniform European electoral law which , hopefully , could even lead to a single European constituency to sit alongside the national constituencies .
This will increase the individual European citizen 's sense of belonging to Europe .
I come now to the core of my argument .
As has already been emphasised - and I thank the Commissioner in advance - my committee has worked very hard , holding hearings and many meetings , but we need a proposal , an initiative from the European Commission , which brings together European parties within the law of the Union with a new legal form under public law , with a legal personality that is also valid in all Member States and with a uniform structure that allows them to act as representatives of the European public interest .
I thank Mrs Giannakou and the Commissioner for their pledges .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Giannakou , thank you for drawing up this report , which I think will be very helpful in spurring the Commission to make progress in forming a better system for recognising and protecting European political parties .
European democracy is genuinely representative democracy .
The edifice of representative democracy has remained steady ever since , in the mid-19th century , the expansion of suffrage made real the promise of the liberal revolutions to give the people representation , so that they could control their own destinies .
The representative edifice has firm foundations , but from time to time it needs reforms and new ways to express itself with greater quality .
An example of that would be the work that Parliament has done on adopting the Citizens ' Initiative .
In short , democracy has never survived without free representation , and representation has never been free without plural competition .
It is political parties that enable this plural representation .
In democracy , the parties express pluralism and are fundamental instruments of political participation : they contribute to shaping public opinion ; they offer alternatives , and general and sectoral government programmes ; they coordinate and harmonise social interests ; and they contribute to communication between the demands of the people and those who govern .
As a theorist of political parties has correctly pointed out , parties did not develop to communicate the needs of the rulers to the people , but rather to communicate the aspirations of the citizens to the rulers .
We now need this , which has worked at national level , to work at European level .
It is therefore a case of providing a framework and opportunities for European political parties to carry out at European level the functions that they have been carrying out in the national arena .
The most essential thing to achieving that is for parties to have legal status , and that is what this report is proposing : parties that have a territorial presence and that , at the same time , conduct themselves according to democratic rules ; and a differentiation between recognition of the parties and financing , which requires popular support .
Finally , we expect the Commission to set in motion the mechanism to perfect the currently imperfect situation of regulation of political parties .
Mr President , Mrs Giannakou 's report reflects the logical sequence of events over recent years which were aimed at raising citizens ' interest in politics in the European Union .
Regulating European parties means nowadays creating a civic space without borders .
In this respect , the Giannakou report is an invitation to reform-minded politicians .
The plans outlined in this report are important .
They will help turn European parties into a real instrument for enhancing participatory governance in the Union .
It is no coincidence that almost 100 amendments were tabled for this report .
As a result of the joint efforts made , seven compromise versions were produced , supported by all the parliamentary groups .
I think that the interest in the report in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs was kindled by the notion of the European party system becoming even more flexible , attractive and logical , not to mention suitable for the processes in Europe , by establishing a general political , legal and fiscal status for European parties .
This is not about organising parties according to a single , standardised structure , but about following a more general model .
The basic differences between parties and foundations also still apply , but there are new opportunities for greater synergy in their actions .
The report and the expected subsequent developments must change the familiar status quo whereby current parties are simply organisations of national parties and do not have any direct link with the electorate in Member States .
Based on this aspiration , it is recommended to start examining the conditions for direct individual membership and the participation of natural persons in the party 's internal operation and even in the party 's management .
A number of sensitive issues are raised in this report .
For example , a proper distinction is made between the criteria for founding a political party and those for funding it .
The report should be supported so that the Commission can start creating a new section in the Financial Regulation devoted solely to the funding of European parties and foundations .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , clear legal regulations for political parties in Europe are an important factor in shaping European society , developing European political debate and helping make the European elections truly European , with European campaigns and arguments rather than the national campaigns and arguments mainly encountered at present .
For this reason I would like to thank Mrs Giannakou most sincerely for her report .
We worked together very closely on this .
We did not agree on all the points to begin with .
However , we are happy to sign up to the final result .
I would like to point out a couple of areas that were particularly important to us during the debate .
One of them is the fact that we believe that parties who wish to participate in the democratic process must also be democratic in their structures .
This applies in particular to the election of party organs , the selection of candidates and the drawing up of lists and has now been included in paragraph 5 .
I believe this represents enormous progress .
The same goes for a series of other points which I do not intend to mention here .
I would like to refer briefly to the most important point : the requirement that a party should already have one member in the European Parliament .
This was originally required in order to receive recognition and funding .
This condition now only applies to the funding issue .
This was very important to us because recognition and funding must be very clearly separated .
Recognition means that there must be free competition so that new parties with new issues and new faces can be formed in Europe .
This should not be subject to excessive constraints .
However , when it comes to the question of funding , this can , of course , be linked to a certain minimum level of electoral success .
Accordingly , we can also agree to this , even if we would have liked to have worked this point out more clearly , which is why we intend to table an amendment .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , democracy is not just a periodic right to put a cross on a ballot paper .
Democracy depends also on a connection between government and governed - an affinity .
To have a functioning democracy you need a ' demos ' , you need a unit with which we identify when we use the word ' we ' .
If you take the ' demos ' out of democracy you are left only with the ' kratos ' , with the power of a system that must compel by force of law what it may not ask in the name of civic patriotism .
You cannot create the institutions of functioning representative government by bureaucratic fiat .
We have tried it in the European Union .
We have created all the attributes and trappings : the European Parliament , the political parties , the elections and so on , but you cannot make people feel European in the same sense that somebody might feel Norwegian , Japanese , French , Portuguese or whatever it is .
A party should grow organically because its members recognise a community of identity and common interests .
It is not something that we can do with public funding or at the stroke of a bureaucrat 's pen .
So , to be clear , the ECR opposes this legislation , we oppose the concept of having transnational parties .
We form some of our constituent members into an alliance of parties but we oppose the single statute .
We oppose the increases in the budget - which seems to me an extraordinary allocation of resources in the present economic climate - and I oppose my compatriot and my friend Andrew Duff 's idea that these transnational parties should be allowed to spend effectively EU money in national referendum campaigns .
You will not create Europeans by spending public money .
Not all the gold in all our national treasuries put together can serve to convince people of a false idea .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Šefčovič , ladies and gentlemen , I can only welcome the fact that the European Parliament is taking a serious-minded and practical approach to the issue of the democratisation of European decision-making processes .
As Mrs Giannakou 's report shows , this approach also involves the further development of European parties , which , although they have been an everyday political reality in Europe for many years , until now have not been equal partners and players in terms of their democratic influence on EU policy .
We need political parties at EU level too that are firmly rooted in the societies they represent and that can play a strong role in the elections to the European Parliament and in establishing European openness , based on internal democratic structures and regulations .
With regard to this particular report , I must say that I would have liked the rapporteur to have shown a great deal more courage by using the Parliament 's right of initiative to take a truly significant step in developing the political system and the party system in the European Union .
This is a step that many citizens have been waiting for and that will encourage them to get involved .
The interlocking European and national decision-making levels and the relations between the political parties could have been addressed more clearly as a common factor that is transparent and open to influence .
The European Parliament should now decisively call on the Commission and Council to take the initiative in this regard .
I would expect constructive cooperation from the Commission and Council .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this legislation will allow the EU to throw money at referendum campaigns to ensure that it purchases the right result first time , for a change !
The UK will in future be holding a referendum each time the EU proposes to remove power from its electorate .
The EU is frightened out of its wits that we may give a series of wrong answers .
So it intends to remove money from UK taxpayers to indoctrinate them into its version of the path of true righteousness .
Fronting the legislation is Andrew Duff , a liberal democrat MEP from my own region .
Support in the UK for his party has collapsed recently - a party of course desperate for EU institutions to govern the UK .
Never has the EU 's gerrymandering been so clearly displayed alongside its contempt for UK voters .
It is sowing the seeds of its own destruction , because the legislation will allow us to fund the referendum campaign that many in my country have for a very long time been waiting for - the one that gives us the opportunity to remove ourselves entirely from its control .

Mr President , would my colleague Mr Agnew agree with me that a political party that would accept funding under this legislation , as a single European party , and which in particular would have to observe the EU 's programme and activities and the founding principles of European law , and the development of European law at all levels regionally , nationally and at European level , would be a party which has lost its principles ?
Would you agree with me , Mr Agnew ?
Mr President , I say to Ms Sinclaire that we will take what we can out of this because we use the devil 's money to do God 's work .
That is what we do , and well you know it .
Will you accept the principle of European law though ?
No , of course we do not .
That is why we are here .
Mr President , let me first thank our rapporteur , Mrs Giannakou , and the Commission for their excellent cooperation and for an excellent report .
Are we really in a process of creating a European demos , as my honourable colleague Mr Hannan just told us ?
I do not know , I am not venturing that far .
I think what we want to do at this particular moment is to strengthen the nascent European public space and basically invigorate the debate on European issues .
I mean , the idea in this House is to bring European citizens closer to what we are discussing here and what could be simpler then basically starting to discuss European issues with them .
By the way , I can only speak for myself , but I am no bureaucrat - I am a directly elected member of this House .
The debate is actually to increase the visibility of European political parties , to which we all belong regardless of whether we are sitting on the Left , in the Centre or on the Right of this House .
To bring them out of the shade , because at the moment no one really knows what they do , what is their status , whether they produce any added value - and we in the EPP believe that they do .
That is the possibility , to actually have some programme presentation and in the future hopefully to fight European elections on European issues and not get bogged down in national rhetoric all the time .
This report is positive on three counts .
First of all , it brings a certain balance between operational authority within the parliamentary groups and a clear link with what we do in this House , linking funding to presence in this House - in the European Parliament .
Secondly , it brings organisational convergence between European political parties and European foundations , which is quite laudable , and thirdly it tightens and clarifies the funding of European political parties , which I think should be the goal for us all .
- ( SK ) Mr President , when we look at the history of European integration and at the current setup and functioning of the EU , it may be said that the EU can be seen not only as a grouping of states , but instead more as a political arena with the potential for creating a genuine European public .
The EU not only has a single market , its own legislature , an elected body of representatives and its own judicial system .
Political parties at the European level have also been in existence for a long time now .
They are not just federations of national parties .
They have their own agenda , a European agenda , and they are an integral part of European political life .
The strengthening of political parties at the European level reinforces participatory administration in the EU , and thereby ultimately democracy as well .
For these reasons , I welcome the presented proposal to reform the statutes and funding of political parties at the Union level , and I would also like to thank you personally , Mr Vice-President , for your cooperation .
It is now very important for political parties to get a common and single legal statute .
We must do away with the differences between the system for political parties and the rules applied to European institutions .
This is possible on the basis of introducing a common political , legal and fiscal statute for political parties at the European level .
It would also be appropriate to consider whether the right to establish such a party should be restricted to political parties operating at the national or regional level .
The issue of a funding system is also appropriate .
The system for approving funding for political parties at the European level should be simplified .
It should be possible to perform financial inspections , in order to maintain transparency .
A transparent and secure environment for the operation and funding of European political parties is also a desirable and welcome step for the citizens of EU Member States .
It may help them in their everyday lives .
A statute of the European political parties is a significant step forwards towards greater interaction with citizens , more democracy and greater public interest in European issues .
Mr President , national political parties are now failing to sustain European integration in a democratic and efficient manner .
This is very serious .
There is a gap to fill , and essential democratic sinew is needed to connect the citizen and the European powers that are exercised in Parliament and the Council .
The time for European political parties has come , not as a substitute for national political parties but as a complement to them , to challenge and compete with each other for support for ideas and for candidates .
The development of European political parties is a critical link for the success of the transnational list proposal that this House is to be considering next month .
I urge Parliament to support the Giannakou report with great courage and optimism for the future of post-national democracy .
( FR ) Mr President , the creation of the European political parties was a major step forward towards a more democratic Europe capable of expressing the wishes of its citizens .
Mrs Giannakou 's report is on the right lines in terms of making the activities of European political parties and their foundations simpler and more straightforward .
It will ease the burden of the conditions required in return for obtaining public funding and will broaden the options for making use of this funding .
We are particularly in favour of the possibility for the foundations to act outside EU territory also .
However , alongside this general approach , which encourages and extends provisions supporting a stronger European democracy , one of the measures goes in the opposite direction and restricts the freedom of European political parties .
Among the criteria for recognising a European political party 's basis in a Member State , the regulation will now require the party to have elected representatives sitting in a regional assembly that has legislative powers .
My party is specific to Corsica .
It is a member of the European Free Alliance ( ALE ) , which has been a European political party since it began .
We obtained 26 % of the vote in Corsica and have a large body of members on the Corsica Regional Assembly .
However , since France refuses to grant the Corsican Assembly legislative powers , even if our party were to gain a majority on the island it would not count towards the criteria for the ALE .
This provision is to be deplored .
We wanted to draw your attention to this point .
( PL ) Mr President , European political parties are a new phenomenon in European politics , but , together with the rise in integration and subsidies , they are starting to play an increasingly important role .
Political parties and foundations have become participants in the political life of the EU , and as such they should be subject to appropriate regulations which prevent abuse .
In certain cases , however , supranational structures aim to have too much influence over politics in the sovereign Member States .
For example , I am concerned at the announced intervention of EU parties in domestic matters .
As a Polish politician , I could not agree to a situation in which one or several of the European political parties were to organise a referendum campaign in my country , for example , using EU funds to achieve a specific result , for example in the referendum on my country 's accession to the euro area .
Similar fears may be harboured by politicians in other countries , for example the United Kingdom .
I am also opposed to demands to increase spending on European political parties , using money from taxpayers ' pockets .
This is all the more true since the government in my country is halving subsidies for national political parties and preventing the opposition from reaching the public .
Let us first support national parties , and then international ones .
After all , the European Union is a Europe of nation states .
( NL ) Mr President , you just observed that I was too late with my blue card .
I was not .
Even while Mr Duff was speaking I had already clearly indicated that I wanted to speak .
I am not sure exactly what the procedure is .
Can I still use my blue card or will you carry on with the debate ?
I would still like to ask Mr Duff a question about what he had to say , as he did start talking about the transnational list .
I was not aware that we were discussing that and I wanted to ask him a question about it .
Mr van der Stoep , as far as I am concerned you may ask your question .

My problem with the transnational list with which Mr Duff commenced his report - a report that we are to debate soon - is not so much the fact that a transnational list is to be made .
Obviously , I am already completely against that idea .
My problem , rather , is that only parties can participate in this - but what we are talking about here is European political parties - which means parties that are active in at least seven Member States .
My party is a party that stands for the interests of the Netherlands .
As a result , parties in other Member States that stand for the interests of their own countries are little concern of ours .
They are most welcome to do so , but in doing this you are excluding a whole range of parties that are unable to compete for the 25 seats required .
That causes me terrible worries .
I do not know how exactly you envisage this or how exactly you plan to participate .
Could you make things less difficult in this connection ?
In any case we feel seriously excluded .
Mr President , the proposal that I am promoting is that a transnational list should be drawn from at least a third of the Member States .
That is not very many .
If Mr van der Stoep cannot attract colleagues with political affinity from six other states , I recommend that he examines the validity and credibility of his political opinions .
( DA ) Mr President , let me start by saying that I am a strong supporter of political parties at national level , European level and also at international level .
However , a political party is not merely the party apparatus ; it is much more than that .
One of the truly major democratic challenges we face is the fact that political parties are reflecting the population as a whole to an ever decreasing extent .
This is demonstrated , among other things , by the fact that political parties are losing members .
Many countries have chosen to compensate for this by increasing government subsidies to the parties .
However , higher government subsidies are no guarantee of a closer connection between the parties ' leadership and apparatus on the one hand and the parties ' membership on the other .
On the contrary , the risk of an independent bureaucratic apparatus developing is greater the more financially independent from their members the parties ' apparatus becomes .
I therefore have to say that I am sceptical about the idea of European parties approved by the EU and supported by payments from it .
This is not because I have anything against European parties .
European parties should grow politically , organisationally and financially from the bottom up .
If this is not possible it is probably because there is not enough support .
There is no shortcut to democracy , not even when it comes to establishing European parties .
( EL ) Mr President , firstly my congratulations to our rapporteur , Mrs Giannakou , on her balanced and accurate report .
I consider that the development of political parties with European prospects which are more than national vehicles will be crucial in galvanising public opinion in the Union and interesting the citizens of Europe in participating in joint parties .
We are living in times when , as we are all aware , it is fashionable to denigrate politicians and the political parties to which they belong , as European citizens feel alienated from political , economic and civil developments .
At this juncture , therefore , Mrs Giannakou 's report will help to improve the appearance of political parties and support the unification of Europe and the reforms needed to create a Europe with equal citizens , with a common political , legal and fiscal status and with opportunities for growth .
Mr President , earlier today I spoke in this Chamber about my constituency , the West Midlands , and the economic hardships it is going through .
One of the last things that people there want is more money to be spent on politicians - they already have too many politicians , including MEPs , wasting their money as it is .
What this is , is a step , and Europe is willing to throw this money at creating that further step on the road to a super state .
It has its Parliament , its President and its Foreign Affairs Adviser , and now it wants the political parties to go with that .
Because what it wants is a nation called the European Union .
Even the most euro-sceptic members of this Parliament are willing to trade their principles to take their money .
Well done !
Is that what Europe wants ?
Does it want to buy its way to power ?

( FR ) Mr President , in our democracies we have our parliaments , which are the voice of citizens , then we have the political parties and their foundations , which are the masterminds , think-tanks and leaders of the debate .
Parliaments are the motors of democracy and political parties are the fuel .
Here in our Parliament , we complain all the time about citizens ' disinterest in the European Union .
We lament the abstention rate in European elections and ' No ' votes in referendums .
If we want real European democracy , we must take a serious look at the place we want to give to European political parties in the European space we are trying to build .
We have already done a good deal with the Treaty of Lisbon and the European Citizens ' Initiative .
We must now give European political parties the resources they need to achieve their ambitions .
Please note that I do not think these resources should be a vehicle for allowing the big parties to turn into immovable hegemonies .
Small organisations should also be able to take part in the debate .
This is important if we are to combat the parties ' negative image among citizens and their image as the unpopular face of democracy .
I believe it is essential to clearly establish the conditions on funding and transparent management of funding if we are to strengthen the European public space we are trying to create .
The initiative must be inclusive , so that the larger parties are not favoured to the detriment of the smaller parties and vice versa .
Another point I would like to deal with relates to the continuity we will be creating between the European , national and regional levels .
The European regulations we will be introducing must be capable of fitting in with the different national legal frameworks on the subject , to ensure that the different levels do indeed mesh with each other .
Finally , we also need to look very closely at what paragraph 23 of the report says , because by extension we need to think about the links that European parties would be able to form with parties in the rest of the world .
We must be able to share our democratic values with our partners in the rest of the world , because the globalised world in which we live today requires political decision-makers to come up with solutions to problems together .
( LT ) Mr President , the importance of the role played by European political parties is enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon , which aims to create an effective European political space .
It is the job of our politicians ' to encourage citizens to take an interest in the European Union , to make it more understandable and accessible and to involve them in decision making .
However , to that end it is necessary to regulate the activities of European political parties and foundations in a clear and uniform manner , and to ensure that the internal functioning of such parties is democratic .
As enablers for democracy these political parties must have a uniform legal and fiscal status , which would ensure that European citizens have a better understanding of political parties and are better represented .
It is particularly important for the formation of political parties ' internal management bodies to be based on transparent principles , in order to ensure the democratic election of all party bodies and democratic decision-making processes .
( DE ) Mr President , very few of our citizens are aware of the existence of European parties and foundations .
Until now these have simply been umbrella organisations for their national member parties , established according to national laws , mainly Belgian laws in this case .
What is it that these European parties do ?
They discuss European issues , hold party conferences and play an indispensable role in reforming the European Parliament 's electoral system .
According to the Treaty of Lisbon , they are required to help establish European democracy - a political forum at European level .
The own-initiative report to be voted on tomorrow calls on the Commission to reform the legal basis for these European parties .
In future , these parties will be based on a European legal statute and will have a European legal personality .
As liberals , we have campaigned to ensure that a clear distinction is made between recognition as a European party and an entitlement to funding , as there was a certain greed in evidence .
It is also important that European parties should follow democratic principles in their internal workings , something that cannot be taken for granted .
Mr President , the tide of opinion is moving one way in many of our nations , but the European Union and this Parliament curiously seek to swim in a different direction .
There is no demand from our citizens for transnational politicians .
This Parliament now wants to spend even more public money , when our national governments are having to make reductions in public expenditure .
I speak , Mr President , in my capacity as President of New Direction , the Foundation for European Reform .
To my mind , it is unacceptable that the costs of political foundations should be increasing at a rate of over 30 % year on year .
In 2009 , EUR 6.3 million was spent ; by 2012 this will have doubled to EUR 12.3 million .
Some might say that if you object to this , why does your Foundation accept funding ?
Well , the answer to that is quite simply that any funds we do not accept are distributed among the foundations of the other political groups ; we would be funding the activities of our political opponents .
We need to find a way of returning money to our national exchequers .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that the European Union is being tested by a democracy crisis and a credibility crisis , as well as an economic crisis .
The policies being applied are angering and disappointing our citizens and the decision-making procedures discourage their participation , as the recent European elections demonstrated .
That is why , subject to certain preconditions , European political parties , with their specific political attributes , may help the public to become more pro-active in seeking solutions for the benefit of the people , not the financially strong .
Therefore the rules of political and legal recognition and the necessary funding must facilitate their action to freely develop their policies and their alternative proposals - because that is the essence of democracy - and they must not be influenced by outside political or economic restrictions .
That is why I have reservations about certain points in the report , insofar as they might be used as restrictions on the free and independent organisation and action of political parties .
The operation , action and organisation of parties must be matters of their own choice and must not be contingent upon political sovereign correlations .
- ( SK ) Mr President , the report on the application of a regulation on a statute for political parties at European level and their funding evaluates experience from the application of this law in the administration of political entities with a broad European scope .
As well as evaluating the current situation , Mrs Giannakou has decided to formulate a number of proposals for improving the current legal environment .
Perhaps the most significant change would be the transformation of the form of the statute from the current equivalent of a Belgian non-governmental organisation to a common and single European legal statute for political parties .
The second significant change would be setting the percentage share of independent funding sources at 10 % of the overall budget of political parties .
In view of the fact that European political parties and their foundations should receive more than EUR 30 million from the European Parliament in 2012 , however , we must ensure maximum transparency in the management of this funding .
Changes such as these can be supported , in the interests of further improving political work in the EU .
( NL ) Mr President , the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) is in this House to represent the Dutch people .
We are here because we believe that the European Union , as it currently exists , does not serve the interests of the Netherlands .
We are not opposed to the European Union , we just want it to restrict itself to economic cooperation .
For us , Mr President , a European political union is therefore completely unthinkable .
Power must rest with the Member States , as only they can determine what is best for their own citizens .
European political parties would provide no added value at all for the well-being of citizens of the European Union or of the Netherlands .
Mr President , the provision in the Treaty of Lisbon which states - and I quote - that political parties at European level contribute to forming European political awareness and to expressing the will of citizens of the Union is an absurd and out-of-touch statement .
It does not interest the citizens , and quite rightly so .
Between them , the European political parties received around EUR 67 million in European subsidies between 2004 and 2010 .
This is a completely senseless pouring of taxpayers ' money down the drain .
A political party must , by definition , be able to function without subsidies , and that includes European political parties .
These are special interest groups that nobody knows , that nobody monitors and that we need like we need a whole in the head .
( EL ) Mr President , the core issue raised by the report in connection with the funding of European parties and the policies to found them is the creation of a single statute for European parties in accordance with Euro-unifying legislation .
The European Union - with its legislation setting out a single structure and modus operandi for European parties and interfering in their internal operation , their charters and their political programme , on the pretext of allegedly relaxing the funding regime - is opening a Pandora 's box of economic and , by extension , political sanctions against political parties in the form of an EU stranglehold on their operation and action , pressure on national political parties to integrate more fully into the anti-grassroots policy of the European Union and an attack on parties that question the anti-grassroots policy , the EU strategy and the authority of capital .
This is not about parliamentary coordination ; it is about European parties as ideological and political tools of the European Union to manipulate the working and grassroots movement .
That is why we shall vote against the report on regulations governing European parties , political foundations and their funding .
( RO ) Mr President , transparent funding of European political parties is an essential means of supporting democratic values .
We need a European space where political parties will be active and citizens will be at the heart of the European Union 's concerns .
Adopting European legal status marks a step towards improving European parties ' regulatory framework .
In the case of my own country , we have Act no 334 of 2006 , revised in 2010 , in force .
However , the public debate is about whether it would not be more appropriate for funding for municipal and parliamentary candidates to be provided by the state budget .
The ceiling being proposed for each candidate is approximately EUR 11 600 .
Adopting these cost regulations would eliminate electoral bribery and illegal funding .
The parties would have primarily competent candidates rather than people capable of promoting their own campaign .
Mr President , this debate tonight is symptomatic of all that is wrong with the ' more Europe ' agenda .
It is simply staggering for me to have listened and to see how greatly removed the debate is from the agenda of ordinary citizens .
Mr Duff quite rightly acknowledges that there is a gap to fill between the European powers and the individual citizens .
That is absolutely right , but that gap will not be filled by developing European parties and , as another contributor to the debate has said , giving those parties the resources to match their ambitions .
I would challenge Mr Duff to go to his constituency at the weekend and try to sell those views to local community groups that have had their funding cut because of austerity measures imposed by his coalition government in the United Kingdom .
The gap will be filled , however , by giving people their say on Lisbon , on increasing federalism , and on the litany of red tape that comes from these institutions .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I start my concluding remarks by thanking once again Mrs Giannakou for her report because I think that this debate has very clearly proven that the concern and the issues she raised in her report are legitimate ; they are at the heart of European integration and of its democratic nature .
The exchange of views clearly demonstrated as well how sensitive these issues are and , therefore , if this House approves this proposed legislative resolution tomorrow , the Commission will respect its commitment stemming from the framework agreement and will respond to this resolution within three months .
However , as you may have felt from this debate , it is quite clear that this would be a very sensitive , elaborate , political and legal task because there are a lot of issues that are both legally and politically very sensitive .
Our preliminary analyses on the statute of the European political parties is in this direction but , of course , we now need to study very carefully the legal basis , potential legal form and , as we see now , we would most probably need a separate legal act on this issue .
That is because the revising of the regulation from 2003-2004 would simply not be sufficient because it targeted the funding issue and not the issue of the statute of the political groups .
So this would be one angle , which we would have to look at very carefully .
Several speakers raised the question of amending the Financial Regulation .
Here , again , we would need to look very carefully at the requirements , scope and the timing and we certainly took very careful note of the calls in this report for more flexibility .
As you know , we already took some steps in 2007 and we will examine these proposals very carefully .
However , it is quite clear that it might be very difficult to agree on the changes and have them incorporated into the current revision of the Financial Regulation and its implementing rules .
Of course , Parliament is a legislator and is free to raise this issue in the current ongoing interinstitutional process , if it so wishes .
My thanks again , Mr President , and we are certainly looking forward to the ensuing debate on this issue once the resolution has been adopted and the Commission 's response has been prepared .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Commissioner in particular for what he said and for the undertakings he made and my fellow members who supported this report .
Firstly , I think that it is important to repeat that , as far as the funding procedure is concerned , the parties will not seek more funding and that the amendment to the 2007 regulation has brought about greater transparency , as Transparency International itself has admitted .
Secondly , it is only fair that the parties should seek a European statute and to bring their statute into line with the European institutions and with European legislation and this is , of course , intended to satisfy the citizens .
Finally , creating a secure and transparent environment for the operation and funding of parties is a deeply democratic act .
We need a European area of active political parties which will bring citizens into the heart of the Union and help them in their daily lives .
This will mean greater participation , more democracy and , in the final analysis , more Europe .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on 6 April at 12 : 00 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
The European Union has faced repeated criticism due to the lack of democracy .
To achieve genuine democracy , we need to have a European political space in the true sense of the term , and political parties at European level are a key instrument for attaining this goal .
The proposals for reforming the regulation on the rules governing European political parties and their funding , which feature in this report , mark a step towards streamlining how they operate .
I think that they can fulfil their role much better if they enjoy a uniform political and legal status based on European law .
The current system where these parties have a legal personality based on national legislation does not offer the conditions which are most conducive to ensuring effective communication between these parties and the electorate in the 27 Member States .
Introducing a European statute would help political parties at European level to adapt to any reform of the electoral system for the European elections , which is currently under discussion .
Furthermore , I welcome the move to facilitate the involvement of European political parties in campaigns for referendums relating to European issues at Member State level .
In most cases , these referendums are dominated by purely domestic issues .
The involvement of European parties could help redirect the debates towards the real issues of these referendums .
in writing . - ( LT ) Discussions about how to strengthen the role of European political parties by developing democracy in Europe and forming public opinion are very relevant .
Although Parliament is acquiring increasing powers there has been no reduction in its democratic deficit due to citizens ' ever declining participation in European Parliament elections .
Political parties at European level are essential instruments of parliamentary democracy , raising European political awareness , promoting interest in EU affairs and expressing the will of the citizens of the European Union .
I therefore agree entirely with the rapporteur that it is necessary to enhance the situation of political parties at European level and prepare a clear and uniform legal status and financing model for them .
Such parties should not remain foreign bodies .
Currently the role of European political parties in the public sphere is rather limited .
They are merely umbrella organisations for national parties and not directly in touch with the electorate .
The new legal status of such parties in the European Union would ensure organisational uniformity and provide the opportunity to carry out its role more effectively .
I would like to stress that we must continue to strive for the creation of a safe and transparent environment for party funding .
Party funding should not be based purely on grants , we must also promote funding from our own resources , which are a sign of party vitality .
in writing . - ( SK ) I would not like to be a member of a political party established on the principles sketched out in the submitted report .
These parties are supposed to become the representatives of the ' European public interest ' , but if you ask any two Members of this Parliament what that is , they will each answer differently .
Who will determine this interest ?
Parliament ? The Commission ?
Members are not nominated by EU institutions , however , but elected by the citizens of the Member States .
It is my duty to represent actual citizens , not what the EU institutions consider to be the ' European public interest ' .
Nor do I agree that European parties should also operate at regional and national levels .
They simply do not have a mandate for that .
If they start doing that , they will get into conflict with the parties on whose ballots we were all elected , and with the voters represented by these parties .
My loyalty belongs to my voters , not to a European political party .
That is called a free mandate .
I therefore completely disagree with the philosophy of super parties presented in this report .
It is another attempt by the social euro-engineers , who are so obsessed with the utopian super-state that they ignore common sense .
If they listened to common sense , they would realise that the stubborn assertion of such proposals demolishes the foundations on which European integration stands .
As a staunch European , I must therefore vote against this report .
EC-Comoros fisheries agreement - Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea - Fisheries - transitional technical measures - Imports from Greenland of fishery products ( debate )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the external strand of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) has taken on particular importance , as it is no longer possible to guarantee that our fisheries-product needs can be met on the basis of our fish resources alone .
The European fishing industry can only provide for 40 % of our self-sufficiency .


In 2009 , we imported EUR 15.5 billion worth of fisheries products and only exported EUR 2.5 billion worth , which means that , without bilateral agreements with third countries , 3 000 boats would be brought to a standstill and 40 000 jobs would be lost .
However , the external strand of the CFP also has positive aspects for our partners .
In contrast with many of our international competitors , the European Union does not limit itself to exchanging fish for money .
The values that we support are behind the agreements we conclude , whether in terms of human rights , or respect for the sustainability of resources .
According to the Treaty , the Union 's exclusive competence with regard to the preservation of biological resources applies to managing fishing activities by EU fleets in non-EU waters .
The main objective of the activities that are part of the CFP 's external dimension is to expand the principles of sustainable and responsible fishing internationally .
As I mentioned before , the other objectives currently guiding the external dimension of the CFP of maintaining an EU fleet presence at an international level and ensuring that this fleet supplies the EU market are becoming increasingly less relevant .
It is in this context that the report of which I am the rapporteur , which we are discussing here today , on the fishing agreement with the Union of the Comoros needs to be understood .
It is an agreement concerning 70 European boats ' right of access to Comorian waters in exchange for a financial contribution of around EUR 600 000 per year .
Around half of this amount should be channelled into developing the fisheries sector on which around 30 000 of the 800 000 inhabitants of the country depend ; it should be recalled that the country has practically no other resources .
The agreement provides for mechanisms for controlling catches , for employing of local crews , and for a clause relating to suspension or review if cases of human rights violations occur .
It is to be remembered that this small country , independent from France since 1975 , has already experienced several coups d 'état .
In the light of the above , I propose that the adoption of this agreement , and I would draw attention to the various recommendations that I make , specifically those relating to the need to improve significantly the evaluation of results .
I would like to take the opportunity to use the minute remaining to refer to another aspect of another report : that of Mrs Grelier , with which I do not agree , and which has given rise , jointly with other Members , to the tabling of a draft amendment .
I am referring to the amendment seeking to permit fishing for hake and monkfish with trammel nets to continue in areas 8 , 9 and 10 , along the Portuguese coast , which was banned by Commission decision from 1 October 2010 , as I believe that this has an adverse effect on certain populations of sharks caught with them , although no scientific study has been carried out to verify this .
Under these circumstances , the aforementioned amendment would propose that this decision be abrogated until 2012 , so that the Portuguese authorities can complete scientific studies determining whether or not this decision is justified .
This position is also backed by the European Economic and Social Committee , which is why I am calling on Parliament to endorse it , in order to be fair .

rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , this regulation , Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 , establishes Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and in the area of the law of the sea .
It constitutes an important European Union financial instrument in the area of fisheries .
Together with the European Fisheries Fund , these represent the two main instruments for applying the CFP .
Since the adoption of this regulation in 2006 , a number of elements of related supplementary legislation have been gradually amended , which is the reason for now amending this regulation in order to ensure consistency between all elements of the legislative framework .
The Commission also believes that , in some cases , experience has demonstrated the need to ensure that the provisions of the regulation be adapted slightly to provide a better response to needs .
I therefore propose a limited scope for this revision , with the objectives and structure of the original regulation essentially being retained .
However , while maintaining this essentially limited scope , we also believe it would be useful to propose certain additional amendments , which , although quite specific , could contribute to bringing this legislation more into line with recent changes in the sector and with its future prospects .
The debate that took place before and during the drafting of the report contributed a great deal to the final result , as did the opinions and proposals of the shadow rapporteurs and other Members , all of whom I would like to mention and acknowledge at this point , and thank for their participation .
Among these proposed amendments , included in the report , I would highlight , inter alia , the reference to safeguarding coastal fishing activities , and the possibility of financing the development , in addition to the purchase , by Member States of new technology for use in the fisheries sector , such as equipment and software , and computer networks enabling sampling methods to be designed , managed , validated , analysed and developed , as well as the data relating to fishing to be exchanged .
In the area of aquaculture , I would point to the possibility of introducing financing of the collection , management and use of environmental data in addition to the socioeconomic data previously provided for , thus promoting environmental and health monitoring and evaluation in this sector , in order to contribute to its sustainability .
However , I would like to draw attention at this point to the three additional amendments that we are proposing to this report .
There is currently widespread and growing recognition of the importance of fisheries management supported by up-to-date and thorough scientific knowledge of the status of stocks .
This is an essential condition for its sustainable development .
For this reason , we propose the inclusion of the possibility of increasing the EU co-financing rates provided for in the area of the collection , management and use of scientific data , both basic and supplementary , on the status of fish stocks .
The proposal is to increase the ceiling from 50 % to 60 % .
Also , with regard to control activities , we propose a similar increase in the maximum possible EU co-financing rate , while maintaining the Commission prerogatives already in place regarding the possibility of financing some actions at higher rates .
All of this comes in a framework where Member States and their control authorities play and should continue to play a key role in the steering and implementation of control measures within their waters .
These amendments result from an attempt at compromise , taking into account the objections raised by various groups , with regard to the 75 % ceiling initially considered .
They are backed by our group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , and by a series of Members from other political groups , which indicates their importance and the consensus that , I believe , unites these Members , and could also unite them during voting in plenary .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking my colleagues for their committed and constructive participation in the work done by the Committee on Fisheries on this report on transitional technical measures .
The report has aroused lively debate , given the huge significance of the technical measures , as they will influence the way fishermen and the sector as a whole do their work , by setting out the methods fishermen may use to catch fish in the zones covered by this regulation , with a view to protecting juveniles and restoring stocks : an aim shared by all , and by fishermen in particular .
The subject of this report is sensitive and controversial , as demonstrated by the difficulties the Commission has come up against since 2008 in trying to reach an agreement with the Council on the future of these measures .
This was when only those two institutions were involved in the procedure .
At present , technical measures are governed by an old regulation that was amended by a succession of transitional measures and then renewed until 30 June 2011 as no agreement was reached with the Council on the Commission 's 2008 proposal for a new regulation , which was aimed at simplifying and clarifying the existing legislation to ensure the rules were implemented more effectively and to cater for the fisheries ' regional features .
Today , as the new deadline approaches the situation is radically different .
Since the Treaty of Lisbon , for the most part the subject of fisheries now falls under the ordinary legislative procedure , whereby Parliament has an important part to play as co-legislator .
It fully intends to play its part by bringing the fishermen 's points of view and those of EU policy-makers closer together .
As an elected representative from a port town , I am always struck by how the fishing sector mistrusts and sees itself as remote from the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) , whereas farmers for example clearly feel themselves to be more a part of the common agricultural policy .
Added to this , the fishing sector is in crisis .
There is growing dissatisfaction .
The real challenge is the balance that must be found between the sector 's economic stability and hence the guarantee of decent incomes for fishermen and the sustainability and replenishment of fish stocks .
Finally , the expiration of the regulation comes at a time when talks on the reform of the common fisheries policy are starting .
This reform must adopt a bold framework and must get the fishing community , consumers and citizens on board .
It must involve the whole sector in the scientific analyses that form the basis for the quotas and hence the sector 's level of activity .
This new framework presupposes that the Commission will draw up a concrete proposal on the future technical measures , an effort which at present both it and the Council appear to have been saving themselves .
The new proposal must make provision to ensure that the technical measures are in keeping with real experience on the ground , through consultation with those working in the sector .
It must also be in keeping with the new regulation and the framework of the new CFP , especially on the subject of regional variations in measures .
It must ensure that the division of jurisdiction between the Commission and Member States is clearly defined , a factor which will aid understanding and ownership of this EU policy .
In the light of this background and these issues , I propose that we agree to the Commission 's request for an extension until 31 December 2012 , without substantially changing the current technical measures except for the addition regarding the permissible mesh size for boarfish .
However , I realise that this proposal is a form of concession to the Commission and that there are a lot of questions being asked and a strong demand for change in the sector , which is disappointed that this important project has been postponed .
I am therefore adding a twofold demand to our approval : a request for an impact assessment on the technical measures currently in force , which is vital if we are to adapt them effectively , and a request for genuine consultation with all of the parties involved , especially fishermen themselves , in drawing up the new regulation .
To conclude , I would like to draw attention to the fact that the Commission 's new proposal should be made within a reasonable timescale for a new regulation to come into force on 1 January 2013 , which is when the new CFP comes into force .
It is vital that the Commission begin work immediately on this new proposal .
It would be unreasonable to allow a further extension after this new 18-month extension period for the current regulation .
The technical measures to which my report relates are transitional and have only been approved as such .
Mr President , I must begin by regretting once again the complications that this report has encountered because of the resistance of the Council and the Commission to accepting Parliament 's powers of co-decision .
In this case , we have a proposal for Greenland , as an overseas country and territory , to be able to export under the same conditions as those applied to a European Union Member State .
This situation would benefit both Greenland , which exports 87 % of its fisheries products to the European Union , and the Union ; Denmark in particular , which is the recipient of the majority of these exports .
One of the conditions for including Greenland in the single market import arrangements is that it should accept EU health rules , and this does not pose a problem in the least .
Despite the trade in fisheries products being subject to the common organisation of the market , the Commission , using the need for compliance with health rules as an excuse , tabled its proposal based on Article 203 of the Treaty , which meant a simple and straightforward consultation procedure for us .
Both the Committee on Fisheries and the legal services pointed out this anomaly from the outset .
However , as it presents no problems in terms of content , and given its importance to Greenland , we are allowing the report to be processed under the consultation procedure .
Imagine our surprise when , just as we were about to vote on the text and without prior warning , the Council adopted a completely different proposal , with numerous changes attempting to obscure the clear link with the common organisation of the market and so avoid co-decision .
Since Parliament had - as I said before - already adopted the text using the consultation procedure without any problems , such manoeuvring was uncalled-for .
Nevertheless , as we were faced with a new text , and given the clear proof that the Council 's goal was to erode Parliament 's powers , we decided that , this time , we would use those powers to the full and request a formal opinion from the Committee on Legal Affairs .
In that opinion , the view of the Committee on Legal Affairs was - and I am quoting directly from the text - that ' the purpose of the proposed decision is to require Greenland to transpose EU health rules as a condition for the application of the EU internal market rules as regards fisheries ' , as specified in Article 3 of the proposal itself , which guarantees that the agreement 's rules will be adapted to the applicable rules established in the Union as regards animal health and food safety , as well as the common organisation of the market in fishery products .

Consequently , the Committee on Legal Affairs came to the unanimous decision that Articles 204 and 43 ( 2 ) of the Treaty , along with Protocol No 34 , which includes specific arrangements and procedures for products subject to the common organisation of the market in fishery products in Greenland , should form the legal basis for the proposal .
Therefore , as rapporteur , I drew up another draft report , modifying the legal basis .
That is what we are tabling for adoption tomorrow and , as far as the European Parliament is concerned , it is our first reading .
All , then , that remains is for me to tell the Commission and the Council - which I believe to be absent - that they now have an opportunity to correct and recognise the new legal basis , and , therefore , to consider this the first reading , as we will be doing tomorrow .
The problem is with the legal basis and not the content .
I call for this problem to be solved with a view to the future .
Mr President , the opinion of the Committee on Budgets has been requested on this report on the fisheries agreement between the European Union and the Union of the Comoros .
The committee approved this agreement .
However the committee felt that in the first instance there is little point in Parliament 's vote on this report since it comes after the agreement has been signed .
The low level of funds committed in this instance mitigates the impact of this problem , but in future we would of course need to be able to give our opinion before such agreements are signed .
Secondly , the committee felt that the content of these agreements should have been analysed in greater detail , in terms of the provisions for monitoring actual catch quantities and protecting fish stocks in view of the pressure from the Committee on Fisheries and also to ensure that the local development component of the agreements is properly applied in practice .
The Committee on Budgets therefore plans to propose an in-depth working meeting on this subject with the Committee on Fisheries in the very near future .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing four reports in today 's debate , and so I would like to start by thanking all the rapporteurs for their work , and the European Commission for its cooperation .
To begin with , I would like to say a few words on the Grelier report , which is a compromise between the political groups and the European Commission .
I endorse the version of this report which was agreed on and voted through in the Committee on Fisheries .
As a result of the coming into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , in 2010 the European Commission withdrew its draft Council regulation for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures , with the aim of drawing up a new plan .
The new plan was intended to comply with the provisions of the Treaty and to take into account the reform of the common fisheries policy .
The draft was to be put forward in the third quarter of 2011 .
Unfortunately , it appears that the Commission will not manage to prepare the draft regulation in time , and , what is worse , will not have the funds to change it .
This does not bode well .
By voting tomorrow to extend the provisional regulation , we are taking on a commitment to fishermen to work on the new regulation , which must ultimately systematise the whole range of provisions regulating permitted methods and places of fishing .
It is , however , encouraging that , according to the latest information , the Commission will most likely want to transfer some competencies back to the Member States as far as technical measures are concerned .
This is a very positive step towards decentralisation .
Technical measures used in the individual sea basins differ according to local conditions .
The fisheries management system should abandon the traditional top-down approach and instead emphasise the principle of regionalisation , which makes it possible to take into account the prevailing conditions in individual sea basins .
We must therefore say a firm ' no ' to all attempts to adopt a universal and joint fisheries management model , and call for the due attention to be paid to the particular characteristics of the various European seas .
An individual approach will put us on the right path to sustainable fisheries management . Thank you .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Damanaki , ladies and gentlemen , once again we find a whole package of fisheries policies on the agenda .
In my capacity as coordinator , I am pleased to see that we have reached a compromise with the Council and Commission on two regulations .
I refer to the Grelier report on technical measures and the Ferreira report on the second financial instrument .
We shall also be able to vote in favour of the fisheries agreement with the Union of the Comoros , although I do not wish to hide the fact that I would like to see a fundamental realignment of the partnership agreements within the framework of the reform of the common fisheries policy .
However , there are real problems between the institutions in relation to Greenland , where Parliament 's powers are not respected .
I am gradually losing patience with the fact that the level of cooperation between the institutions is still so poor .
This is something that I have raised time and time again already .
I am raising the issue again today .
The problem with the management plans must be resolved as a matter of urgency .
I would appeal to the Hungarian Presidency of the Council to actively press for a solution .
The fact that there is no representative from the Council here today is a clear sign of the Council 's lack of respect for Parliament .
I find this incredible .
One final remark about the Grelier report .
I am aware that some of my fellow Members are frustrated because it was not possible to incorporate the amendments they wanted .
However , I find it very regrettable that our fishermen are forced to work with out-of-date technical measures .
The fault in this case lies with the Council , which has been unable to agree to a new regulation .
As a Parliament we have a great deal of responsibility , which is why we need to act responsibly and extend the existing regulation without amendments .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I want to congratulate all the rapporteurs on the presentation of their reports and , due to the time constraints , I want to confine my remarks to the Grelier report .
The existing regulation on technical measures is causing major problems for small inshore vessels operating off the coast of Ireland and , indeed , off the west coast of Scotland .
We cannot afford , as politicians , to sit and wait for the reform of the common fisheries policy when a new regulation is expected .
Parliament has an opportunity to act now and I urge all political groups to support the very realistic amendments that have been tabled .
These small vessels which I referred to , short of 15 metres , are deprived of earning an income and , even more importantly , these vessels are forced to travel into dangerous waters .
We are driving these vessels 80 kms off our coasts to catch fish outside the area , which is closed for cod recovery .
My amendments refer to the use of tangle nets .
These nets are used by small inshore vessels to catch shellfish and lesser spotted dogfish off the North-West coast .
Tangle nets are not used to catch cod , they are not used to catch whiting or haddock and will have zero impact on these stocks , so these amendments , if passed , will allow these small vessels to survive in these areas .
It is not good enough to suggest that we do not want to open discussions .
That is what we are here to do .
In relation to boarfish , this is a new form of fishery .
It has been developed primarily by fishermen from my own country .
In December the Council established a TAC , of which Ireland was allocated 67 % , and I am glad to hear the Commissioner says that there is scientific evidence to justify this .
There are no references to boarfish under the existing regulation , so therefore I am pleased that the committee decided to accept my amendment to use the Commission proposal as a vehicle to introduce the appropriate mesh size of 32 to 54 , thus avoiding the need to introduce new legislation that would take too long .
In conclusion , I urge all Members to think about
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I would like to thank all the rapporteurs for their constructive cooperation .
However , I would like to focus on the fisheries agreement with the Union of the Comoros .
If I ever need to remind myself why we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance have up to now voted against these fisheries agreements , I only have to take out one of the assessments and read the agreement with the Union of the Comoros that we are now to vote on .
The EU has had an agreement with this poor country since 1998 .
According to the assessment , the agreement provided the Union of the Comoros with EUR 2.7 million between 2005 and 2009 .
The agreement states that 60 % of the money is to be used to support the local fishery sector and for controls and scientific estimates of fish stocks .
According to the assessment , this developing country still does not have a single operating fishing port , not a single coastguard boat , no coastguard aircraft and no fishery research .
The country 's own fishery sector is still completely undeveloped .
Thus , the Union of the Comoros receives EUR 2.7 million to let in EU boats .
We taxpayers provide 65 % of this amount and vessel owners 35 % .
These boats , the majority of which are intended for tuna fishing , have during the same period caught fish , according to the assessment , to the value of EUR 13.7 million .
It is very good business for the vessel owners , but the assessment states that all of the so-called added value has been received by the EU .
No Comorian people have been employed as crew on the boats .
There has been no landing of fish on the Comoros .
All processing of the fish has been done elsewhere , in the Seychelles , for example .
I agree with the Commissioner that it is good for the EU to have a presence in the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission ( IOTC ) , but my question to the Commission is the following :
How does the Commission intend to ensure that this new agreement is implemented better than previous agreements ?
For example , how should the EU fleet be persuaded to employ Comorians on board and how will the Commission ensure that the agreement really contributes to development on the Comoros so that the figure for the money earmarked for development of the fishery sector is not just fine words , but also has substance ?
on behalf of the ECR Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to start by offering my most sincere thanks and congratulations to all the rapporteurs for the work they have put into preparing their reports .
These reports are a key factor in the implementation of the common fisheries policy .
At the same time , attention should be paid to the difference in opinions between the European Parliament and the European Commission with regard to international agreements .
It is accepted practice for the European Commission to be unduly secretive when it comes to negotiating agreements with third countries , contrary to the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , which provide for greater involvement by Parliament in the drafting of normative acts .
This runs counter to the principle of transparency and limits the role of Parliament , which after all must perform a supervisory function .
Influence over the negotiating process would allow Members to discharge their mandate properly as Members of the European Parliament .
Commissioner , I would call for the Members of the European Parliament to play a greater role in the negotiating process , since the current system , whereby a general report on negotiations is issued by a European Commission official , is inadequate .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , after 30 years , the destructive practice of discards is to be addressed .
Fleets at Grimsby are a few dozen fishing boats , where once there were a hundred .
Two years ago West of Scotland fishermen tabled a plan to conserve white fish but , while they wait , stock depletion continues .
A regional approach is suggested - why not ?
The EU divides the land into regions .
Much worse is the renewal of licences for European fleets to raid the waters of the Comoros islands - and raid it will be , for local fishermen cannot compete with the superior EU-powered trawlers .
The same thing has been done to others in that area .
Is the House surprised that Somali fishermen denied a living have resumed the age-old vice of piracy ?
Five years ago , did Members see the TV pictures of hundreds of Western Saharans trying to seek refuge in the Canaries ?
EU licences had just been renewed for their waters and they too had seen it all before .
In a pitiful , desperate attempt many died on the 800-mile journey in fishing boats never intended for the open sea .
However , the EU does not care that people from the least-developed countries have been impoverished by its actions and , for that , it deserves to be condemned .
Mr President , one of our rapporteurs spoke of the distrust of fishermen for the common fisheries policy .
It is little wonder , because the common fisheries policy currently constituted has seen the destruction of our fleet but has not seen the build-up of fish stocks .
From my point of view , the sooner we can get fisheries policy returned to Member States , the better .
However , I recognise that this is unlikely to happen in the short term , so I have a few observations to make on this joint fisheries debate .
First , the issue of establishing a Community financial measure for the implementation of the common fisheries policy .
So long as the EU is able to interfere in our fisheries , it would seem to me that that interference should be properly funded .
However , while we seek to guarantee the funding that is available for the administration of the CAP , we should bear a thought for the stakeholders - in particular our fishermen - who struggle to keep abreast of the multitude of current rules and regulations , let alone those they are consulted upon .
I am increasingly hearing from a variety of maritime stakeholders that the entire industry is struggling to deal with this particular issue .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first an appeal from the heart : Parliament has only one seat , and that is Strasbourg .
Now , I would like to congratulate Mr Ferreira on his report on Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea .
The amendments to this regulation proposed by the Commission and Parliament will establish the level of EU investment that can be put into funding research .
They will bring the regulation into line with the changes in the EU legislative framework on data collection , management and use .
I especially welcome the opportunities for funding scientific research into fisheries and aquaculture .
We will now be able to carry out research into the European Union 's level of dependency on imports from third countries .
As you know , 60 % of our market relies on imports and this figure is rising all the time .
It is vital that we increase our support for European producers , instead of increasing our trade openness in all directions , which is damaging European output .
I would also like to thank Mrs Grelier for her report .
Technical measures are an extremely sensitive subject , and they must be changed as quickly as possible , once we have the Commission 's proposals on the common fisheries policy reform package .
This report , which we will be adopting tomorrow , allows for the transitional technical measures governing the fisheries sector to be extended .
This extension will allow us to avoid a regulatory vacuum after 30 June this year and will enable the fisheries to carry on their business until the reform of the CFP .
It will also allow a thorough impact assessment to be performed on all the technical measures currently in force .
It would really not be reasonable now to adopt any substantial amendments to this report , as this would prolong the legislative procedure and would entail long discussions in the Council .
Lastly , I would like to congratulate Mr Capoulas Santos on his report on the fisheries partnership agreement with the Comoros and my colleague Mrs Fraga Estévez on the Greenland report .
( DA ) Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteurs for their work on the recommendation and the three reports .
Tomorrow , we will vote on the import agreement with Greenland , for which I am shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
I am pleased that we are now getting rid of the cumbersome and expensive bureaucracy , while at the same time we are fully meeting the EU 's food safety requirements .
The agreement will give Greenland a good opportunity to sell its fishery products under the rules of the internal market , provided that these products meet the EU 's health and safety requirements .
Greenland 's fish are currently already checked by the Danish food authorities , both in Greenland and again when they are exported to the EU .
That represents expensive duplication of work , which the agreement will fortunately do away with .
Everyone will benefit from this agreement , but it has clearly been too long in coming .
However , it was also important for Parliament to be absolutely clear about the legal basis , and we hope that the Commission and the Council will support this .
We will also be voting on the Partnership Agreement in the fisheries sector with the Union of the Comoros .
Essentially , I have a very positive opinion of sustainable fisheries agreements , providing sustainability in terms of fish stocks and for fishermen , for the local population and finally sustainability for the EU fishermen who make use of the agreements .
Unfortunately , this agreement with the Union of the Comoros is not as sustainable as I would have liked it to be , as it does not contain an ultimate ceiling for how much EU vessels are permitted to fish .
When the agreed quota of 4 850 tonnes per year is reached , each additional tonne will cost EUR 65 .
The tendency not to put a ceiling on how much EU vessels may catch in the waters of third countries is damaging and wrong .
It is not good enough for us to pursue a different fisheries policy according to whether we are in our own waters or the waters of a third country .
I would also like to press for us to ensure to a greater extent that the money the EU pays out to third countries in return for concluding fisheries agreements is earmarked in such a way that it definitely benefits the local population .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Damanaki , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that Parliament is finally to vote on this issue and would like to thank the rapporteurs for their work .
The amendment to the Council regulation on the financial measures in the Community is one of the main tools we need in order to implement the common fisheries policy .
This is true in particular for the areas of international fishery relations , data collection and scientific studies .
The control systems of the common fisheries policy and their implementation are particularly important .
The rapporteur has made every effort to convince his fellow Members of the need to increase the co-financing rate to a maximum of 75 % .
We have been unable to acquiesce to his wishes .
The existing regulations have proven themselves in practice and already allow for some exceptions .
The Member States already make use of the opportunity to avail of co-financing and there is no need for any further incentives .
It is important that the amendment to the regulation should clear the way for a coherent legal framework .
Mr President , the Grelier report gives too many concessions to the Commission , I would say .
West of Scotland fishermen find it difficult to understand why it is that the Commission can say that it wants to eliminate discards and at the same time reject amendments to these technical measures .
The Commission prefers to extend the current range of technical measures that are causing discards , including of haddock , for at least another 18 months .
The Commission prefers another 18 months of so-called temporary measures , which have failed to conserve the stocks .
Another 18 months of dumping dead fish back into the sea .
I urge colleagues tomorrow to support all of the amendments in our vote and I hope that these amendments will be adopted and , if they are adopted , I hope that the Commission will change its attitude and grasp the opportunity that presents itself to act now on discards , not just talk about action at some time in the future .
Mr President , I have lodged an amendment to the Technical Measures Regulation to try to resolve the anomaly that Ian Hudghton just referred to , which has arisen off the west coast of Scotland .
In a well-intentioned attempt to conserve white-fish stocks in this area , the Commission introduced temporary catch composition rules for a period of 12 months at the end of 2009 , but these temporary rules have already been rolled over for a further year under a catch-all agreement that extended all EU technical measures for 12 months .
Now the Commission is seeking to roll the rules over yet again to the end of 2012 while it prepares a new framework for technical measures under the CFP reform package .
The unintended consequence of this will mean that a temporary regulation that was introduced for a period of only one year will now run for at least three years , during which time the circumstances in the west of Scotland have changed dramatically , forcing our fishermen to dump good fresh haddock back into the sea , dead .
I hope Parliament will support my amendment tomorrow .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , while I congratulate all four rapporteurs , I would like to focus on just two of the reports being debated .
In 2008 , the absence of any agreement on a draft regulation intended to simplify and clarify the EU regulation on conservation of fish resources led to the adoption of the current regulation , which established a set of transitional measures , initially provided for the period between 1 January 2010 and 30 June 2011 .
The current legislative proposal extends this transitional arrangement for an additional period of 18 months - in other words , until 1 January 2013 - pending a new regulation on technical measures framing the reformed common fisheries policy ( CFP ) .
It is important to maintain a regulatory framework for fisheries during this transition period , safeguarding the interests of fishermen without losing sight of the basic objective of promoting sustainable fisheries .
The current intention not to extend the use of trammel nets , and to ban them at a depth of between 200 and 600 metres from 1 October 2010 , does not constitute a good example of what has been described .
The current ban on this fishing technique , which has been used for decades by a section of the Portuguese small-scale fleet for the sustained exploitation of species such as monkfish and hake , was a severe economic and social blow to the sector and to the fishing communities most dependent on the exploitation of these resources .

I therefore call for your support in adopting a proposal that I and my colleagues Mr Capoulas Santos and Mr Ferreira have tabled in the Chamber , which seeks to do no more than ensure that what was law until 1 October 2010 remains so until 2013 .
I would also like to mention the draft regulation setting out Community financial measures relating to the implementation of the CFP and the law of the sea : the Ferreira report .
Together with the European Fisheries Fund , this is the most important financial instrument for supporting fisheries , providing for financing in the areas of international relations , governance , the collection of scientific data and opinions , and the monitoring of the implementation of the CFP .
In this context , I would like to express my complete support for the proposals tabled in this Chamber by the rapporteur to increase the possibility of EU co-financing to 60 % in the area of the collection , management and use of basic data , as well as with regard to the collection , management and use of supplementary data .
The widespread and growing recognition of the importance of fisheries management supported by up-to-date and thorough scientific knowledge of the status of stocks fully justifies adoption of the rapporteur 's proposals , as well as of his report as a whole .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would congratulate the four rapporteurs of these reports on their sterling work .
I am going to focus on two reports , given their importance .
One of them is about the agreement with the Union of the Comoros .
This is a fisheries agreement between the European Union and a country in south-eastern Africa - I mention that so we also know where we are spatially - where 60 % of the population lives below the poverty line and where their only form of income is tourism or state aid .
This agreement establishes the possibility of catching their excess fish .
I repeat : excess fish .
It also provides for compensation in order for the country itself to develop , and to improve its infrastructure and its own capacities .
It establishes a partnership framework under criteria of sustainable and responsible fishing , preserving biological resources .
We must take into account that there are migratory species such as tuna there and that every year the following year 's stock is established using scientific criteria .
It facilitates scientific research and the presence of onboard observers , as well as the maintenance of the area 's fish , as it is limited to a coastal area so that home-grown fishing will develop .
This protocol is of great benefit thanks to the access that European fishing boats have to the area , development aid , improved employment and greater economic prospects .
However , it also has a very important element : it prevents third countries from fishing unless they adequately ensure the preservation of the environment .
Third countries catch 75 % of the area 's fisheries resources .
We therefore believe that this agreement not only helps the Union of the Comoros , but also helps maintain the environment .
Particular attention must also be paid to the important Grelier report on a regulation establishing technical measures that expire in three months ' time , for which an extension until December 2012 is being requested because , if not , there would be a legal vacuum , legal uncertainty and poor conservation of marine resources .
However , we would also stress the assessment of the attached declaration calling on the Commission to accept certain amendments : some technical measures proposed by the Member States .
The issue of nets has already been mentioned here , and we are also talking about the question of depth .
It affects certain fisheries and we believe that the Commission should include it because of the impact it has on the stocks themselves .
It affects areas 8 , 9 and 10 , and is important to overcome these shortcomings that are emerging in the application of a regulation that not only damages fisheries but also local populations .
( ES ) Mr President , I shall vote for this agreement because it is positive for the European fleet .
In total , 70 ships will benefit from it , 12 more than in the previous agreement , and these will carry at least one local crew on board .
It is positive for the Comoros , for their people and for their productive sector , for a number of reasons .
Firstly , it is positive because the report encourages cooperation based on fostering local development and because the financial compensation involved is channelled into this area .
Secondly , it is positive because it encourages the region 's governments to respect human rights , which is a key condition to maintaining the agreement .
Thirdly , it is positive because it supports the smaller-scale forms of fishing practiced there and guarantees that the 8 500 people in the Comoros who live off this type of activity will have their own fishing area : European ships will not be able to fish within a 10-nautical mile radius of each island .
Finally , it is positive because it promotes sustainable fishing in the area , it includes a mechanism for objectively analysing fish stocks , and establishes mechanisms for scientific cooperation to that end .
( GA ) Mr President , I am pleased to say a few words on behalf of my group on this subject and , without doubt , fishing is a controversial topic , one of the most contentious subjects that come before Parliament .
There is an old saying in my country that there are as many opinions as people , and this is true of fishermen and fishing .
Therefore , it is difficult for us as Members to speak unanimously on the matter but , at the same time , we must do our best .
Regarding Greenland in particular , I think the Commissioner gave a fairly balanced view of the situation .
There are issues obviously regarding the confidence of the European Parliament vis-à-vis the Council , but , as she said herself , a pragmatic solution will be found and that is obviously desirable .
It is important from the point of view of the European Union .
It is equally important , or more important perhaps , from the point of view of Greenland - a country that is almost totally dependent on the European market for its fish and , of course , almost totally dependent on fishing for its economy .
One thing we can say regarding Greenland is that the fish coming from there , as envisaged here in this report , will be verifiable and be of top quality - unlike many of the fish coming into the European Union from the monstrous fish farms in South-East Asia , the quality of which cannot be verified , and indeed which many think come from polluted waters .
There is therefore a huge area for us to deal with , in particular because the Commissioner herself earlier this afternoon in Question Time painted a somewhat grim picture of the sustainability of fish stocks and coastal communities into the future .
For that reason , there is a need to develop a major policy regarding aquaculture within Europe as part of the future CFP .
In the meantime , I welcome the proposals here and I accept the Commissioner 's words on what will happen .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would congratulate the rapporteurs of these four reports .

Before talking about the reports by Mr Ferreira and Mrs Fraga Estévez , I should like to express my support for the report by Mr Capoulas Santos , which recommends adopting the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Partnership Agreement with the Union of the Comoros , and reminds us of the need for Parliament to participate actively in this process .
I also agree with the fundamental aspects of Mrs Grelier 's report on technical measures .
I call on the Commission to speed up its impact assessment and to prioritise the drafting of a regulation on these measures so that it may be adopted as soon as possible : before 2013 , if possible .
The Ferreira report amends Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 on Community financial measures , one of the tools used to apply the common fisheries policy , alongside the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) .
The report clarifies its scope and adapts it to the real needs of the common fisheries policy under the new Treaty of Lisbon , so I think it is positive .
However , like the rapporteur , and given that one of the fundamental conditions of achieving sustainable fishing is ensuring up-to-date , accurate knowledge of fish stocks , I regret that it has not been possible to raise the co-financing rates as regards data collection , management and use .
The Fraga Estévez report affects the establishment of rules on animal health and food safety for the importing of certain fisheries products and fishing by-products , whether originating in Greenland or in third countries .
The rules affect practically 90 % of Greenland 's exports in this area , which reached EUR 251 million in 2007 .
There is broad consensus on applying the rules governing trade within the European Union , with which Greenland remains associated , to these imported products .
This will expand the single market in fishery products and their by-products .
It is clear that there is no agreement over what the legal basis should be and we therefore warmly welcome the Commission 's decision to promote an agreement .
Parliament is following the report of its legal services , the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the position being maintained by the Committee on Fisheries .
We hope that these issues can be resolved , that Greenland will be given the priority that it has and deserves , and that a legislative agreement will be reached .
( RO ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate all four rapporteurs on all their hard work on this package of fisheries measures .
I would like to stress that the Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy are a major European Union funding instrument in this sector and must be constantly adapted to the needs of the citizens involved in this area and strictly in keeping with the current challenges being faced .
The financial resources required to implement the common fisheries policy also include funding for projects in areas such as : international relations , governance , data collection , scientific advice , control systems and enforcement of this policy .
I think that fisheries management has to be based on up-to-date , accurate scientific knowledge of stock status .
This is precisely to enable the provisions of the regulation to be geared more effectively to real needs .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to give you some short explanations concerning your remarks .
With regard to the discussion on the Fisheries Partnership Agreements , we are now trying , in the framework of our proposal for the reform , to ensure the good implementation of these fisheries agreements for the benefit of the local population .
Until we have the new proposal for the new generation of fisheries agreements , we have tried to improve the current situation .
We are trying to ensure the implementation of the Comoros agreement and to do our best for the local population .
With regard to the problems mentioned in connection with Parliament and the information given to Members of Parliament about the agreements , the Commission has given all information - even restricted information - to Members of Parliament and this is what we will do in the future .
With regard to the technical measures and Mrs Grelier 's report , I can understand that there were a lot of concerns because we are now prolonging the current regulation .
We had to do so , because we have to wait for the implementation of the reform , but I can understand why you are urging us to take some measures in order to have new regulation before the end of 2013 .
What I can say - as I cannot give you promises I cannot keep - is that we will do our best to accelerate the procedure for a new regulation and also for the implementation of the basic regulation for the reform in order to give the Member States some competences regarding technical measures .
Regarding the next issue - the Financial Regulation - I hope that we will achieve a first reading approach , because this would be very good for the implementation of the regulation in the future .
With regard to the case of Greenland , I would like to reiterate that we are here to find a solution on the legal basis of the proposal .
For the Commission , it is very important to work on the substance because a good relationship with Greenland is an absolute political priority for us .
I can reiterate that the Commission is here to facilitate and to find a compromise with the Council .
Mr President , just a few seconds to express my thanks for the comments made , and then we will go on to what I was expecting to talk about .
We know that there are minor aspects of the partnership agreements that need to be corrected .
I appreciated the Commissioner 's position , including her personal position relating to the participation of Members of the European Parliament , and I hope that this personal position of hers may influence the institutional position of the Commission , so that we achieve the objective that we are working towards .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , I would also like to express my thanks for the comments that everyone has made , and for the notable stamina that everyone is still demonstrating at this hour .
I also need to say , with regard to the comments made about the report on financial measures , that the amendments we are proposing do not jeopardise the consensus obtained to date in the trialogue .
I believe that it is possible to go a little further whilst safeguarding this consensus , and in this regard I am thankful for the comments that have been made by a number of Members in support of the proposed amendments .
I believe , as several Members have said , that not adopting these amendments would constitute incomprehensible inconsistency on the part of a European Union that , on the one hand , wants increased participation in certain areas , to which it ascribes growing importance , while on the other resists allocating the funds necessary for actually acknowledging this growing importance .
With regard to the report on transitional technical measures , I would like to highlight - which was also done during a number of speeches - the amendment supported by myself and two other Members , seeking to eliminate negative discrimination with no scientific basis , and I emphasise that there is no scientific basis justifying the negative discrimination against some segments of the Portuguese small-scale fleet that use trammel nets .
Over time this fleet has demonstrated its ability to use the resources in question , namely sole and hake , in a sustainable manner .
As there are no solid , scientific reasons justifying this ban , it should not have gone ahead in the first place , particularly in the light of the significant negative economic and social consequences that it would entail .
For the same reasons , I would like to say in conclusion , Mr President , that we also support the proposals tabled by our Irish and Scottish fellow Members in relation to this same report .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I will do my best to speak more slowly - I promise .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank my fellow Members for their generally favourable comments on this report , which also echo the debates that took place during the meetings in the Committee on Fisheries .
I share the Commissioner 's standpoint on accepting the amendment specifying the mesh size for boarfish nets and on not agreeing to any specific requests for amendments to certain technical measures , on the grounds that they are not supported by any impact assessments for the vessels and the ecosystems concerned , or because the Member States have not sent the necessary scientific data .
These measures are all interconnected and have not been evaluated .
I would like to stress , as previous speakers have done this evening , the urgency for the Commission to carry out an evaluation of the current measures as quickly as possible and on the basis of this evaluation to draw up a new proposal that can be dealt with at the same time as the reform of the common fisheries policy , rather than after it .
I wanted to draw your attention to this point , Commissioner , and I note your readiness to speed up the drafting of the proposal .
To conclude , I must mention once again the importance of joint work between the EU institutions and the fisheries sector on gathering and sharing the scientific data .
I believe this is a necessary basis for a new , fair and collaborative common fisheries policy which has sufficient resources - and that is an important point - and which reconciles the economic necessities and the sustainability of the sector in the interests of all : the fishing community , consumers and citizens .
Mr President , I should like to give special thanks to the Commissioner for the answer she gave to my question , saying that she would be ready to accept the change to the legal basis , and I hope that the Council will also follow the same line that the Commissioner has set out .
In any case , I had been considering the possibility of asking for this report to be returned to committee before it reached the final vote , but I later thought better of it and realised that it could only delay even further this proposal , which I believe is positive for Greenland and for the European Union , and that it would be advisable not to delay it more .
I hope , anyhow , that the Council will go along with the intentions of the Committee on Fisheries , which are entirely justified , and I hope that a solution will be reached , given that the only problem is the legal basis and not the content .
In any case , I am pleased that we have achieved this result ; moreover , we always have the option of going to the Court of Justice if we see that it is advisable to continue with this matter .
Anyhow , we will demonstrate goodwill tomorrow , by issuing our opinion , and we hope that the Council will respond and consider this Parliament 's first reading , as I have said .
Therefore , thank you to the Commissioner for being prepared to cooperate on this issue in a straightforward way , and thanks to all my colleagues who have worked on and supported this report .
All that remains is to hope that the Council will go along with our intentions , which are justified , as I have said , and endorsed not only by the Committee on Legal Affairs but also by the legal services of the European Parliament .
The joint debate on four reports relating to fisheries affairs is closed .
The vote on all four reports will take place on 6 April at 12 : 00 .
Written Statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - With regard to the Grelier report , I voted against my Group on four amendments - Amendment 4 , Amendment 5CP , Amendment 6 and Amendment 3 .
I am disappointed that the amendments were not accepted .
Nevertheless , I supported the report in the end in order to ensure that the Irish boarfish industry is protected , and there is legal certainty on this point , instead of waiting for full reform in 2013 .
in writing . - ( FI ) The reform of the Union 's common fisheries policy is one of the most important tasks of this Parliament .
As we all know , the EU 's fisheries policy has come under intense criticism for a long time now , and with good reason .
There are a lot of questions relating to overfishing , fishing in the territory of developing countries and state aid for the fishing industry , all of which need to be resolved quickly .
The report by Mr Ferreira on Community financial measures before us today deals with key issues as far as the reform of fisheries policy is concerned .
These are : data collection , research , internal cooperation , the administration of fishing matters , and common fisheries policy monitoring systems .
It is also important to ensure that the harmonisation of fisheries policy , especially with environmental and maritime policy , is a major priority , and it will also require resources .
in writing . - ( PT ) The common fisheries policy ( CFP ) groups together a series of measures designed by the European Union to ensure the sustainability and competitiveness of the European fisheries sector .
Within the framework of reforming the CFP , the main priorities are making it more effective to better ensure the economic viability of European fleets , the conservation of fish stocks , the linkage with maritime policy and the supplying of quality foodstuffs to consumers .
The measures adopted today by Parliament , such as a review of technical measures and the adaptation of existing legislation to take scientific data collected into account , come under this heading .
The sustainability and competitiveness of the sector should be balanced .
Fishing activity is essential to the economic and social development of coastal communities , because it contributes to the galvanisation of regions and fosters activity in related sectors .
For example , in the Union 's outermost regions , which represent the European Union 's largest exclusive economic zone , the fisheries sector plays a fundamental role in their economic activity , making it a priority to ensure the sector 's sustainability and development .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 00 )
Documents received : see Minutes
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Governance and partnership in the single market - Single market for Europeans - Single market for enterprises and growth - Public procurement ( debate )
The first item is the joint debate on the Single Market , and will include a discussion of the following material : the report by Mrs Kalniete , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on governance and partnership in the Single Market [ 2010 / 2289 ( INI ) ] , the report by Mr Correia De Campos on a Single Market for Europeans [ 2010 / 2278 ( INI ) ] , the report by Mr Buşoi on a Single Market for enterprises and growth [ 2010 / 2277 ( INI ) ] and the Commission statement on public procurement .
I would like to welcome Commissioner Barnier and the President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Győri , to the Chamber .
I now give the floor to the rapporteurs .
The first to speak will be Mrs Kalniete .
Mr President , when we speak of governance and partnership in the Single Market , we in Parliament consider that one of the major requirements for putting the Single Market into practice is to ensure that it has political leadership at the highest level .
The President of the Commission must , in association with the President of the Council , take responsibility for consolidation of the Single Market .
The Member States must also take an extremely active part in this process .
Otherwise , many ideas about what we could do to restart growth in Europe , create new jobs and increase its competitiveness in the globalised world will simply remain good intentions , paving the way to Europe 's transformation into the sick man of the world .
That is why , in this resolution , we call upon the President of the Commission and the leaders of the Member States to take part in and assume responsibility for introducing the legislation and changes in policy that the Single Market requires .
The resolutions to be adopted today send a clear signal of those directions in which Parliament expects action from the Commission .
I shall mention some of the most important work priorities : a single digital market and a unified intellectual property space , professional mobility for European citizens , encouragement of cross-border public procurement and services , and alignment of tax systems .
As regards governance of the Single Market , I consider four directions to be decisively important .
First , ensuring implementation of Single Market norms that have already been adopted .
All Member States must introduce Single Market regulations in a timely and transparent fashion and , for its part , the Commission must monitor their implementation strictly and consistently .
Second , reducing protectionist tendencies .
Protection will merely encourage fragmentation of the European market and a reduction in our overall competitiveness .
Third , a reduction in various transaction costs which are hindering the brisk functioning of the European economy .
This refers not only to such mechanisms as an effective , simple and extrajudicial dispute resolution procedure , but also to user-friendly cross-border e-management with functioning electronic exchange of necessary information and documents .
The fourth direction is the greater involvement of social groups in policy formation and implementation in accordance with the principles enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon .
Finally , Mr President , I should like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs and coordinators for their contribution and the business-like collaboration that ensued , which , as I hope , will enable us today to adopt resolutions on the Single Market with a convincing majority , and to continue the work of recent years on the development of legislation that will truly consolidate the Single Market and make it the instrument for creating growth and jobs in Europe .

rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament has responded to the Commission 's request concerning the measures needed to revitalise the Single Market by means of the report that we are debating and voting on today .
From the set of 19 proposals relating to the Single Market Act for Europeans , for which I have been rapporteur , we have identified five priorities , using tangibility and feasibility in the short term as criteria .
Firstly , we need to increase the mobility of European citizens through the mutual recognition of professional qualifications , professional identity cards , the European skills passport and the regular measurement of mobility within the EU .
Secondly , we must improve border controls on goods imported from third countries and draw up a multiannual action plan for market surveillance and product safety .
Thirdly , the Roaming Regulation should be extended until June 2015 , with price caps for roaming in order to reduce costs for the public and businesses .
Fourthly , we need guaranteed access to basic banking services , with improved transparency and comparability .
Fifthly , the obstacles encountered by mobile workers must be removed in order to ensure the full portability of their pension rights .
This exercise was simple and consensual , but it was more difficult to reach agreement on measures to address the Single Market fatigue mentioned in the Monti report and to achieve the holistic , concerted approach to respond to citizens ' needs and mistrust , which were clearly identified in the Grech report adopted by this House in May last year .
We certainly consider it artificial to divide Parliament 's work into three separate reports , despite the efforts of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection to unify the analyses and actions .
The three components - businesses , Europeans and governance - have to progress simultaneously in order to produce a competitive Single Market , with smart , inclusive and sustainable growth making Europeans central to that market 's concerns .
We also acknowledge that the proliferation of Commission initiatives on this subject , together with Europe 2020 , the industrial policy and the Europe of innovation , runs the risk of blurring the central issue of revitalisation , which is to make the idea of the Single Market not only more friendly but also more appealing to Europeans .
Consensus , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , was most difficult on two issues .
Firstly , with regard to respect for social values and rights , we came up against the reluctance of Members on the right and in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe to accept the need to permanently safeguard Europeans ' social rights so that they can never be swamped by market considerations in any future legislation .
We especially regret the failure to prioritise a reference to the revision of the Posting of Workers Directive .
Secondly , with regard to safeguarding social services of general economic interest , the aim was to prevent the content of the activities of those services from being subject to purely market considerations or , at least , to eliminate the possibility of turning public social services into private monopolies or oligopolies in areas such as water supply , urban transport , education , health and social support .
Although it would appear to be useful to introduce competitive management and internal market mechanisms to those services , the social values associated with universal access will need to be safeguarded , since the principles of solidarity outweigh mere market considerations in such cases .
In this , we encountered reluctance from the parliamentary groups on our right to accept European legislation on this subject , and they only agreed to ' using all the options available [ ... ] , based upon and consistent with Article 14 [ and ] Protocol 26 ' to the Treaty .
The group to which I belong abstained from the final vote on the three reports in committee since no progress had been made on the social dimension of the Single Market .
After the vote in committee , however , a number of positive points were included which improved the report considerably .
Consensus was reached through a succession of compromises , with final amendments being subscribed by the main parliamentary groups without winners or losers .
All the parliamentary groups contributed to the end result - which does credit to the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and to those who worked on the report - through 266 amendments , as well as the opinions of five committees .
All the contributions were useful .
I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs Róża Gräfin von Thun , Jürgen Creutzmann , Malcolm Harbour , Emilie Turunen and Kyriacos Triantaphyllides , as well as the group coordinators , for the productive criticism and spirit of cooperation that enabled the negotiations to reach a positive outcome .
I particularly thank Mr Harbour for the generous , forward-thinking attitude that he has stamped on the committee 's work throughout the last four months .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the internal market is undoubtedly one of the European Union 's greatest successes and one of its undeniable strengths , and something of which we can all be proud .
I think it is no exaggeration to say that the internal market is central to European integration .
As time has gone by , the internal market has demonstrated its benefits to the consumer as well as to European businesses , and it has contributed to our economic growth .
Recently , however , we have noticed a certain lethargy in the market 's integration .
We therefore need to give new momentum to the internal market .
We need to renew the confidence of European citizens in it .
We need a new start .
I greatly value the Commission 's work in this respect and , in particular , the excellent work done by Commissioner Barnier , whom I would like to congratulate once again for his determined commitment and his efforts to revive the internal market .
The Commission has set out for us an ambitious and , at the same time , practical and much-needed programme for restoring strength to the internal market .
I am quite sure that if these measures are implemented , they will make the internal market more attractive to our citizens and businesses and will help it to function more effectively overall .
Concerning my report , I have to say that we did not have an easy task .
Our task was ambitious because we had to find a consensus on the measures laying down the foundation for a strong and modern Single Market which would contribute to future growth and which would , above all , meet the expectations of our citizens and enterprises .
We considered whether the emphasis should be put on innovation , what should be done in the field of intellectual property rights , and what fiscal measures are appropriate in order to enhance the Single Market and , at the same time , respect the sovereignty of the Member States .
Following our discussions , and after many contributions - for which I would like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs , the rapporteurs for opinions and all my other fellow Members who tabled amendments - we managed to identify a set of five priorities to be implemented immediately .
The first priority refers to the means to support innovation and creativity in the Single Market , which is essential if we want stronger and more sustainable growth .
The creation of an EU patent and of a unified litigation system , which is already under way , as well as the improvement to management of copyrights , are of paramount importance .
If we want innovation , we also need to come up with a solution for financing it , such as long-term investment and a framework that would make it easier for venture capital funds to be invested effectively .
EU project bonds can also be a great opportunity for infrastructure investments in the field of energy or telecommunications .
Our third priority seeks to bring the Single Market in line with our digital agenda by stimulating e-commerce .
This requires measures that would enhance consumer and business confidence in e-commerce , such as fighting counterfeiting and piracy and facilitating cross-border deliveries and cross-border debt recovery .
The fourth priority aims to make the Single Market a better environment for SMEs , given their importance for economic growth and their job creation potential .
They need better access to capital markets .
Fiscal measures such as the introduction of a common consolidated corporate tax base , a clear VAT framework and reducing administrative burdens could encourage SMEs to do cross-border business .
Finally , public procurement procedures need to be rationalised .
They need simplification to allow SMEs to take part in procedures , and they should be better used in order to support smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we are at a crucial point in this work we have undertaken together in the light of Mr Monti 's clear , comprehensive and painstaking examination of the internal market , in the light of Mr Grech 's report , which you adopted by a very large majority , and at a time when , if we are listening attentively to the citizens in each of our Member States , we need to take stock of where we are going in terms of growth , employment and social cohesion .
What messages are people getting from Brussels and Strasbourg ?
At the moment , the messages are necessary , but they are always difficult or restrictive .
They are messages about regulation , or , as in the case of my job , about governance , supervision , deficit and debt reduction .
They are essential messages therefore , but restrictive and difficult .
I believe we need to add other messages and , above all , other actions to them in order to restore confidence in the European project , and in the reasons why we should all pull together instead of standing alone or doing things alone to tackle the challenges of globalisation .
That is what is really at the heart of our work , and I would like to personally thank our three rapporteurs who have just spoken : Mrs Kalniete , Mr Correia de Campos and , a moment ago , Mr Buşoi .

I would also like to thank the Chair , Mr Harbour , who , as has already been mentioned , has succeeded with great efficiency and by listening very carefully in setting nearly 11 parliamentary committees to work in a very short space of time .
I would also like to add to these thanks my gratitude to the coordinators of the different political groups , because you had a great many matters to coordinate between you , given the large number of issues we have covered .
By doing this , you will be sending a very strong signal to the other institutions , and also to businesses and citizens .
Following on from the Monti report and the Grech report , President Barroso asked me to work with 12 of my colleagues , as a joint task within the college , on reviving the internal market and on the structural reforms that will be required so that the two , three or four points of growth which the market contains can emerge .
I would remind you , ladies and gentlemen , that in this big market , which , moreover , constitutes the basis of the European political project , 60 % of our exports go to the other 26 Member States .
Each country , from Germany the biggest , down to the smallest of our countries , exports , on average , 60 % of its goods and services just next door to the large market itself .
It is thought that there is still more potential growth in this market if it functions more efficiently .
That is how the Single Market Act came into being .
That is how we identified the 50 proposals contained in this little Blue Paper that I sent to all your countries , in the 23 EU languages , to every national MP , trade union and professional organisation .
We then spent time in our discussions to choose from those proposals the ones that will be most effective in improving life for businesses and citizens .
On Wednesday of next week therefore , the college will debate the Single Market Act in the wake of these discussions , before taking action and in the light of your deliberation and debates today .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is my firm belief that every region is needed , every business is needed and every citizen is needed in order to win the battle for competitiveness and growth .
Every region : this is why , right at the beginning of the Single Market and the Single Market Act , the President of the Commission , Jacques Delors , wanted to support the construction of the Single Market with a cohesion policy so that even regions that are behind in terms of development can also take part in the battle for growth and competitiveness : all regions , including the most distant , outermost regions .
Every business is needed when it comes to innovating or creating - the patents we are pushing through come to mind - when it comes to small and medium-sized enterprises obtaining financing and having less administrative complexity and red tape to deal with , when it comes to trading securely online , and when it comes to participating in public procurement , which I will return to in a moment .
Every region , every business , every citizen is needed .
In our daily lives , we are all , by turns , consumers , service users , savers , shareholders , workers , craft workers , and the objective is that cross-border mobility should be made easier , that professional qualifications , skills and welfare rights should be respected and recognised , that we should be able to access high quality public services , that we should feel safe and protected when we buy products over the Internet or in any other way , and that we should not be taxed twice .
Those are just a few examples that we must deal with in order to make the internal market work more effectively .
What is the next step now after your debate ?
On 24 and 25 March , the European Council welcomed this action we have taken and the action it has taken itself in terms of joint legislation .
We were asked to decide on priorities and therefore , as I have said , together with my colleagues , who have worked so hard and whom I thank , next week , I shall propose that the college choose 12 levers which will make the internal market work more effectively for businesses and citizens .
For each of these levers , for example , mobility , financing of small businesses , intellectual property , taxes , public services , or social cohesion , we will propose a key action that will be new , that we hope will be effective for businesses and citizens , and that will be deliverable within two years .
Deliverable means that the Commission will table it and that Parliament and the Council will be able to vote on it and adopt it in 2011 and 2012 .
It will be the 20th anniversary of the Single Market Act and the Single Market in 2012 .
If we understand rightly what Europeans are saying to us , we have no right , honourable Members , to allow this anniversary to be a nostalgic or melancholic one .
It must be a proactive anniversary , one that boosts growth , and this is how we want to celebrate it through the Single Market Act .
We will have 12 levers : 12 specific but not exclusive proposals .
For each of these levers , we will have identified other ideas , actions and proposals that the Commission will develop at the same time , but there will be 12 key actions that will symbolise this work .
I hope that the European Council at the highest level , the Parliament that you represent , the Commission for our part , and the Hungarian Presidency - which I thank , Mrs Győri , for its involvement - will be in a position to undertake , somewhat solemnly we hope , before the end of June or July , to deliver this Single Market Act .
Mr President , that is all I am able to say on this matter .
You asked me to talk about one of these aspects in a Commission statement .
I would like to do that now , in order to leave time for the debate later .
This aspect , found in the Single Market Act , relates to 17 % of the European economy , namely , public procurement and public contracts .
I would also like to say a few words on the four projects we are undertaking with you on public contracts , as highlighted in the Buşoi report .
The first project is the general revision of the 2004 directives aimed at guaranteeing best use of public funds , enabling as many businesses as possible to participate in public procurement contracts and ensuring that high quality products and services can be purchased with less red tape .
In practical terms , I would like to simplify the procedures and make them more flexible , and also to look at how we might cater for the specific needs of small local authorities , for example , by making simplified procedures available to them .
Secondly , I would like to make access to public contracts easier , especially in terms of cross-border participation by small and medium-sized enterprises .
Finally , I would like to encourage in every way possible , as stressed by the Committee chair , Mr Harbour , and your committee , more responsible and more environmentally aware , or greener procurement that also promotes innovation or social inclusion .
The various reform objectives will now be translated into simple , more balanced rules .
We have carried out , but not completed , a very extensive consultation and economic evaluation on the ground .
We have a Green Paper and we are currently looking for the most effective proposals .
The laws will not cover everything .
At the same time , the Commission will work on sector-based initiatives aimed at making better use of public contracts , and at promoting objectives such as those contained in the Europe 2020 strategy .
These will range from updating the Handbook on green public procurement , which I am preparing with my colleague , Mr Potočnik , to implementation of the European Energy Efficiency Plan , which we are working on with Mr Oettinger or Mrs Hedegaard , or promoting pre-commercial procurement plans and plans for innovative purchasing activities generally , which we are coordinating together with Mr Tajani and Mrs Geoghegan-Quinn .
That is the first project .
The second project involves concessions .
I would like to make tangible progress quickly on the issue of concessions , without waiting for this long-term work on modernising the public procurement framework to be completed .
Ladies and gentlemen , concessions play an increasingly important part in the creation of public service provision infrastructure .
Sixty per cent of public / private partnerships in Europe operate through concessions .
Apart from public works concessions , however , at present there is no European law on concessions , and even though the general principles of the Treaty are applicable , there is real legal uncertainty in this area , which is preventing this type of contract from developing .
As proof of this , I could mention the 24 judgments by the Court of Justice in recent years .
I would like to propose the creation of a simplified framework , limited to certain basic rules , which will not interfere with national legislative frameworks when they are working well .
It will not impose an excessive administrative burden on local authorities , primarily because of the thresholds that I will be proposing .
I know that there are doubts and debates going on in several of your groups .
For my part , I am convinced , in listening to everyone , that if we set our goals carefully , we will be able to avoid misunderstandings .
Public authorities will still be free to organise public services themselves , but if they do decide to outsource them , I do not think anyone will object to a basic level of transparency and rules that ensure there is no discrimination .
I believe this is essential in order to optimise the use of public money , reduce the practice of awarding contracts without adequate publicity or without effective right of recourse , and to reduce certain risks of corruption .
From the enterprises ' point of view , if we are trying to revive the internal market , who can object to the idea of putting it into practice in the area of concessions ?
I am thinking , in particular , of small and medium-sized enterprises which do not currently have the resources that large enterprises have for identifying and winning contracts abroad if they are not published .
Having a minimal framework on concessions will mean transparency and information , and will thus make it easier for the smallest enterprises to gain access to some of the contracts .
It is also a question of better regulation .
Targeted , well thought-out legislation is a better option that will cost less than trying to sort out problems simply through the rule on violations .
The third project , which I will talk about quickly , concerns the European defence market .
We will work with Member States in connection with the implementation of the 2009 directive , for which the transposition time limit runs out in a few weeks .
It is a question of adapting payment policies , which often conflict with EU law .
Together with Mr Tajani , I will organise a conference on this issue of the European defence industry market at the Brussels Parliament buildings on 23 May .
Finally , I would like to quickly raise an issue that has been set aside for too long , namely , the international dimension of public contracts .
The aim is clear : increased access to markets for our enterprises , and we too are naturally ready to offer more , in a spirit of mutual reciprocity and benefit .
More trade will benefit all .
Now , I must draw attention to a problem that we currently have in connection with this basis of open trade and the benefits associated with it .
The truth is that our main partners - the United States , Japan , under the Government Procurement Agreement ( GPA ) , and China , under a bilateral agreement - do not really want to commit to opening up their markets further .
For our part , we do not have any real levers for negotiation , insofar as our own markets are already considered , virtually as a matter of course , as being open .
Ladies and gentlemen , the international undertakings under the GPA and the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) agreements have not yet been transposed into EU law .
Against this background , Member States apply the rules in very different ways , and that distorts the internal market .
At present in Europe , therefore , our enterprises are suffering from an inequitable situation - I remember the case of motorways in Poland .
Foreign enterprises enjoy very wide access here in Europe , often going well beyond what the EU has negotiated , whereas our own enterprises encounter difficulties if they try to participate in procurement contracts of some of our major partners .
That is why this year , with my colleague , Mr De Gucht , we are planning to table legislation that will transpose our international obligations on public procurement contracts into EU law , and this will give us the lever for negotiation that we need .
We are in favour of openness , but we do not advocate gullibility .
It is a question of giving European purchasers a sound , clear legal basis for dealing with bids from enterprises from a country with which we have an agreement differently than with those from a country with which the EU does not yet have an agreement , and of providing greater legal certainty .
Let me be clear : it is not a question of turning Europe into a fortress .
We must create an environment for our enterprises that is realistic , fair and open , but not naive .
There we are .
As you and your Parliament requested of me , Mr President , I wanted to take the opportunity of this debate on reviving the internal market to bring up this important area which will , moreover , constitute one of the 12 levers for reviving the Single Market that I referred to at the beginning of my speech , namely , that of public procurement and the modernisation that we are going to propose in agreement with you in the next few weeks .
Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , as Mrs Kalniete , too , has said , the European Union and the economy need a locomotive .
This is true .
I strongly agree with this idea .
Perhaps you remember that , some time ago , at the start of the Hungarian Presidency of the European Union , the Hungarian Prime Minister , too , made it clear in this House that it is not enough to cope with and manage the after-effects of the crisis , to encourage Member States to follow a tighter fiscal policy and to also inspect this .
We are working on a number of such laws currently as well .
A comprehensive economic crisis management package has also been prepared .
We also need to pay attention to remaining credible in the eyes of our citizens .
This , however , will only happen if we are able to create jobs .
It is for creating these jobs that we are seeking resources , the wherewithal that will enable us to do this .
I firmly believe that the Single Market is just that : an unexploited opportunity where our future lies , alongside the implementation of the European Union 's strategy up to 2020 as well .
Therefore , along all these lines , I expressly welcome both the European Commission 's and the European Parliament 's commitment to relaunching the Single Market , and the priorities which the Commission has indicated and which this Parliament is also setting out in the three excellent reports .
We have already been able to debate the various ideas and positions regarding the report made earlier by your fellow Member , Mr Grech .
Moreover , I believe that the current three reports will also contribute to a targeted debate , as a result of which we will be able to take specific measures jointly by 2012 , by the twentieth anniversary also mentioned by Commissioner Barnier .
As you , too , know , and the Commissioner has also pointed out , at its meeting on 10 March , the Competitiveness Council exchanged views on the outcome of the social consultation focusing on the criteria defining the prioritised commitment areas of the institutions and Member States .
Based on this debate , the Hungarian Presidency is preparing to adopt conclusions on the proposed priority measures at the meeting of the Competitiveness Council on 30 May .
Allow me to remind you of the broader context as well .
In the situation today , due to political and economic pressure and measures taken to relieve this , the Single Market may not be at all popular with citizens , enterprises and institutions .
However , in Professor Monti 's words , I think that it is precisely at times like this , now , that there is the greatest need for the Single Market , at times when , due to the effect of the crisis , we instinctively try to withdraw into narrow but very familiar national confines .
I am convinced , however , that we must not succumb to this temptation .
Therefore , the time has obviously come for us to provide a political incentive for the Single Market .
As you , ladies and gentlemen , have also emphasised in your earlier report on the creation of a Single Market for consumers and citizens , and Professor Monti 's report , too , has stated , the Single Market is facing a test .
Will it become a means which brings the European Union closer to its citizens by producing a perceptible improvement in their everyday lives ?
Or will it be merely an arena which serves to protect both the bottlenecks inhibiting the functioning of the Single Market and the sectors maintained ?
The answer to these questions depends on how committed we are to doing our job over the coming months .
After the European Parliament adopts its resolution today , the Commission will be able to adopt its revised communication in the middle of April , as has already been mentioned .
We hope that all the political messages and also what you have advocated in your report will be included in the Commission 's document .
Once the legislative proposals are made , we are counting on being able to create a special partnership with you and the Commission , which will afford an opportunity for the swift examination and adoption of the main measures designated in the final Single Market Act .
Now , allow me to highlight a few elements of the three reports before us without reacting fully to every point made .
The Presidency welcomes the fact that the rapporteur would like to put the issue of the Single Market on the European Council 's agenda .
We believe that progress on the Single Market Act falls under the scope of the European Union 's general political guidelines mentioned in the Treaty .
Indicating the political guidelines , however , is certainly the European Council 's task .
The agenda for this is set by the President of the European Council , but I would like to remind everyone that the European Council 's conclusions of 24 and 25 March also referred to the importance of the Single Market .
The Presidency would like to express its gratitude to Parliament for consistently supporting the Competitiveness Council in drafting specific measures regarding the creation of a unitary patent system .
We are all aware that the unitary patent system would boost the competitiveness of enterprises no end .
Moreover , we had a very good debate on this here , and I thank Parliament for its cooperation in authorising the Council to initiate this within the framework of enhanced cooperation .
We also agree that the completion of the single digital market and strengthening and improving the situation of small and medium-sized enterprises are indispensable in promoting European innovation .
Through the mobility of citizens and , in particular , the recognition of professional qualifications , we can consider further issues concerning European citizens .
For this reason , we agree with the statement that our priority task in this area is to take increased EU action and achieve immediate , tangible results .
The Presidency has also found that almost all the reports reviewed , including the earlier Grech report and the Correia De Campos report as well , lay particular emphasis on guaranteeing the exercising of internal market rights for EU citizens .
In relation to this , we welcome the results achieved in this field , which are due to measures taken by the Commission .
These include the creation of the Your Europe portal , the SOLVIT network and points of single contact under the Services Directive .
Nevertheless , we share your view that more can still be done in the interest of EU citizens exercising their rights .
Finally , allow me to make a digression concerning the other priority on the Hungarian Presidency 's agenda .
During my parliamentary consultations to date on the package of six legislative proposals on the economy , the six-pack , I have frequently heard the criticism that the Member States , by which we should understand the Council , and the European Council , while bearing in mind financial macro-stability , neglect encouraging growth and the recovery of the real economy from the crisis , or , if they do not , they only attribute soft , unaccountable tools to these latter objectives , and that the content of the Europe 2020 strategy is mainly limited to this .
Well , I believe , and I referred to this in my introduction as well , that the Single Market and the massive potential for growth concealed in it can give an appropriate answer to these concerns , while also providing a guarantee for the balanced response of the European Union .
I think that our primary task is to complete the entire process , the consolidation of the Single Market , by as transparent means as possible , in close cooperation with the European Parliament .
The Council is ready to cooperate in this way , in full partnership with the Commission , Parliament , and their Members . Thank you very much , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , these five speeches - three on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , the Commissioner 's speech and that of Mrs Győri - have started a great debate , one which is very important for the future of the European Union and its citizens , and also for our rapid development .
I would like to remind everyone again that the initial idea to relaunch the Single Market is one which arose in the IMCO Committee .
Once again , I would like to congratulate all fellow Members who serve on the committee , and I would like Mr Harbour to accept these thanks and congratulations on their behalf .
It was the IMCO Committee , too , which came up with the idea of Mario Monti 's report - an excellent report which is of great help to us in our work .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Barnier for an excellent and very broad-ranging presentation of the European Commission 's proposals in response to our reports .
As for public procurements , they do often prove to be the Achilles heel of our work in the Member States .
So it is extremely important that we move this matter forward , and the Hungarian Presidency is certainly going to help with these efforts .
We are convinced of the need for this , because this issue is very important for the people of Europe .
The importance of these reports and this discussion can be seen by the number of parliamentary committees which have drafted opinions .
Eight committees have done so , and you know as well as I do that it is very rare for eight parliamentary committees to prepare opinions on one set of reports .
Those committees will now take the floor in turn .
Mrs Andrés Barea on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , you have the floor .
Mr President , the Committee on International Trade is one of the eight committees that were involved , and I would like to thank its members for the contributions they made to the report .
The consolidation of the Single Market is one of the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy based on growth .
The European Union is the main international player .
In a globalised market , the EU must meet the challenges it faces .
The challenge for companies , for our companies , in the international market is to generate high expectations and major opportunities , but they also bear social responsibility : social growth with guarantees for workers and public services .
We are also making a commitment with developing countries : the fight against poverty is a Millennium Development Goal .
In the future , our industry and companies must be based on knowledge , and we need to fight against counterfeiting in the area of intellectual property .
We must defend our businesses according to research and development criteria and social criteria , as well as defending our foreign interests , for European citizens and those outside the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to begin by paying tribute to Commissioner Barnier , the Council representative and , in particular , my colleagues in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
On behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I would like to emphasise the importance of the reports that we are discussing here today , which strongly echo the spirit of the Monti report , with the idea of promoting a successful liberal economy , promoting competition and promoting a dynamic , innovative market .
It will be these paths that lead us to the point where the Europe 2020 strategy can , in fact , go beyond being a paper initiative and become reality , supporting small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the major employers in the European economy , supporting businesses in general , and creating an idea of sustained growth in the economy , which can be based more and more on the internal market , on economic governance that actually works and , essentially , on an idea of real growth for our economy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the importance of the Single Market Act lies in its desire to satisfy the needs of the market , facilitating access and participation of all those involved : businesses , consumers and workers .
Given this ambitious goal , I am satisfied with the interventions proposed by Mr Barnier and the indications provided by this Parliament .
In my opinion , some priorities are imperative for achieving the objectives that the EU has proposed , in particular : improving the access of small and medium-sized enterprises in the domestic market , reducing their administrative obligations and facilitating their participation in contract bidding procedures , removing all obstacles to the development of electronic commerce , and supporting and financing innovation , particularly through the issuance of bonds for European Union projects , especially in energy , transport and telecommunications .
Finally , only by connecting development and support for the business world with the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy regarding employment can we achieve what I believe to be the aim of this act , namely , to create a social market economy based on growth , competitiveness and sustainability .
Mr President , Jacques Delors was wrong when he claimed that you cannot fall in love with the Single Market , because there are so many ardent feelings expressed in the debate surrounding this subject .
The Commission 's approach has been an ambitious one , and there are some very important projects in hand : the European patent , the common energy market , and so on .
One issue , however , has remained a nagging problem : the report 's social contribution is very poor .
For example , hardly anything is said about posted employees , and the way charitable services and the social clause associated with the Single Market are described is , regrettably , very vague .
It is a mystery to me why the more robust and more integrated social rights are seen primarily as a problem .
I would like to remind everyone that , in the Nordic countries , robust social rights have succeeded in combining high levels of competitiveness with productivity .
Is that not a much smarter approach , Commissioner ?
Mr President , Mr Barnier , I would like to respond to my fellow Member 's remarks .
Instead of a social clause , the committee has proposed investigating the impact that the measures in the internal market will have on employment .
This is much more important than applying general formulae .
If we want to make progress with the internal market , we must pay attention to social issues and put the emphasis on them in everything we do .
For this reason , an impact assessment which specifically takes these requirements into account is particularly important .
I would like to make one more comment .
I was surprised to hear the President speak about economic governance , which is still translated in German as Wirtschaftslenkung .
This term is also used to mean central state control of the economy .
We have had very bad experiences of state control of the economy in one area of Germany .
I am certain that we can only develop the internal market further if we coordinate all our national economies .
That is abundantly clear .
However , we will not be able to make progress with the internal market by means of economic governance .
Today , we are discussing how we can bring some momentum to the internal market .
This is long overdue , because we will be celebrating the 20th anniversary of the internal market next year .
Therefore , I welcome Mr Barnier 's statement in which he said that he wants to focus on a few specific measures that have not yet been implemented and that will give a new impetus to the internal market .
The internal market represents a huge opportunity for all of us .
It can lead to the creation of more jobs and our goal must be to find work for people .
This is the very best social policy that we can put in place , because people who are employed will also develop self-esteem .
Therefore , we must do everything we can to make sure that progress is made in this area .
We need a balanced package of measures which brings advantages for businesses and for citizens .
On the one hand , we want medium-sized companies in particular to benefit more from the internal market than they have done in the past .
Therefore , we urgently need an EU patent system , so that companies can at last protect and sell their innovative products throughout Europe for a reasonable cost .
In addition , businesses need more funding to develop innovations .
A European venture capital market is just one of many measures that can be taken .
The harmonisation of value-added tax and the corporate tax base that we are now discussing will also give a boost to the internal market .
On the other hand , we also need to take specific measures which will increase citizens ' trust in the internal market .
We must improve the recognition of professional qualifications , possibly by means of the European professional card .
This will make it easier to work in another Member State and will create more mobility for citizens within the European internal market .
We also need a European market surveillance organisation , and I would like to emphasise this point , because the Member States are constantly failing to put the dossier into practice .
We do not want dangerous products to be sold on the internal market .
If we can adopt this proposal with a large majority , we will be able to give a new impetus to the internal market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if we are to restore confidence to the market , we need to prioritise the needs of consumers , workers and businesses .
If we want to strengthen the rights of citizens , workers and users of public services , significant attention should be paid to guaranteeing the social dimension of the future Single Market .
Growth , development and social awareness must go hand in hand .
There must be economic growth at the service of citizens .
From this point of view , the package of regulations regarding standards for companies contains some good proposals , including the action plan to increase access on the part of small and medium-sized enterprises to capital markets and new lines of financing for innovative firms and regional development .
Small and medium-sized businesses are the heart of our economy and the growth engine of the internal market .
Mr President , it is up to us to ensure these goals if we are to get out of the crisis and promote a new model of development , sustainable growth and new quality jobs .
Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have one thing to say , a word which is perhaps in stark contrast with the current economic situation , but one which needs to be stressed all the more .
That word is ' ambition ' : ambition for the internal market , Commissioner , ambition for Europe , ambition to prove to citizens that European integration is a step forward for their rights , their rights as workers , as consumers , as tourists , but , more generally , as individuals .
I would like to pay tribute to Mr Barnier , who embodies this ambition through all the projects he wants to implement .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the parliamentary Committee on Rural Development , I welcome the ideas covered : the need for special action for regions with specific geographic characteristics , such as the outermost regions , the creation of a European patent for businesses and of a European statute for foundations , mutual societies and also associations , the issuing of bonds for financing specific projects and the need to encourage sustainable development within the internal market .
Mr President , we will not achieve the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy , neither will we make the economy more innovative and competitive , if we do not treat the Single Market holistically .
So I would like to thank Commissioner Barnier for his very comprehensive approach to the Single Market and Professor Mario Monti for that superb report .
I would like to draw attention to four important aspects .
Firstly , the European patent , which might be brought into use next year , in other words , on the 20th anniversary of the entry into force of the Single Market .
Secondly , the need to give serious treatment to the matter of copyright , because copyright represents a great hope and opportunity for the development of a creative market , and this aspect of the market should be regulated jointly .
I am thinking , here , principally of a common system for the management of copyright and serious treatment of orphan works , and also of reducing the burden on small and medium-sized enterprises .
This involves very specific steps , such as : simplification of accounting , protection of trademarks , a European Foundation Statute and , above all , the possibility of interconnecting business registers .
If we introduce measures in the areas I have listed , I hope that 20 million small enterprises will be able to function effectively and freely in the European Single Market .
Mr President , that means that I can cut a minute or two into Mr Lehne 's speaking time .
I would like to thank the Commissioner and everyone else for the discussion we have been having here .
However , I have not noticed any mention of a couple of matters which are , in my view , extremely important and which I have included in the report .
I hope that the Commissioner will assist us in making these a reality .
We have been praising Professor Monti to the skies , but his conclusion was that the transposition of the directive is the major problem affecting the internal market .
He says that we need to work with regulations more .
My own take on this is that less is more ; let us have less legislation from Europe .
Whatever we actually do , however , it must be done in a uniform fashion , because we need to prevent the 27 Member States becoming a hotch-potch of states which all transpose legislation in different ways , which creates a huge barrier for small and medium-sized enterprises in terms of working across borders .
Another thing which has been overlooked , Mr President - and which is perhaps our greatest failure of all - is the matter of marketing .
We have top lawyers here .
We are creating great laws .
We believe that it is incumbent on us to improve the market for our citizens .
However , the citizens themselves do not seem to be aware of that .
We actually have a problem in that we are unable to build a bridge between us and them .
We are adept at legal terminology , but we do not appear to be good at communicating directly with our citizens .
What is in danger of happening - and I hope that will not be the case - is that we , as the European Union , might drift further and further apart from the citizens of Europe .
I think that , over the coming years , we really need to focus on and invest in ways of seeking the support of individual citizens for the European Union and for what we are doing .
There is a lot to be done on that score , and I think that we need to invest in that and that we ought to consult our communication advisers on how we can best achieve that .
Finally , it has struck me that our citizens do not know the difference between the European Commission , Parliament and the Council .
In each Member State , we have three representatives whose hands are ultimately tied , because they work for official organisations .
If Member States express negative views of the European Union , there is no one to parry that .
I think that it would make sense to consider having a single EU representative in Member States - call it an ambassador , if you like - who could ultimately respond to any negative pronouncements about the European Union .
If we do that , it will prevent us from becoming like the Titanic .
On the Titanic , everyone thought that things were absolutely fine , but ultimately the real danger lay outside .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission and the Council for this morning 's introduction .
I found writing the opinion on the internal market on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs extremely interesting .
I think that the internal market should receive widespread support in the European Parliament , especially in the Committee on Civil Liberties , because freedom of movement within the Union is important , particularly that of persons , of migrant workers and skilled migrants , whom we need in order to increase the internal market 's labour force .
However , Mr President , we have so many aims , but have so far achieved so few results .
I am very happy with Commissioner Barnier 's 12 levers and I hope that over the coming months , we will be able to speed things up , because the competition outside the EU is not going to wait for the EU 's internal market to bridge the gap .
Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe I can truly say that the work of the rapporteurs is excellent , as are the pleasing and comforting words of the Commission and Council .
These three reports retain the spirit and the far-sighted stimulus that characterise Professor Mario Monti 's new strategy for the Single Market , and they succeed in representing the unity of purpose of reviving the European Single Market via 50 measures , which are then reproduced and synthesised or emphasised , by this Parliament , in 14 priorities .
Within these measures , 19 are devoted to centring the market on the interests of citizens .
I believe that in order to realise a Single Market truly and fully , it is important to reduce the gap between citizens and the Single Market by working to restore public confidence , by promoting the process of political and social integration before economic integration and , above all , through establishing a different perception of the Single Market for European citizens .
I believe that all these objectives are contained in the measures included in these three reports .
( The debate was interrupted for a few moments )
Announcement by the President
Following the advice of the committees , we move on to the speakers on behalf of the party groups .
Before giving the floor to the first speaker on the list , Mr Karas , I have two very short notices .
We learned that , early this morning , a boat with over two hundred migrants , spotted off Lampedusa , capsized because of poor sea conditions .
The Coast Guard has been doing its best to rescue the missing people .
The situation is very grave .
We wait anxiously for the commitments made by the Commission and governments in this House to materialise .
I turn now to the second statement .
Two years after the tragic earthquake that devastated the city of L 'Aquila and the Abruzzo region , I wish to reiterate this House 's care and solicitude for the earthquake victims , and to express our hope that the timetable for the restoration of the region 's historical heritage and housing stock can be accelerated .
Governance and partnership in the Single Market - Single market for Europeans - Single market for enterprises and growth - Public procurement ( continuation of debate )
Mr President , many thanks for the information you have given us , Mr Barnier .
The Treaty of Lisbon has now been in force for two years and , for the first time , we have a sustainable social market economy as the European social model .
This may enable us to make the quantum leap to economic and social union in Europe .
The concept of the internal market must be based on this principle .
The internal market has been in existence for 20 years , but it is not yet complete .
We have a Europe 2020 strategy , which we cannot put into practice without the backing of the internal market , and we are discussing the financial perspective until 2020 , which , if it does not provide more funding for political initiatives on competitiveness , growth , employment and social solidarity , will not allow us to implement the Europe 2020 concept and to meet its targets in full .
The euro is making the internal market into a home market .
The internal market is essential for growth and employment .
Everything which strengthens the internal market also increases Europe 's competitiveness and , therefore , its independence .
For this reason , I am very pleased that we are taking this initiative , because it is the most important move that the European Union can make .
This is all about allowing small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) access to capital .
We must make sure that the financial support provided to SMEs does not only take the form of credit and the promotion of loans .
We also need to look at other approaches .
It is important for us to support venture capital funds , project bonds and e-commerce , combat piracy more effectively , create a common consolidated corporate tax base , regulate public procurement and put in place the four freedoms : the free movement of people , goods , services and capital .
We all have a lot to do .
Thank you for this initiative , Mr Barnier .
Mr President , I very much hope that it will be possible to rescue the 200 people who are in distress , because this is a very important matter .
Thank you for informing us about this .
Mr Barnier , Mrs Győri , ladies and gentlemen , Article 3 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which enshrines the social market economy , represents a new approach and a new political task for the future .
Of course , we now have to complete this task and we have been waiting to do so for the last two years .
I am pleased that the European Commission has made the first move in this direction .
I am also very pleased that we in the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have succeeded , after a hard struggle , in ensuring that the social clause is included in the European Parliament 's position when we vote on this issue today .
This is a very important question , because it forms the basis for social cohesion and will enable us to ensure that the internal market is regarded by people in the European Union as a social component .
This is essential if we want the citizens of Europe to regain their trust in the political system in the European Union .
In particular , the Commission must finally acknowledge the decisive significance of social rights in the internal market and put the focus on the social impact of European legislation .
This is why it is important for Parliament to remind the Commission once again about the social clause which is enshrined in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I would like to thank Mr Barnier for assuring us that he will take this into consideration and will follow this route .
He can be sure of the full support of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
Mr Barnier , the social clause also means , of course , that the Posting of Workers Directive must be revised accordingly .
It means that the right to work and to strike must be respected in the Member States , together with the issues which really concern people , and that these rights must be incorporated into the internal market policy of the European Union without any ifs and buts and without restrictions .
That is what concerns us as Social Democrats .
If the internal market is developed on this basis , we will give you our support and our policy will be moving in the right direction .
Of course , other questions are also important in this context .
The recognition of professional qualifications , the European qualifications passport and the full transferability of pensions within the European Union are all issues which interest the citizens of Europe and which will ensure that the internal market is a market for the people .
This is exactly what we Social Democrats are always saying .
The economy is there for the people and not vice versa .
If we follow this path , then we will be on the right track .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the other shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation on these reports .
We worked well together , and I am also pleased that , in the end , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament agreed to go along with a compromise .
It would have looked strange if we had not succeeded in achieving a broad compromise with regard to these reports .
I would like to mention three things that I believe have been a success for the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in the report on which I worked , namely , the report on governance and partnership in the Single Market .
The first priority we have included is the fact that the EU 's Heads of State or Government must take political leadership in this area .
This is an absolutely essential prerequisite for achieving results and for achieving the necessary prioritisation .
The second is that we have ensured that we focus on actually getting the legislation in this area implemented correctly and on time .
That was a major problem with the Services Directive that we obviously hope will not be repeated in the future .
Finally , we have an alternative form of dispute resolution , which is to be promoted at EU level , particularly for consumers who shop on the Internet .
All of the focus on e-commerce in general also represents a major step forward , and in this regard , it must be mentioned that we have also just adopted a directive on consumer rights that is also pointing in the same direction , which is clearly yet another major step in the right direction .
Finally , I would like to appeal strongly to Commissioner Barnier to ensure that , as this large package on the Single Market now goes further through the system , we also promote communication about it .
Our experience up to now with regard to communication about the Single Market - the Single Market for citizens - has left something to be desired .
All of us have a responsibility , but I would like to strongly urge the Commissioner , if I may , to put a great deal of effort into ensuring that we really promote communication and to give it a boost so that citizens and small businesses become more aware of the fact that this excellent package actually exists .
The fact that there is a lack of awareness about this seems to be the biggest problem at the moment .
I would therefore strongly recommend that we give communication a shot in the arm .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , back in the 1980s , the decade in which I was born , the President of the Commission at that time , Jacques Delors , said that the Single Market should have a social dimension .
Now , more than 20 years later , we have a situation where we have 23 million unemployed , there is pressure on wages and working conditions and on public services , there are nearly 18 million working poor and there is increasing inequality in Europe .
At the same time , we are losing jobs , and we do not really know how we are to support ourselves in the future .
We have to conclude that we still have a huge amount of work to do when it comes to establishing the European social dimension .
Mr Monti took this matter up last year in his splendid proposal for us all .
I believe that he made an absolutely key point when he said that there are some bottlenecks , in other words , some critical points , that we need to accept and that we need to deal with if we want to make progress , some of these being social and environmental in nature .
In actual fact , it is the central idea that , in my opinion , we should follow up on or pursue in the near future .
It has been a rather tough process debating this document in Parliament , but I am very pleased that we are able , as Parliament in session , to make our recommendation today with regard to how the Commission 's and Mr Barnier 's work should continue .
I would like to mention three points that are very important for us in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and that constitute absolutely central messages .
The first message to take from this today is that we want a green Single Market .
This is to be achieved , among other things , through innovation and by using public invitations to tender and procurement in such a way as to actively promote the conversion to a green economy .
It is also to be achieved by introducing an environmental footprint for products and by finding financing instruments that can help to enable these green investments to be made , including Eurobonds , which are intended to cover our large requirement for investment in connection with the conversion to a green economy .
The second message from us today is that we want a social Single Market .
This means , among other things , that we want a fundamental and thorough social examination of legislation before it is tabled , and therefore also that we want a social policy reference - that is the term that we agreed on in the relevant Single Market legislation to remind us all of the obligations imposed on us by the Treaty of Lisbon as regards fundamental social rights .
Our third message is that we want the consumers ' Single Market with , among other things , ambitious initiatives , market surveillance and passenger rights .
This is therefore an excellent document that we Greens are able to support today .
I would have liked it to have been a bit clearer in its messages and I would have liked this document to have made us dream that Europe could lead the world when it comes to social justice , new jobs and the switch to a green economy .
We probably still have a way to go in this regard , but I think that this is a good start .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , it gives me very great pleasure to be able to welcome the excellent reports from the three rapporteurs , and indeed to thank all the Members - not just those on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , but also those on the many other committees represented here , who have joined us in what has been a great enterprise .
We have seen already from the quality of the contributions across the political field how engaged we are with the topic .
We have had lively debates and lively arguments , but we have been united in a common goal of wanting to make the competitive Single Market economy work , a competitive social market economy work , and for those two things to be linked together .
We have achieved that in what we have done so far .
The history of this important project , referred to by a number of you , had its seeds first of all in Professor Monti 's work , for which I pay him tribute , and in a desire by my committee - and I want to thank all the coordinators particularly for the support and energy they put behind this - to say that Parliament needed a response to this as well .
We had a feeling that the completion of the essential foundation of the EU 2020 strategy for smart growth and jobs and innovation - the Single Market - was not really reflected as a political priority .
We have been able to work with the Commissioner - and here I pay tribute to Michel Barnier who seized that opportunity to work with us - to express this as a political priority in the form of the Single Market Act .
That has been a real success for Parliament .
It is a lesson on how committees can use their power of political initiative by working together to take that movement forward , because if it were not for Parliament , we would not be here today .
I am delighted to see that Martin Schulz is here - the only group leader here - whom I warmly welcome .
I hope that this is a lesson he will absorb in the future work that he may do in this Parliament .
Thinking about what is in this report , a number of messages have come through .
First of all , a number of colleagues have said that in areas like goods and services , in particular , we have done a huge amount of work but that it is not well enough known ; people are not taking advantage of it .
There are also areas which we really have to develop .
Some of them are in the EU 2020 strategy , in innovation and digital networks .
Green technologies are not reflected enough , though some are not fit for purpose .
I am very pleased at what you said about public procurement , and mutual recognition also needs to change .
We are going to work together on those , but today we have created the framework and the foundation in which to move those forward .
Again , I want to thank all of you who are engaged in that great effort on behalf of all European citizens .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I would like to put a question to Mr Harbour , who is a fellow MEP for the West Midlands in the UK .
He talked a great deal about being in the European Union and the influence this gives ; indeed , he is the Chair of one of the most influential committees here in the European Parliament - the Single Market Committee .
He is actually the only Conservative MEP who is a committee chair .
He recently brought forward a written declaration in support of small businesses , but only got just over 200 signatures .
Is that the level of his influence ?
Or is he just a Europhile in Euro-sceptic clothing in a no-meaning ECR Group that deceives the British public over and over again ?
Mr President , Mrs Sinclaire and I represent a region of the United Kingdom whose citizens depend on the Single Market for their jobs and for their future .
I work with small enterprises all the time , and I can tell her that small enterprises in the Midlands supplying the great companies in the car industry , just down the road from where she and I live , are working overtime at the moment because of new opportunities that we have created by giving them a framework to go and attack a market numbering 500 million people - that big an area .
I do not apologise at all for the work I do here .
I wish other people would be more constructive and do real work for their local citizens , instead of merely coming here to complain .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , I greatly enjoyed your speech today .
However , we are of the opinion that the Commission is sticking to the philosophy behind the Lisbon strategy which , according to the Commission 's official position , failed to meet its targets .
The Single Market strategy must , firstly , clarify its visions and redefine its priorities , at both theoretical and practical level , so that it is sufficiently visible to the public .
We believe that the market is useful , that it has its virtues ; however , it is not a social model per se .
The social dimension must be defined as the top priority and the new agenda for the Single Market must be configured so that it improves social justice .
In a free market society , not everything can be for sale .
Public utilities , public health services and services of economic interest should not be covered by competition law or Single Market legislation .
Universal access to viable and high quality public services is a vital political issue .
At the same time , fundamental rights , such as the right of trade union activity , cannot be set aside .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will not make yet another speech about the individual points .
I represent a coalition partner in the government of one of the founding countries of the European Union , namely the Northern League .
This is not a matter of better communications - I heard a colleague speak of an ambassador for communications in case the activities of the European Union come under attack - but rather a matter of involving territories .
We appreciate these three measures .
They have positive aspects and aspects that need refining , for which , as a group , we have tabled amendments .
The fundamental factor is involvement , because Italy is different from Finland , and is different from Portugal .
The important thing is that this should be an opportunity and not an imposition , as some directives have often become in the past .
We must be careful when considering as transgressors those countries which fail to follow guidelines , because if they are unable to follow them , it is obviously not just for the sake of it but probably because those directives cannot be homogeneously deployed over the 27 countries .
The Single Market is our goal .
It is not an end but a means and , as such , for small and medium-sized businesses and consumers , the important thing is that the process should primarily be concrete , not declarations of principle , but concrete actions starting with those specific twelve points , and secondly , there should be real involvement of governments and territories , because otherwise we risk setting up yet another framework that people and manufacturers do not welcome .
No ambassador of communications can determine whether a directive or a Single Market is suited to the social and productive fabric that needs to embrace it .

Mr President , on a point of order , first of all , the rule book states that if a Member of this House wishes to make a point of order , the President should give way , and it was a procedural point of order I wished to make .
These blue cards allow a Member to ask another Member a question .
Now if the Member disregards that question , I think it is up to you , Mr President , to ask the Member to answer that question .

My question was simple : how did Mr Harbour 's influence help with adoption of his written declaration , which failed to get the requisite number of signatures ?
Our honourable colleague , Mr Harbour , has replied .
Everyone is now free to interpret this answer as more or less complete .
You may consider it wanting , others may consider it complete .
But here ends the debate .
We cannot turn such an important topic as this into a bilateral discussion between you and Mr Harbour .
( NL ) Mr President , let me begin with the positives .
The reports in front of us include a number of good proposals , such as moving the Services Directive forward , the European patent and addressing excessive roaming charges .
These are things which will affect the core issue of the internal market and which will help individual citizens and companies to move forward .
Unfortunately , I also have to note that there are many other initiatives which go far beyond the objective of the internal market .
I will mention a few : the climate and CO2 targets , socio-economic equality , fair working conditions and , of course , greater solidarity : that is , a socio-economic redistribution scheme which will undoubtedly involve more money being spent on it .
Every one of these proposals is socialist in flavour and , as far as we can see , none of them comes within the scope of Europe 's responsibilities and certainly none of them has anything to do with the internal market .
It is pie in the sky to think that differences in Europe can be erased with socio-economic interventions .
The internal market was never intended to create all-embracing equality in Europe .
Mr President , the delegation of the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) would prefer an internal market which focuses on the core issue , that is , on the promotion of freedom and economic cooperation .
Tackle the work on these two concerns that is overdue and get rid of any superfluous initiatives .
For the PVV , the vision of the internal market which is propagated here is a bridge too far .
Mr President , I would like to say to the Commissioner that while we were working on the report on your rich document , we were , just like yourself , constantly conscious that the Single Market is there to serve Europeans .
Maybe this is exactly the reason why the negotiations between different political groups on the final form of the text were so difficult .
I do agree with them that even if we do not fall in love with the Single Market , we can be very emotional about it .
It is really good that the European Parliament sends a clear signal today to the Commission and to the Council in the form of 15 priority proposals , and I am personally satisfied that we underlined the importance of the mobility of our citizens .
Better access to banking services ; easier recognition of professional qualifications ; full portability of pensions : these are the fields in which citizens need solutions in order to study , work and invest in different Member States throughout their lives .
Europeans expect concrete actions from us for concrete needs , and we must deliver .
Take , for example , voice and data roaming charges .
It is high time these stop hindering the mobility of Europeans on this continent - our continent without internal borders .
This issue is also addressed in the document we are going to vote on today .
Finally , the European Parliament is proposing an idea to organise an annual Single Market forum , and this platform should enable a genuine discussion with citizens .
To me , this is a crucial way of involving European citizens in the reform of the Single Market for its 20th anniversary , and for that event I wish all of us much success .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , one reason for the problems of the Single Market is poor governance .
At present , an inexcusably large number of directives are waiting too long to be implemented nationally .
Far too many have also been implemented unsatisfactorily or incorrectly .
The Member States must themselves take responsibility for the viability of the Single Market .
Common rules that are not respected in any tangible way are of no value .
One danger lies in the inequality of EU citizens .
Rights and obligations must be the same for all EU citizens and companies .
In my opinion , Mrs Kalniete 's report does not sufficiently stress the importance of the role of the European Parliament .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's role as a legislator must be on a par with that of the Council .
I am convinced that the relaunch of the Single Market will rely on the equal participation and close cooperation of all the EU institutions .
Only by acting together can we achieve the objectives that were originally set for the Single Market . These are : the promotion of competitiveness , a social market economy and sustainable development .
In his speech in yesterday 's plenary , Mr Schulz emphatically stated that neither the President of the Commission nor the President of the European Council has the right to play down the role of Parliament .
The credibility of EU policy and the future of the European Union ultimately depend on effective democracy .
The legitimacy of Parliament 's work is assured by 500 million European voters in a direct national election .
It is they who are among Europe 's most important people of influence , actors and decision makers .
The viability of the Single Market and the future of the European Union , too , depend on how they behave and the decisions that they take .
( SV ) Mr President , the EU is certainly more than the Single Market , but without the Single Market , there is no EU .
The Single Market is our most important tool for getting the EU out of the economic crisis .
There is therefore no conflict between what is good for Europe 's citizens and what is good for Europe 's businesses .
Everyone will be a winner if we succeed in removing the remaining obstacles to free movement of people , goods , capital and services .
The Single Market is still far from complete and the services sector in particular needs to be revamped and improved .
This also applies to the digital market in order for us to be able to reap the benefits of the dynamic effects of free movement .
One of the cornerstones of the Single Market is the euro .
The common currency creates stability for businesses , which do not need to worry about exchange rates .
The euro simplifies trade across borders .
If the euro were to be introduced throughout the whole of the EU , including in my country , Sweden , it would obviously stimulate and strengthen Europe and give the Single Market additional force .
We would have more jobs and more prosperity .
By the way , Mr President , I fully support the remarks made by Malcolm Harbour .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I think that many of my fellow Members will have remembered that the background to this package for the Single Market comes from the Monti report , and the Monti report recommended a considerable compromise between those who advocate more competition , if you like , and those who advocate giving more weight to social , environmental and tax-related aspects .
I believe that , here in Parliament - and as long as the texts are not unpicked in the votes we shall be having in plenary in a few hours - we have succeeded in finding this compromise , including in the 14 proposals that emerge from the three reports as a whole .
I also know that you are having discussions , in the College of Commissioners , to determine which central themes you will be retaining , and we shall clearly be paying great attention to whether this balance found within Parliament and desired by Mr Monti is taken up and extended to the 12 central project themes to which you have referred .
I would like to highlight three items which seem particularly important to me , further to what Mrs Turunen said a little while ago on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
The first aspect concerns competition .
The issue of the Single Market is to ascertain where we can focus competition .
Do we focus competition on innovation , on products or do we focus competition on the rules , through environmental dumping or social dumping ?
I believe we have indeed struck a balance here in Parliament - and I hope you can carry it over into the Commission - which is to say ' yes ' to more competition through innovation , ' yes ' to more capital investment , but ' yes ' also to a social clause , ' yes ' to environmental standards that ensure that competition does not lead to regulatory dumping .
Those are the two aspects that I believe are fundamental to our compromise .
The second item that I would like to highlight concerns the tax-related aspects .
When you proposed the consolidated corporate tax base for multinational companies in your first version of the Single Market Act , it was not an optional proposal : in other words , all companies had to be subject to this consolidated tax base .
In the proposal put out by the Commission 10 days or so ago , it is an optional measure : in other words , instead of building up an aspect of the Single Market , the Commission is tearing one down .
You will be adding a new system , you will be adding a layer of complexity , you will be adding regulatory arbitrage instead of creating tax harmonisation .
The proposal tabled by the Commission a fortnight ago runs totally counter to what we in Parliament want and to what you had proposed .
The last point I want to highlight very quickly is the notion of reciprocity , in exactly the same terms as you have done .
The Single Market accounts for 500 million people ; it is an economic entity , but it is also a political entity which must afford us more influence in shaping globalisation .
( CS ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his 12 measures on the Single Market Act , and for being inspired by the Mario Monti report , but I would like to mention one name which is important here , and which can surely be agreed on by all of us who have worked on internal market activities in the Internal Market and Consumer Protection committee , and that is the name of Malcolm Harbour .
His is surely one of the most important names in today 's session .
The Commissioner will not be offended , because he was sitting with us in the committee when Malcolm Harbour came up with the internal market initiative , an initiative which re-opened the whole debate on the internal market , and everyone - regardless of their political affiliations , whether socialist , green , liberal or from the European Conservatives and Reformists themselves - I would say almost everyone , supported this idea , which is why I want to mention the name of Malcolm Harbour .
In my opinion , we now have to fight against economic nationalism , and time is just one of our enemies in that fight .
In relation to the lack of time , I am pinning my hopes on Commissioner Barnier being able to turn these 12 measures into legislative measures .
( SV ) Mr President , Mrs Győri began her speech by saying that we need a driving force for the economy .
That is true , we do need that , but I would like to add that we also need a driving force for social justice and for a sustainable society .
Social rights must never be seen as obstacles .
On the contrary , they are a prerequisite for a sustainable and social economy and for growth .
No one has mentioned the idea of a new value-added tax strategy .
I will do so , as we have different regulations on VAT in the various Member States .
Sweden , for example , finances a large part of its welfare system by means of its VAT rules .
We are already suffering as a result of EU legislation , as the EU will not let us exempt non-governmental organisations from VAT .
This affects all voluntary organisations , for example , those providing activities for children and young people .
We must have the right to decide on these VAT rules for ourselves .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the creation of a Single Market is one of the objectives of the European Commission in order to respond to the economic crisis .
There are positive and negative aspects to all three reports .
We agree with the use of new technologies , e-commerce and innovation to encourage business growth and increase competitiveness .
To encourage the creation of a market for Europeans , greater coordination of trading activity should be a priority in order to control goods from third countries .
The creation of a collaborative Single Market can only be an opportunity for economic growth , since it fulfils the criteria of transparency and greater involvement of regional realities .
There are still problems , such as the granting of a special mandate to the President of the Commission as supervisor of the Single Market and the lack of protection for small and medium-sized businesses and their employees .
If we want to support the European economy , we must stop businesses relocating .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is possible to agree with the report before us in essence .
The question , however , is how much purport we can really give it .
That is to say , the freedom of movement of people and the free movement of capital are essentially fine words , yet what have Hungarians seen of these until now ?
They have seen that Western capital can come to Eastern Europe , but from Eastern Europe , only people can go west , and therefore , only the movement of people is free .
It is impossible , is it not , to imagine Hungarian or perhaps Czech or Polish entrepreneurs buying up , for instance , the German company which makes Volkswagen and then closing it in order to create their own market ?
In contrast , German , French and British entrepreneurs have done this to Hungary when they did away with the sugar industry , the food industry , the canning industry and the textile industry in the country .
Indeed , in 2004 , they even campaigned on the grounds that we should join the European Union because Hungarian entrepreneurs could then open patisseries in Vienna .
Far from being able to open patisseries in Vienna , Hungarian entrepreneurs are not even able to open patisseries in a small village .
For this reason , the food industry , the textile industry and the canning industry need to be rebuilt also in Eastern Europe in order that we may be members , respected members , of the European Union with equal rights .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to extend my sincere thanks to everyone in the European Parliament and in the European Commission who was involved in this joint report .
Almost 20 years ago , the internal market was created by means of the Single European Act .
A great deal has undoubtedly been achieved since then , but the process is like a 100-metre race .
The last few metres are the most difficult and the most strenuous .
Therefore , the fact that Mr Barnier , in consultation with the other Commissioners , has presented us with an unbelievably coherent approach to the last few metres in the race towards the internal market is all the more welcome .
In the past , proper progress has not been made in one area or another , precisely because the strategy was not adequately checked by the various Directorates General and the Commission to ensure that it was coherent .
We must work together across all the groups in the European Parliament and with the Commission to ensure that this situation changes .
The key note of the last few metres of the internal market race , the final spurt , as I call it , is the guiding principle of the social market economy , which means taking seriously the rights of employees , companies , citizens and all those involved in the world of business and making sure that we achieve a fair balance between the various Member States and also between the differing interests of the stakeholders .
I believe that the compromises that we have reached across the different groups come very close to this principle .
Nevertheless , Mr Barnier , I would like to point out that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) has agreed internally across all the committees a list of priorities for the next measures to be taken from the package that you are proposing .
The list consists of four key points .
We want to see a final effort being made to put the fundamental freedoms in place in the internal market .
For example , a quarter of the professional qualifications in the European Union only exist in one Member State .
This shows that there is still a great deal to do and that the market is not functioning properly in terms of openness .
In addition , we want to create a cross-border , digital internal market and to establish a global perspective on the internal market .
The proposals on public procurement policy are hugely important in this respect and Parliament will be drawing up a resolution on this subject during the next session .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate all those MEPs who had a hand in drafting these reports .
I think that we have managed to produce three balanced texts , which send a strong signal from Parliament to the College of Commissioners about our priorities for a Single Market that operates effectively on behalf of our citizens , for growth and for enterprises .
As shadow rapporteurs for Mr Buşoi 's report , we have created a clear road map for the Commission .
Firstly , and here we are all in agreement , Commissioner , there is a proposal for a legislative framework for public procurement , public / private partnerships and service concessions which should protect small operators , SMEs and awarding local authorities , and which will guarantee reciprocity between the EU , the industrialised countries and the major developing countries .
Then there is the need to ensure that we prioritise the common consolidated corporate tax base and a clear VAT framework .
That is crucial if we want our SMEs to flourish within a healthy competitive environment .
Finally , we must ensure that innovation is funded , in order to stimulate strong and sustainable growth in major European infrastructure projects , through the creation of Eurobonds .
I should like to finish by stressing how important it is , to my mind , that we have reached a satisfactory compromise on the key issues of being able to guarantee social rights in the different legislations of the Single Market and of protecting services of general interest within the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Commissioner , we are sending you a very clear message : the economy must be at the service of the citizens , and not the other way round .
You need our help .
Today , we give you this help , along with a major challenge : that of reconciling our citizens with the European project .
So do not let us down and give them the confidence they need !
Mr President , as a Liberal , I welcome the launch of the Single Market Act .
Removing national barriers should create an effective Single Market , but is this really applicable in all sectors ?
It seems obvious to me in the energy sector , and even more in terms of scarcity of resources and international tensions .
I strongly believe that Europe has to throw its weight to push Member States to interconnect and invest in their infrastructure as a precondition for a common energy market and security of supply .
However , this new Brussels mantra is only desirable so long as it reinforces competitiveness and lower prices for consumers , and there are sectors where it might not be possible .
I doubt whether creating European telecom champions , establishing pan-European licensing in the audiovisual sector or a Single Market for on-line content will bring more competitiveness in the long run or stimulate creativity , culture and growth .
So maybe we should take time to sit down and think , and should not charge like bulls into an easy-market concept .
Mr President , I shall start by thanking all the rapporteurs for their efforts , but especially Mrs Kalniete for all her hard work , and for the leadership of our chair , Malcolm Harbour .
The UK Government estimates that the value of a true Single Market would add up to EUR 800 billion of the EU 's GDP - a truly astonishing figure .
There is still much to do to deliver this .
Improving governance of the Single Market must be a key strategic priority for the EU .
It is vital that in these difficult economic times , we look to enhance our competitiveness , increase growth , create jobs and drive innovation .
I am pleased with the outcome of this report , which stresses the importance of a clear commitment and ownership by Member States to relaunch the Single Market , which is vital for its success .
By carrying out a rigorous monitoring process , and by reducing the time it takes to transpose directives , Member States will be able to increase trade and ensure a well-functioning Single Market .
I am also very supportive of the priority action highlighted in Mr Correia de Campos ' report in relation to the mutual recognition of professional qualifications , for which I will be the rapporteur .
We must urgently identify the obstacles faced by Member States in implementing this directive and by the professionals themselves .

( NL ) Mr President , as we were debating Mr Louis Grech 's excellent report , I gained the impression that both Parliament and the Commission were aware of the need to make the internal market more socially oriented .
We all agreed that the explanation of the partial failure of the internal market lies in the fact that it has won the hearts of large companies , but not those of ordinary people .
However , no proposals have yet come through for a social chapter for the protection of trade union rights and collective agreements .
On the other hand , we have had Heads of Government and the Commission going on about pay restraint , with some even calling for the abolition of collective agreements .
Even the existence of the trade union movement itself is now in question .
Commissioner Barnier , do not let this throw you .
Follow your social heart and ensure that the internal market becomes a market for everyone , not just the plaything of large companies .
I therefore urge you to put forward a proposal which will make it quite clear that social rights should not be subordinated to the principle of unbridled competition .
Just one word to my fellow Member , Mrs Sinclaire .
It was a pleasure to work with Malcolm Harbour on a written declaration on SMEs .
We received no support from you and I find your criticism of the declaration totally unjustified .
( SK ) Mr President , the attempt to create a Single Market for companies and for growth is coming up against many administrative barriers , which are a natural consequence of the fact that the business environment has developed independently in the different Member States , in different stages and under different conditions .
The effort to synchronise the business environment of all 27 Member States seems to me a highly demanding ambition .
I would therefore like to point out the option of an alternative approach , which does not require the full cooperation of all Member States from the outset .
The procedure under Article 20 of the Treaty on European Union ( TEU ) has already enabled us to achieve substantial progress over the long-intractable problem of the European patent , through so-called enhanced cooperation in the establishment of uniform patent protection .
I firmly believe that , if the group of economically stronger Member States , such as France and Germany , in particular , found the will to unify accounting rules and to create a common accounting and taxation system , it would be possible , through enhanced cooperation under Article 20 TEU , to lay the foundations for a common accounting system , which other Member States could gradually join .
I firmly believe that , through a good choice of measured , gradual steps , it is possible to help the functioning of the EU Single Market substantially .
Mr President , Mrs Kalniete wants to relaunch the Single Market and makes it sound like a V-2 rocket : extremely dangerous but never on target .
Mr Correia de Campos is concerned about movement of workers .
Well , so am I.
The EU has swamped the United Kingdom with extra workers .
The United Kingdom sees the world as the market .
The straightjacket of the EU regulation is closing our industry , stopping innovation when it is ahead of the regulations and closing traditional industry , where the product is good but different from the approved continental version .
Small business is the victim here .
The United Kingdom is amongst those which do comply , yet it suffers because it does : for example , expensive compliance in the pig and egg industries with regulations that the Commission will not enforce , making our product uncompetitive .
I have many more examples , but have been allocated just one minute to save small businesses .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe it is now important to unite our voices in thanking Mr Barnier for his work and also for the outstanding work of Mr Harbour .

The initiative that was brought forward by the Commission is the result of many years of work , including that of fellow Members who have preceded Mr Barnier .
With its publication , we can , at last , at this point , better highlight and give priority to the issue of the Single Market which , for unavoidable reasons , and which are difficult for the public to understand , has not , in my opinion , received enough attention within the 2020 programme .
I think the Single Market is the European Union 's great challenge .
On one hand , it can get us out of a difficult crisis situation and , on the other , it can make us even stronger and more influential regarding policies which are being implemented in the rest of the world .
But nevertheless , we always have to fight resistance from Member States and I think the guidance given in this report will require a common effort from all .
As for my group , may I borrow a phrase used by Mr Schwab , with which I fully agree , who said that we are in the final sprint .
In this final sprint , things are more exciting but also more difficult .
I believe that what we are asking of the Commission , for which we have Mr Barnier to thank , is a focus on the uniformity of professional qualifications , on the digital Single Market , on a Single Market for public procurement and special attention for SMEs .
To this I add my usual motto : we must simplify , simplify , simplify .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteurs and Mr Barnier for their generous contribution to Parliament .
We support the idea of an internal market which is able to understand and meet the social expectations and the implications that the social dimension requires .
It is not a pipe dream ; it is realistic and also modern .
It is this vision that makes the market stronger , because focusing only on the economic element , essentially reducing the market to a question of economics , has shown that it will solve neither problems of growth nor of cohesion .
This means , in short , that we must now fully realise the ideal of a European social market economy .
In today 's texts , we have this .
There is recognition of the social enterprises , cooperatives and their role , of mutual insurance companies and of foundations , which represent 10 % of European companies and many of our jobs .
These are a reality with real businesses demonstrating economic pluralism and the pluralism of business .
They work with capital but not for capital and want to create work , welfare , quality of life and innovation , and to demonstrate that these values should and can be part of the internal market in Europe .
Mr President , the European Union 's greatest achievement is the establishment of the Single Market .
The free movement of goods , services , labour and capital drives innovation and increases the prosperity of the 500 million people who live in Europe .
The common market was the reason my country joined the EEC , and the Single Market is the reason we remain part of the EU , but in recent years , the EU 's focus has strayed from completing the Single Market .
Too much time and money has been wasted on grandiose projects that do not benefit the people we represent .
I believe it is time to refocus our attention on the Single Market .
Its expansion and success is crucial for our economies .
It is one of the few areas where the EU can deliver growth rather than impede it .
I would ask the Commissioner to be bold .
Rather than creating more regulations that drive jobs away from the City of London , I would ask him to focus on creating a competitive and job-creating Single Market for Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , public procurement law and the awarding of public contracts are an essential part of the internal market .
Mr Barnier , my response to your remarks about wanting to promote social integration in this context is that I have heard very little about protecting social rights or about protecting collective agreements .
These are some of the fundamental rules which you , as you have said , do not want to call into question .
If we want to protect the fundamental rules , we must ensure in future , during the process of awarding public contracts , that basic social standards are maintained , that collective agreements are not undermined , and that the use of cheap labour is prevented .
All of this forms part of modern public procurement law .
I would like to make it clear that we must no longer put greater emphasis on economic freedoms and free competition than on fundamental social rights .
Either we want a social Europe or we want permanent conflict with the people who are turning away from Europe because it does not protect their interests .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , economic and social crises always cause our citizens pain and create doubt for the public and our economies .
For three years now , there is considerable evidence that , when faced with difficulties , nations are tempted to turn in on themselves .
One minute , we hear of a profusion of penny-pinching measures , the next of difficulties in competing for public procurement , and , now and again , this is something we heard in this House just now , doubts about the very usefulness of Europe .
Europe is fingered as being responsible for the crisis .
However , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis is what is responsible for the doubts .
Your message , Commissioner , is to tell the European citizens that Europe is back again and that its role is to protect them .
In the past , Europe has been ingenuous in matters of external trade .
This must stop .
Europe is frequently hard to comprehend .
It should become easy to comprehend .
We are all responsible for the regulatory nit-picking which gives Europe the reputation for being a factory churning out complex detail .
Europe must embody a constant striving for simplification .
Too frequently , Europe is a collection of 27 rules which , too often , are mutually contradictory .
Europe must continue to harmonise .
Then the time will come to talk of social dumping and tax dumping between Member States , because how do we think that we can ever achieve our Single Market if regulations continue to differ so greatly from one State to another ?
Lastly , Europe is often seen to be a source of constraints .
It should henceforth be seen as a source of enablement .
Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , what indeed you want - and I applaud this - is to give the Single Market back to the citizens .
That will assuage their fears and provide them with new reasons to live together .
Commissioner , in building the Single Market , you want political and not merely economic foundations .
Parliament , I am sure , will support you in this matter .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Single Market , when it was set up , was a source of hope for European consumers .
However , over time , they have entertained serious doubts about the benefits it might bring to their daily lives .
I am thinking , in particular , of e-commerce , which is still insufficiently used due to a lack of confidence .
I am also thinking about the lack of passenger protection and the non-compliance , by Member States , with regulations in this area .
I am thinking of the fact that we still need a European statute for mutual companies and consumer associations .
I am also thinking of the total lack of transparency in the financial services sector , but I am aware , Commissioner , that you are working tirelessly on these issues .
In order to restore the confidence of our citizens and finally to ensure that this Single Market operates effectively , we must take ambitious and targeted measures .
That is what we propose in the three reports that we are debating today .
I am particularly pleased with the inclusion of the horizontal social clause and the services of general economic interest clause which allow us to take a first step towards a more social Europe .
It is our duty , the duty of all of us here , of the institutions -and I have confidence in you , Commissioner - to swiftly put into effect our proposals for a Single Market operating on behalf of its citizens .
( CS ) Mr President , if we want to revitalise the European economy and boost competitiveness in the global environment , our core objective must be , finally , after 20 years , to remove all barriers preventing small and medium-sized enterprises in particular from developing their business activities .
It is therefore necessary to complete the harmonisation of technical and accounting standards , to promote electronic commerce , to link commercial registers , to implement the interoperability of on-line identification systems and the recognition of qualifications , to eliminate on a consistent basis discrimination against business on the grounds of their place of origin , and to streamline the conditions for participating in public tenders .
The 50 points which the Single Market Act currently contains are of absolutely key importance , and we must bring them to life .
Differences in national legal systems create bureaucratic barriers for companies , slow down investment and limit efficiencies of scale and the benefits of synergy , but these differences exist even in areas that have already been harmonised by directives , but the directives have been implemented inconsistently in the Member States , and therefore the barriers to doing business on the Single Market persist .
Would it not be better to adopt measures which allow uniform legal interpretation and uniform implementation in all countries , and to limit directives which allow variations in national law ?
I very much appreciate the fact that Commissioner Barnier has made it his top priority to complete the Single Market , and he has our full support .
I would like to thank all MEPs who participated and cooperated in this objective .
Mr President , in May 2010 , Parliament voted for the Single Market to be perceived as a holistic , unified project , finding an equilibrium between an open SME-friendly economy and a citizen 's social and basic rights .
This should be factored into all Single Market legislation , regaining , in the process , citizens ' trust .
However , implementing and adopting the many excellent proposals found in the various reports and in the Act itself is a difficult task .
We have to ensure that a revitalised , redefined Single Market does happen and does not get sidelined .
Ultimately , it is up to the institutions to politically support the Single Market and give it the necessary momentum and leadership , which is sadly lacking at times .
In this respect , therefore , I am proposing that one of the permanent features of the Single Market forum should be to carry out an annual appraisal and audit to gauge the state of play of the Single Market , primarily , whether the objectives and aims set out in the Act have been achieved or not , thus convincing European citizens that the Single Market truly represents their interests and aspirations .
( PL ) Mr President , the Single Market may have seemed a pipe dream 60 years ago , but today it is a fact and a reality in the everyday lives of nearly 500 million Europeans .
Of course , on the one hand , we can be proud that the idea of the European Union has been put into effect with such excellent results but , on the other , we have to be aware that this project will , in fact , never end , because the world is moving forward , Europe continues to develop , and the citizens of the European Union are going to continue , to an ever greater degree , to use the opportunities the Single Market offers them .
The Single Market Act which we are debating , today , and the results of the social consultations show unequivocally that harmonisation of the EU market involves not just economic processes in the broad sense of the word , but also legislative solutions which are intended to help ordinary citizens in making full use of the opportunity presented by the EU 's internal market .
Therefore , I greatly welcome Commissioner Barnier 's proposals , which are closely related to improving legal certainty and the functioning of the principles of international private law , because they produce practical solutions to problems which arise from the mobility of citizens .
They are matters which perhaps , at first sight , are not directly related to improving the functioning of the free market , but which are becoming increasingly problematic for ordinary citizens and business people operating beyond national borders .
More efficient functioning of the Single Market will , to some extent , force the whole European Union to develop cooperation , too , in the areas of civil law and administrative law .
The European market must adapt to the latest methods , and this will always present us with new challenges related to its modernisation .
Therefore , I am going to expect fulfilment of the principles enshrined in the Single Market Act with great hope and enthusiasm .

( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr Barnier , the internal market lies right at the heart of the European Union and , following several years of chaos , we must establish a new regulatory framework for citizens , workers , consumers and businesses .
The magic word in all these measures is inclusion - the inclusion of civil society , social dialogue and the active application of the horizontal social clause in accordance with the principles of the social market economy .
What I believe is missing , which represents a genuine shortcoming of the internal market , is a proposal for the cross-border transfer of the place of business of public limited companies .
The current situation leads to negative competition between the systems .
That is not a good thing for businesses or for their employees .
Mr Barnier , we have seen that you are very hard-working and that you are prepared to present a wide range of proposals .
Please come to grips with this subject as well .
( PT ) Mr President , the reports that we are debating - and I congratulate their rapporteurs - reinforce a series of initiatives for revitalising the internal market .
I would like to highlight the commitment shown by the Commission , particularly Commissioner Barnier , whom I thank , and this Parliament 's positive response , through the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , to prioritising competitiveness and market dynamism , a fundamental pillar of the Europe 2020 strategy .
Europeans and businesses are hoping for effective stimulus measures so that Europe 's economy can start growing again .
They are hoping for higher employment and look forward to the creation of greater prosperity .
As the Commissioner pointed out , opening up markets to our businesses by removing obstacles and difficulties will provide very special relief and an unparalleled opportunity for them to pursue their mission as the driving force of our economy .
The measures aimed at cutting the administrative and bureaucratic burden on small and medium-sized enterprises , facilitating their access to credit and to the services market , and promoting the European patent and the recognition of qualifications , are essential .
The development of e-commerce is important for improving confidence among consumers and businesses in this kind of trade ; the focus on innovation is vital for strong , lasting growth ; and the social business initiative is essential for creating innovative entrepreneurial projects for social inclusion .
These are a few measures that will guarantee this ambitious project for completing , deepening and making full use of the Single Market for the benefit of the European people .
Lastly , there is the important recommendation for the Member States to redouble their efforts to improve their transposition and implementation of internal market legislation .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , you are doubtless aware that the exhaustive discussions that we have had in this House on the subject of your communication have revolved around the role of public services , of services of general interest in the Single Market and how they are embodied in legislation .
We have managed to formulate a compromise , which invites you to move beyond your proposal 25 , and we invite you to move beyond a mere communication , which would not meet the expectations and needs of stakeholders , users and all parties concerned in the public services , and nor would it meet the objectives which , moreover , you are setting .
The European Union must send a clear and unequivocal message about public services .
In order to do so , we must set up a proper legal framework , whether that consists of a regulation or a directive .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides us with the legal foundations to do so .
It is now up to you to turn them into a legislative proposal .
Parliament , I am sure , is ready to follow you in this matter .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I first want to congratulate the rapporteurs on a job very well done .
We all agree with the statement that the European Union needs a Single Market which works better , so I welcomed the proposals on deepening and improving it .
I would not like discussion on deepening the internal market to lack reference to the biggest and most ambitious plan - a plan which , despite many years of work , is not , however , a reality - the plan to create a Single Market for services .
The European Commission has put forward many ambitious and new ideas for deepening this market .
They are valuable and necessary for it to function efficiently , but I would also like to appeal for a continuation and strengthening of plans which are still not serving citizens and businesses fully .
The Services Directive is one of the first stages of opening up the services sector , but we should not stop at that .
We should use the experience gained working on the Services Directive to remove other obstacles and to simplify existing regulations .
Many sectors still remain closed , many practices in our Member States hinder the free flow of services , and the flagship idea of the Services Directive - the points of single contact - is not fully working .
Commissioner , in my opinion , many of the initiatives of the Single Market Act will not bring the expected benefits if we do not improve the Single Market for services .
Effective accomplishment of the Act 's numerous initiatives depends on the efficient functioning of the market for services .
It is enough to mention here the recognition of professional qualifications , e-commerce and better conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises , although the list is , of course , much longer .
So I appeal to the European Commission to be consistent in opening up the services sector as a foundation for the success of the other initiatives of the Single Market Act .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Professor Mario Monti , a man whose liberal culture is appreciated and never questioned , says in his report on the domestic market that it is necessary to strike a balance between the market , its rules and the rights of people who live and work within that market .
He says so because he is convinced that social cohesion is an important factor in competition and because he , like us , thinks that people 's dignity should never be questioned , neither as citizens , nor , of course , as employees .
For this reason , the social clause is important .
It is an instrument which is supported by the overwhelming majority in this Parliament , and this is why we ask you and President Barroso to include it in all legislative acts governing the internal market .
Only in this way , through the enhancement of the role and contribution of individual workers , will the market achieve its potential .

( RO ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs for the quality of their work , particularly Mr Campos , and for drafting the ambitious proposals for responding to the challenge of reconciling two seemingly contradictory objectives : relaunching the Single Market and restoring European citizens ' confidence in the proper functioning of the market .
As I see it , the Single Market Act must comprise a coherent , balanced package of measures , in keeping with the Grech report and the Monti report , which will lay the foundations for a Europe of Added Value for both citizens and businesses .
Citizens ' concerns and rights must be at the heart of the measures for relaunching and strengthening the internal market .
In this respect , I welcome the proposal for a citizens ' charter at EU level , which will provide multilingual information about the right to live and work in any Member State .
We now come to the catch-the-eye procedure .
Unfortunately , I have about 18 names on my list , so not everybody will get the floor because we do not have enough time .
However , I will try to divide that time fairly and evenly .
( HU ) Mr President , numerous factors of equal importance guide the internal market .
The problem at EU level is caused by the absence of a comprehensive platform , yet this also creates the opportunity for growth .
The three reports took account of these shortcomings and also defined them excellently .
However , simply describing these will not , in itself , encourage the stakeholders .
I proposed numerous amendments to the draft report , one area of which was the resolution of certain pending issues related to the free movement of employees .
Moreover , the Single Market should benefit all enterprises equally .
Here , I have in mind small and medium-sized enterprises in particular .
More intensive economic growth in the EU can only be achieved by removing the obstacles of the internal market .
In other words , an extensive , integrated market itself can be the engine of innovation in the future .
I congratulate the rapporteurs , I thank Commissioner Barnier for his work , and I congratulate the Hungarian Presidency . Thank you , Mr President .
( SK ) Mr President , it is often the case that the effort to maintain the Single Market takes place at the expense of social rights and compliance with certain national traditions on the labour market .
At present , moreover , the Single Market also faces another problem , as the economic crisis casts a shadow over the prospects for its further successful development .
However , I consider it necessary to include a social element in the laws applying to the Single Market in order to direct policy genuinely towards citizens , and in order to ensure cohesion through compliance with social rights and workers ' rights .
Our common endeavour must be to ensure that the Single Market and its functioning are of benefit both to citizens and companies , thereby contributing to the overall growth of European competitiveness .
We must also direct the adopted legal measures towards the fulfilment of objectives such as a stable and responsible policy on pay and the adequate representation of women in managerial positions .
Mr President , when dealing with European Union reports , never trust the label and always look at the contents of the packet .
These reports appear to be about the Single Market , trade and the transfer of jobs from higher-wage economies to lower-wage economies .
However , one rapporteur has not lost the opportunity to look for yet another pretext for yet further immigration - not just within Europe , but by clear implication from outside Europe .
The Correia de Campos report refers to an influx of highly-qualified workers and seasonal workers - not usually known for their surfeit of qualifications - as being beneficial to the European economy .
People are seen not as human beings , but as mobile factors of production .
Bringing skilled workers from the Third World robs poor countries of people they can ill afford to lose .
Furthermore , bring Third World people to Europe and you bring part of the Third World with them .
You cannot turn them into new Europeans by the application of a little cultural stardust .
People are not the product of distinctive cultures ; distinctive cultures are the product of distinctive peoples .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the guidelines laid down by this important communication prepared by the European Commission in response to Professor Monti 's report of last May .
Governance and partnership are two aspects essential to reviving the market .
Indeed , to enable it to become ever more efficient and competitive , it needs strong political guidance and high-level leadership .
This is also achieved by making the whole European system more democratic .
The positions , decisions and acts we adopt must be the result of highly coordinated collaboration between the various European institutions .
In addition , Parliament 's role in drawing up legislation on the Single Market can be strengthened further .
The Treaty of Lisbon has already made a great contribution in this direction ; that is , it has established new rules to ensure greater power for Parliament , but this alone is not enough .
I am thinking especially of those files on which Parliament expressed a position which is strong and clear but divergent from that of the Council and governments of the Member States .
Mr President , the debate is essential because by making the Single Market work more effectively , we have the potential to create economic growth , which fundamentally results in the creation of jobs .
I was pleased that a compromise has been reached on the subject of the social clause .
The balance between the market and our social values is vitally important ; to have lost this principle would have been deeply damaging .
On the digital agenda , although many Member States are making progress , it is sadly also seen by many as non-essential .
If Member States do not deliver on this agenda , the competitiveness of the whole EU suffers .
What pressure can be brought to bear to ensure that no EU citizen , wherever he or she lives , is left behind in this digital revolution which surrounds us ?
Finally , on public procurement , I welcome the Commission 's proposals .
However , how do we ensure that innovative public procurement is at the heart of our agenda ?
( SK ) Mr President , the idea that Europeans must create more employment , or more jobs , is fundamental for us .
It is necessary , above all , to understand that the citizen must be at the actual heart of the initiative , whether from the perspective of consumer rights or at the level of communications strategies or copyright , or improving the environment for cross-border operations of small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the backbone of every economy .
We must speed up the process of recognising professional qualifications in order to boost mobility , while taking account of collective agreements .
I also attach key importance to the implementation of the same laws in all Member States , adequate social protection - I repeat , social protection - and the fight against social exclusion .
Mr President , I would finally like to say that the incorporation of these elements into the European qualifications framework will be of real profit to citizens , as well as an effective mechanism for workforce mobility .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your words , and I agree with you that we must listen to our citizens and restore their faith in the European project .
Today could , therefore , be a great day for Europe and European social integration .
This is because , with the adoption of these reports , we are not only moving towards the revival of the Single Market , a key element in tackling the current economic crisis , but also responding to the demands of citizens who wish to move towards a larger Europe and strengthen social rights .
Europe must respond to new global challenges , turning the European economy into a highly competitive social market economy and stimulating noticeable growth , with more and better jobs .
However , this goal should be based on the insertion of a social clause in all legislation related to the internal market , making citizens the focal point of our attention and priority , thereby strengthening their social rights .
Finally , I would ask the Commission to present these proposals as soon as possible .
( GA ) Mr President , without a doubt , the Single Market has been very important for Member States in the progress they have made in economic affairs .
It will be more important in the future , especially for countries such as my own , which are trying to emerge from the economic downturn .
The Single Market requires two things , as I see it : one , a greater awareness amongst the public and particularly SMEs as regards its potential and two , we need to unlock the barriers to its progress .
Firstly , for the development of e-commerce , high-speed broadband is an absolute prerequisite .
Secondly , for energy as a Single Market in Europe , the European super grid , which is a long-term project , is absolutely vital .
Thirdly , in the area of innovation , we will need the European patent , which Mrs Győri referred to , under enhanced cooperation , and also centres of excellence at universities that are independently assessed .
( PT ) Mr President , experience has shown that there is no balance between competition and the defence of social and workers ' rights .
What we have today in the name of the liberalisation of the Single Market is a rise in privatisations , the rise in unemployment that that has created , more precarious work and , in many cases , poorer services for consumers .
There are huge examples , including in my own country , Portugal , with the spread of liberalisations in transport , the post office and communications , where services are now worse , fewer people are employed and jobs are more precarious .
That is why we say it is important to defend the social clause in all these processes .
The main problem is that it is not complied with either by governments or by the Commission itself or by the Council , as the Council deliberations on 25 March made very clear .
( CS ) Mr President , I firmly believe that the awareness and confidence of citizens are of key importance to the success of the single internal market .
Of course , this presupposes , among other things , communications that are accessible and comprehensible to citizens .
I would like to call again on the Commission to think seriously about how it will explain its plans to citizens .
The public consultation over the single internal market document itself showed what people are asking for and what they see as the main weak points of European integration .
Most people identified proposal number 48 as the main priority , under which the Commission makes a commitment to strengthen consultation and dialogue with civil society .
It will then pay particular attention to the views of consumers when drafting legislation .
I trust that the results of the public consultations will be brought into the equation in this case .
I would like to end by thanking and congratulating all of the rapporteurs , and I wish you , Commissioner , all the best for the continuing work .
Mr President , it is time to put back the real economy at the heart of the European agenda and to restore citizens ' confidence in our common market .
The relaunching of the Single Market is a historic chance for Europe to get back to business .
Let us take it .
The best way to pursue social Europe is to create jobs and that is what the Single Market Act is about .
That is why I have been engaged in trying to avoid watering down this important act and to boost European capability to compete on the global market and generate jobs .
I have resisted attempts to introduce unnecessary regulation and additional bureaucracy or issues such as the social clause .
I have supported the consensus reached to give the Commission a broad mandate to move forward .
Now is the time for action .
All EU institutions , stakeholders and the Council should take their shared responsibility in moving forward to implement issues such as the goods package , the Services Directive and the Small Business Act , and to boost confidence in e-commerce .
Last but not least , I hope that retail , which is a pillar of the European economy , would also be high on the political agenda .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , do you realise that you hold the future of Europe in your hands ?
I think that today 's debate is hugely important to the future of the European Union , to the future of European citizens , and to the future of the euro .
It is extremely hard for European citizens in the 27 Member States to withstand and understand the austerity measures imposed on them if they do not understand the value and importance of the internal market .
Thus , today , I consider that this debate will decide if the 20th anniversary of the Single Market next year is a celebration or a memorial service .
I believe that there is a triangle formed by citizens , undertakings and governance .
This triangle needs to be an isosceles triangle .
At the present stage , the citizens ' side is extremely weak .
This can only be corrected by a horizontal social clause , which is why we have asked for one , which is why we are trying to achieve a compromise .
To close , Mr Delors said that no one can fall in love with the internal market .
You should make it lovable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very grateful to every one of you for the quality of your speeches across a whole range of views .
I listened with great attention to everything you had to say , the expression of your vigilance , and also , in general - and I am very conscious of this as it is something we need - the expression of your encouragement and your support for our approach .



I should like to reiterate my thanks to your three rapporteurs , Mrs Kalniete , Mr Buşoi and Mr Correia de Campos , and to tell Mr Kožušník that he was right to emphasise the central role in this debate of Mr Harbour , because it was not a foregone conclusion that 11 committees , and I should like to thank the rapporteurs who have spoken , would be able to work together .
This holistic or global approach had been recommended by Mr Grech and by Mr Monti , and , in parallel , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission under the authority of President Barroso carried out the same work .

We have , with 12 other Commissioners , worked to formulate these 50 proposals and , finally next week , to identify the 12 levers for the modernisation of the Single Market and the 12 symbolic proposals for these levers .
Just now , Mr Zwiefka spoke of utopia , recalling the founding fathers .
I remember something that one of these founding fathers , Mr Jean Monnet , said when the very first step towards the Single Market was taken and coal and steel were first brought together in 1950 .
He said : ' I am neither pessimistic nor optimistic , I am merely determined ' .
I believe , ladies and gentlemen that at present - and I am repeating myself here - when you listen closely to the public and hear their anger , their concern , when you see how many of them are suffering , when you see the lack of jobs and of growth , it is time for renewed determination , particularly in the areas of the economy and growth .
Moreover , Mrs Thun referred to this European determination just now .
I feel that it is very important , thanks to the extremely constructive work you have done jointly with the different committees and different groups , that you are able to arrive shortly - at least I hope you are - at a vote which expresses this determination and which the Council and , for its part too , the Commission will have to take into account .
In any case , this supportive work you have carried out jointly makes me feel secure in my own determination , and I have felt reassured by the success of the public debate which we held for four months on the Single Market Act , since we received , as I recall , 850 contributions , and also by the fact that the European Council itself has signalled its support for our approach .
That is how the Commission will identify the proposals for which it is committed to provide the texts over the next 12 months , and I hope that we , the Council , Parliament and the Commission , are able to implement these texts in 2011 and 2012 .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you can see , we , the Commission , through your legislation , produce a great deal of regulations .
Those that I am currently drafting on the lessons to be learnt from the financial crisis are reactive or preventive regulations .
Here , with the Single Market Act , our ambition is to construct a proactive and dynamic regulation , and to turn , as Mr Juvin and Mrs Auconie have recommended , this internal market into what it should be : a space of opportunity , much more than a space of constraints , which is the view that small and medium-sized enterprises and the citizens have of it .
Citizens are consumers , and we are going to work to guarantee the safety of the products that they consume and to lift all discriminatory barriers .
Citizens are workers , and we are going to work on the recognition of professional qualifications and the respect of social rights for those who work in another country .
That is what Mrs Jaakonsaari and Mrs Gebhardt have recommended .
Citizens use public services .
That is a concern that many of you have voiced , in particular , Mr Triantaphyllides , and , moreover , I recommend that Mrs Castex , who spoke just now , read carefully - which she no doubt has already done - my colleague , Mr Almunia 's proposal on the revision of the Monti-Kroes package .
It contains , to my mind , new and open responses regarding the quality of and access to public services .
In addition , citizens are savers and borrowers and I have just outlined provisions regarding a single integrated mortgage market .
Then there are , in addition to the citizens , the businesses that create the jobs .
Mr Creutzmann , Mr Karas , just now , and Mrs Corazza Bildt have spoken of the need for competitiveness , particularly in the case of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We shall work on more favourable accounting and fiscal conditions , on progress in innovation , patents and copyright , which Mr Manders mentioned , on access to investment and also , I believe , on public / private partnerships .
I would like to thank Mrs Vergnaud for the support she has shown for our project on concessions .
We must improve the governance of the internal market .
Mr Schwab said something very important just now on de-compartmentalisation and I have tried to work on this with my colleagues inside the Commission .
This de-compartmentalisation applies to the assessment of the different directives .
I am currently carrying out an assessment , as you already know , country by country and service by service , on the Services Directive that Mrs Handzlik and Mrs Roithová mentioned just now , and I can see clear evidence of compartmentalisation .
There is sometimes a concertina effect , for a particular worker or a particular engineer or architect , in the use of the Services Directive , the Professional Qualifications Directive and the E-commerce Directive .
I wish to work , Mr Schwab , towards the de-compartmentalisation needed .
Mr Løkkegard and Mr Grech also mentioned communication .
Before you communicate , you have to do something and when you do something , you need to explain it in such a way that citizens grasp what has been done .

That is why I attach a great deal of importance , in the entire system of the internal market , to those tools that bring Europe closer to its citizens : the Solvit system , which is starting to work well , the Internal Market Information System ( IMI ) , points of single contact , Your Europe and the forum , which Mr Grech mentioned , to improve dialogue between all stakeholders and civil society .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to remind everyone of some of the beliefs that have guided what I have done throughout the mandate that was entrusted to me with your support .
Let me start with my principal belief , since we are talking about the economy and employment .
Ladies and gentlemen , the rest of the world does not stand by waiting for us .
It is going much faster than us in certain areas .
We must not let ourselves stand by and be spectators of our own future .
We , Europeans , must be the driving force behind our own future .
Moreover , the main argument , the driving force impelling us to be the agents of our own future , is the Single Market .
I was in China a few days ago .
We are respected there because we represent a market of 500 million consumers and citizens .
Let us continue to strive to pool our resources and let us strengthen our core - the Single Market .
The Single Market is the keystone , the platform of our economy .
If it operates effectively , everything that we build on it in terms of private initiatives for businesses or local , national and European public and private initiatives will work better .
Why , for example , are we fighting to re-launch the patents issue which has remained deadlocked for the last 30 years ?
The reason is that all public and private initiatives in the areas of innovation and creation have been weakened , seriously weakened , because we do not have a European patent or because our patents cost 10 times more than in the US So the platform must operate effectively .
That is the nub of the issue and , once that happens , we shall be able to build more effectively a great number of initiatives on its foundations .
My second main belief is that the time has come to work towards renewed growth .
Here , I should like to signal my agreement with Mrs Turunen who , just now , called for a different kind of growth .
The growth that will emerge from this crisis , and here Mrs Turunen is correct , must be different from previous growth , must pay more respect to natural resources , natural spaces , which are neither free nor inexhaustible , and we shall incorporate these objectives in particular into the new code or new regulations for public procurement , as well as for taxation , which must play a role in achieving a more ecological growth .
My third belief , ladies and gentlemen , is that there cannot be sustainable economic performance without innovation or social cohesion .
That is the dynamic compromise to which Mr Canfin referred and that Mr Monti had recommended , including in the area of taxation .
Mr Canfin and Mr Cofferati both mentioned this subject and Mrs Toia mentioned just now a subject that will feature in the proposals for a Single Market Act , namely , the development of a sector in which I believe , that of social business .
My fourth belief , and I repeat it here , is that if we are to win the fight for competitiveness , each of our territories , no matter how weak or how distant from Brussels it may be , has a role to play .
Each business is able to win its own battle , even the smallest amongst them , and we must help them do so .
Finally , all our citizens , even the weakest , those who are sometimes excluded through handicaps , can win their own battles for competitiveness , providing that they receive encouragement and support .
My fifth belief is that , in relation to what is happening in the rest of the world , our ambition must , I insist , be one of being agents and not spectators .
Furthermore , we must not merely be happy for Europe to be a continent of consumption .
Europe must continue to be a continent of production , not only of services , but an area in which we maintain a productive base , and that is also the objective of a number of the proposals that we shall make about long-term investments .
Honourable Members , I outlined to you what my dual ambition was upon becoming Commissioner .
It has not changed and will remain the same until the end of my mandate .
We are going to put the financial markets , which we need , back in the service of the real economy , and not the other way around as it has been over the last 15 years .
It is not the role of business to work for the markets , but of regulated financial markets , that are better governed and supervised , to be at the service of the real economy .
Our aim is to place the real economy , namely the large Single Market , back at the service of growth and at the service of human progress .
You should read next week - it may not be perfect and can doubtless be improved - the draft Single Market Act proposed by the European Commission in the light of your debates , and also in the light of this dual ambition : that of placing the market back at the service of the economy and of placing the economy back at the service of growth and human progress .
Mr President , I wish to thank everyone who participated in this debate today .
For me , this is extremely important from two aspects .
On the one hand , you have confirmed the Hungarian Presidency 's conviction that the internal market plays a huge role in stimulating , at long last , economic growth in the European Union , and in ensuring that finally we can create new jobs again .
The other great benefit of this debate is that very many thoughts and ideas have been voiced which we will be able to incorporate into the Council 's work as well .
The Commission has already completed a good part of the job .
Naturally , however , they , too , still have much to do .
The Council wishes to cooperate extremely closely with this House later in the adoption of specific legislation .
Thanks are therefore due to everyone who has assisted in this process up to now , either as a rapporteur or member of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , and whose involvement we are counting on in the future as well .
As has been mentioned many times already , the Hungarian Presidency has advocated the goal of a strong Europe .
This is the Hungarian Presidency 's motto as well .
What is more , we always say that we are thinking of a strong Europe which places the citizen , the people , at the centre of its policies , and this is what we must not lose sight of either when we consider the Single Market .
I would like to address separately some of the most widely discussed issues in the debate .
The first is the situation of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
They are , indeed , the key players in the internal market , and in consequence of this , we intend to do everything to put them on the map .
This partly means making access to finance easier for SMEs , reducing administrative burdens and ensuring simplified access to public procurements .
We attribute great importance to reviewing the Small Business Act , which will be on the Competitiveness Council 's agenda in May .
We intend to adopt conclusions on the subject as well .
The other such topic is the digital agenda .
A very great deal has been said about this , too , here in today 's debate .
We all know that there is enormous unexploited potential in this area .
We need to improve the options and conditions of paperless administration and business transactions .
The e-commerce and e-government initiatives serve this purpose , but in a broader sense , I believe that the aim of the Consumer Rights Directive is also to encourage cross-border transactions based on a single set of European rules .
Here , I could also mention the implementation of the Services Directive , which affects a significant part of the internal market , a major element of which is simplified electronic administration .
A third point I would like to raise is that the completion of the internal market is , in my view , inconceivable without building and completing the energy and transport infrastructure .
The Hungarian Presidency has already devoted special attention to the realisation of the single energy market in the first three months .
Several Members mentioned infrastructure bonds as well in the debate .
We look forward with interest to the outcome of the public consultation in relation to this .
Protecting intellectual rights is also an issue to which we have devoted much attention to date .
I mentioned the European patent system in my introduction as well , and I trust that , after enhanced cooperation has begun , we will be able to formulate its content together and that , as regards implementing rules , we will be able to achieve the greatest progress possible at the Competitiveness Council in May .
Moreover , I also hope that there is even a possibility that we will be able to reach an agreement .
Lastly , I would like to address social aspects .
This is the issue which generated the greatest interest in today 's debate , too , and aroused the most emotion in the Chamber as well .
I believe that there has been a very lively debate about this in the Commission as well as in this House , and I am certain that this will be the case in the Council , too .
As I have said before , we need a strong Europe with a human factor at its centre .
I think that this clearly indicates the Hungarian Presidency 's approach to this issue , yet we can only do this in a balanced way and by considering all aspects .
That is to say , if we place the human factor centre stage , creating jobs certainly is the most important task , because if we can guarantee that everyone who wants to work can do so , I believe that we cannot offer more than this to our citizens .
The other thing is that , as we are all aware , the European social model , the European social market economy , has been put to the test .
It is our common interest to protect this .
Of course , there is no single model in all the 27 Member States , as we all implement this differently .
We must also be realistic .
This model has been put to the test : the EU 's competitiveness , the Member States ' competitiveness , depends on whether we can adapt this social model to the challenges of the 21st century .
For this reason , we must not treat this as sacrosanct but as something that we defend through joint efforts while adapting it to the 21st century .
Finally , mobility has also been mentioned frequently .
I believe that this is the area where we may be able to make progress most urgently and most easily , and we would like to adopt conclusions about this in the Competitiveness Council in May by all means .
Finally , it is the Hungarian Presidency 's intention to ensure the greatest possible visibility for the Single Market , and we are prepared to make commitments at the highest level .
In this , we are counting on the Members and President of the Commission as well as the Members and President of the European Parliament .
Mr President , in concluding this most fruitful discussion , I should like to underline that this discussion has shown that we , the Members of the European Parliament , recognise our responsibility towards the people of Europe for reviving the economy and creating new jobs .
Consolidation of the Single Market is just as significant for reviving the economy as the other two initiatives : the reinforcement of economic management and the 2020 strategy .
We must raise the political profile of the Single Market .
Both politicians and society as a whole must understand its significance , so communication is a very important element in the revival of the Single Market : communication with business , communications with Europeans and also communication between the three institutions .
I am delighted that we are united in our aim to revive , unify and strengthen the European market .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking everyone for this debate , which has been very worthwhile .
Just now , however , I did not have time to read the last part of my speech , which was basically to thank Commissioner Barnier .
There is no better way for me to thank him than by recalling the first sentence in his speech .
He said that it is time for Europe to raise the bar , and not just to give people bad news .
I could not agree with you more , Commissioner , and I would like to tell you that in this respect , Parliament has done its job in good time and is ready to give the people good news .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank you all for your contributions to this debate and for your positive remarks .
I would also like to congratulate my colleagues , Mrs Kalniete and Mr Correia De Campos , for their good work .
We now have on the table three reports which are the result of a couple of months of hard work .
Despite the difficulties we have encountered , I am pleased with the results we have achieved .
We have identified the right challenges and a set of viable solutions .
They are also a clear expression of the European Parliament 's commitment to deepen and strengthen the Single Market .
I strongly believe that the three reports will be a useful complement to the broad public consultation organised by the Commission , which generated almost 750 responses .
I welcome the interest that enterprises , individuals , NGOs and public authorities have shown in the Single Market Act , since it is crucial that we have a broad consensus on measures to tailor the Single Market according to the expectations of our citizens and enterprises .
I am pleased to see that the Commission is really active and that some of the initiatives are already under way .
I have no doubt that the Commission will take due account of the views of the European Parliament , because in the end , the most important question is : can we make a significant difference with our actions and our efforts ?
My answer is , yes we can , but to do so we need courage and not shyness .
We need to take action immediately and not after some years .
We need to all act together in our efforts and not separately with some isolated actions .
It is time to act .
Mr President , earlier in this debate , my colleague , Mr de Jong , said I was out of order in the comments I made in my question to a colleague .
I do not think it is out of order to request a question on the balance of influence of a Member of this House on that institution .
Can I respectfully ask that I have some silence so I can actually make a speech ?
It is not fair that a person can be criticised for asking a question in this Parliament .
The question was not answered and should be answered .
Instead , my colleague answered the question about jobs in the West Midlands .
Would he then be reminded how the EU subsidised jobs out of the Ryton Plant in Coventry ?
The debate is closed .
Vote : 6 April 2011 .
The vote on the Commission statement on public procurement will take place at the next part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
This proposal simplifies legislation by gathering together several directives .
In fact , it clarifies laws and makes them easier for businesses and consumers to understand and adopt .
I believe this will be a way to give new impetus to the internal market and , I hope , to those regions with weaker economies due to their scale , remoteness and economic dependence on a small number of products , as is the case of the outermost regions .
In general , measures are needed to address the fall in demand resulting from cross-border purchasing , and it is important to ensure that this legislation is beneficial for regions such as the Azores .
More isolated areas have a greater interest in seeing many of their products shipped out .
Their businesses need access to clear legislation and their consumers need to have access to a wider range of goods at more competitive prices .
In situations where there is harmonised legislation in areas such as that of precontractual information , which this new proposal enshrines , one way of further raising levels of confidence in products from outermost regions - and thereby increasing their availability and consumption in the internal market - will be to enhance their image through quality certification , by introducing specific measures to that effect .
The economic and financial crisis which we are still enduring has shown us that , if we move away from the economy 's essential objective , which is to ensure citizens ' welfare , we risk pushing the whole of society towards collapse .
This also applies to the Single Market .
We must not forget that its role is to allow every European citizen to enjoy equivalent economic and social rights ensuring their welfare , across the whole European Union .
The Single Market must be deepened and geared again towards citizens and their interests .
I believe that during this crisis period , it is important for us to gain the maximum possible benefit from something that Europe has which is more precious , namely , human capital .
Worker mobility within the EU is the key to economic recovery and the Single Market 's development .
We must encourage this mobility , and the first step it is worth taking is to remove any barriers preventing the movement of labour inside the EU .
The restrictions imposed on workers from the new Member States are hindering the healthy development of the Single Market and must be lifted immediately .
For the revival of the Single Market , our European policies must operate in a business friendly environment which aims at encouraging innovation and growth and a strategic repositioning of the European economy .
Europe needs strong political leadership to establish and implement economic priorities of this magnitude .
The new European strategy , inspired by the guidelines of the Monti report , has the merit of indicating concrete measures for getting out of this period of economic crisis by restoring productivity and employment levels .
Of the 50 proposals presented by the Commission , I would like especially to highlight the steps taken to ensure increased competitiveness of SMEs , easier access to credit and to internationalisation , so that they can seize the new investment opportunities offered by the global market .
I should take this opportunity to remind you once again that SMEs are the most authentic representatives of the European economic fabric and provide numerous examples of excellence that should be encouraged and supported .
The Digital Agenda , combating counterfeiting , strengthening e-commerce and streamlining the contract procurement system are other widely supported priorities to ensure the concrete realisation of economic benefits which favour monetary stability and cohesion .
The expression ' Single Market Act ' has been on everyone 's lips since Professor Mario Monti wrote his report .
I eagerly await the 12 measures which the European Commission will identify as being crucial for the future of the Single Market .
At the same time , I can imagine what they will include .
So today , I would like to refer not so much to specific ideas , such as the EU patent , copyright or public contracts , but to concentrate on the principles by which , in my opinion , we should be guided .
I think future regulation of the Single Market should , on the one hand , reflect the philosophy of the Single Market which has been developed over the years but , on the other , it must be adapted to 21st century reality .
As an example , I will refer to a principle which guided the European Community from its inception - defence of what is known as parallel trade , or trade in legal products outside official channels of distribution , for example , the sale in Germany of Grundig televisions which have been purchased legally in France .
Today , parallel trade very often takes place on the Internet on a variety of sites .
This right should be defended by supporting development of the Single Market on the Internet and development of e-commerce in general , and by ensuring greater access to cultural goods in legal Internet shops .
We have much to do in this area , both in terms of making it easier for enterprises to operate in the virtual world and also in terms of increasing consumer confidence in Internet transactions .
The Single Market is the main driving force behind the development of the European Union , and besides improving competitiveness , it also creates a framework for social inclusion and job creation .
Proposals for deepening the Single Market , whether they are about removing the administrative barriers faced by small enterprises or stimulating e-commerce , must be for the benefit of the citizens .
The realisation of the strategy must be without prejudice to social rights and must not erode welfare achievements .
There are still too many barriers to employees ' , buyers ' and consumers ' rights being enforced without internal borders .
The implementation of the Free Movement Directive is also incomplete , despite the fact that the employment of as many people as possible and the best possible management of the European workforce are particularly important from the perspective of recovering from the crisis .
The smooth operation of the internal market is assisted by the common European action against corruption and organised crime , and by the implementation of the Stockholm Programme aimed at creating an area of freedom , security and justice .
We must take steps to ensure the recognition of professional qualifications within the EU , the transferability of pension rights , and access to basic banking services .
We also have further tasks ahead of us in ensuring the free movement of services and respect for the rights of posted workers .
Given the importance of this issue and the strict time constraints to which Parliament has had to work , we can all be pleased with what we have accomplished .
In general , I agree with the priorities identified by the various reports , particularly the recognition of professional qualifications , the portability of pension rights , the rationalisation of procurement procedures , initiatives for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and access for all to certain basic banking services
Certainly , in my opinion , other measures deserved to be highlighted , such as the issue of collective resources , but I am well aware that it was difficult to decide between these 50 proposals .
I am also pleased that we were able to reach a compromise on the social clause , which states that any legislation on the Single Market should be subject to a social impact assessment and , if justified by the findings , should contain a reference to political and social rights .
Finally , another reason for us to be satisfied is the fact that Parliament calls for guaranteed access , quality and affordability of services of general economic interest ( SGEIs ) and social services of general interest ( SSGIs ) , and invites the Commission to take sectoral legislative initiatives in this area .
I would first like to thank the rapporteurs for the amount of work they have put in to preparing the reports on the Single Market , and also to congratulate them on the end result .
I am pleased that on the 20th anniversary of the establishment of the Single Market , we have before us a resolution which will help Europeans make full use of the Single Market 's potential .
I am certain that its entry into force will allow the competitiveness of European markets to be strengthened and will bring us closer to achieving the goals set by the Europe 2020 strategy .
I consider the TEN-T networks to be an important factor in achieving an efficiently functioning Single Market .
I am pleased , therefore , that in the reports , attention has been drawn to their particular significance .
The TEN-T networks are one of the mainstays of an efficiently functioning market economy , creating the conditions for fair competition on the scale of the entire European Union .
In the context of decisions awaiting us on the future form of the TEN-T networks , I would like to draw attention to the need for better connection of the ' old 15 ' with the new Member States , and to the fact that greater internal transportation cohesion of the enlarged European Union is an important factor for the EU 's competitiveness .
The Single Market is crucial for the future growth of the EU economy .
Special attention must be paid to small and medium-sized enterprises , as it is these that hold the greatest potential for growth and job creation .
The Single Market must offer advantages to small enterprises , because it is they who provide the majority of jobs but which , at the same time , have greater difficulty in making use of the opportunities presented by the Single Market .
The financing of development and innovation represents a problem for them .
Similarly , we must pay attention to local enterprises in disadvantaged , sparsely populated areas and in urban districts facing difficulties .
Competition policy is a fundamental means of enabling the EU to have a dynamic , effective and innovative internal market , and to be competitive at the global level , too .
The EU must take important measures to ensure the improvement of SMEs ' access to information in order for them to be aware of the opportunities offered by the Single Market and the financial measures provided by the EU .
I , too , believe that the incorporation of the objectives of the Europe 2020 strategy and elements of the Small Business Act into all EU policies concerning the Single Market is important .
This is crucial for overcoming existing barriers at the national and EU level .
in writing . - In my opinion , a Single Market for Europeans should also mean a Single Market of quality .
Unfortunately , this report does not make any kind of reference to this issue .
In the European Union , products are sometimes offered under the same brand names , but with a different product formulation , in different countries .
Products reportedly have the same brand name but are available in different concentrations or strengths .
Situations have been reported where products of four different quality categories were sold under the same brand , depending on the destination country .
As a result , the - apparently - same product is of different quality depending on the country of purchase .
As a brand name is associated with perceived quality , this practice could result in misleading the public .
Businesses must avoid misleading consumers about the advantages related to the brand of goods .
If producers want to reduce the quality of the goods they offer , they should use a different brand name .
Our citizens believe that the quality of brand goods should be identical on every market , based on the principle that one brand equals one level of quality .
As my constituents are preoccupied by this issue , I would like to see it raised in our discussions in this House .
I am pleased that the report by former Commissioner Monti , which has been generally praised , in which he argues for further development and completion of the internal market as ' a prerequisite for a highly competitive social market economy ' has met with a ready response from the European Parliament .
After all , it is undeniable that the financial and economic crises have dealt Europe a heavy blow .
Further development of the internal market , which is the largest market in the world , will be one of our most important assets in this respect .
We need to take targeted action for our SMEs , which make up the economic hub of Europe : sufficient access to capital markets , facilitating online trading and a first step towards a common consolidated corporate tax base .
Our citizens stand to benefit from this as well : for example , from opportunities to study abroad , more stringent toy safety , cheaper roaming rates .
As European policy makers , we cannot emphasise this enough .
The challenges are considerable , which is why we need to do our best to create a fully fledged framework for an internal market for online services .
With these three reports , the European Parliament is sending out a clear signal that we are serious about reforming the internal market .
Let us now be consistent in getting down to this work .
If Europe is to overcome today 's difficult conditions and compete with rapidly emerging economies , it needs to invest in sectors which will give it a competitive advantage .
The common market is Europe 's biggest competitive advantage and it should be exploited accordingly .
Moreover , the recession is taking the EU Member States into deeper economic unification and we must take advantage of this to consolidate the European economy so that it is more competitive at both domestic and international level .
Consequently , we must aim in our official documents to foster a more ambitious deepening of the common European market , especially in services .
Also , the role of undertakings in creating a functioning Single Market should be acknowledged .
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before the vote , I should like to take a few moments to remind the House , the Council and the European Commission that two years ago , there was an earthquake in L 'Aquila in which 309 people died and over 1 650 people were injured .
Now I have raised the matter , I will send all MEPs today a video that was filmed in L 'Aquila on 13 January .
I urge all colleagues to look at it because the citizens of L 'Aquila are waiting for a strong response from Europe .
Thank you , Mrs Alfano .
I , too , during this morning 's debate , mentioned this terrible anniversary .
You were quite right to remind this packed House of it .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last night , there was another tragedy in the Mediterranean .
Immigrants from north Africa died trying to reach Italy and Europe .
There are 130 missing and 20 bodies have already been found .
When it comes to immigration , we must never forget that we are talking about men , women and children , not just numbers .
There must be no more reticence ; the Council and governments must act .
Civil and democratic Europe must show its sorrow and , for this reason , Mr President , I ask you to invite the House to observe a minute 's silence in memory of the victims of immigration .
( Applause )

Thank you , Mr Sassoli . - Of course , I will grant your request .
Before asking the House to observe a minute 's silence , to reflect on the memory of these victims , I would like to give the floor to Mr Tavares who has asked to speak on the same subject .
Mr President , we have received information that a boat from Libya carrying refugees has capsized in the Mediterranean .
We know that there are dead bodies and 150 people are missing .
Almost a year ago , this Parliament approved a codecision instrument providing for an emergency mechanism in order to resettle refugees who were under armed attack or in crisis situations , such as is the case with the civil war in Libya .
That instrument has now been sitting on the Council 's table for a year .
Last month , we addressed an oral question to the Council saying that this concerned people 's lives and was important .
And now , sadly , that goes without saying .
Following Mr Sassoli 's request , which I believe will be shared by everyone , we will now observe a minute 's silence in memory of those who died last night .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
( FR ) Mr President , 20 seconds just to make a voice of dissent heard in this chorus of political correctness .
You alone are responsible for these deaths on account of the false hopes you are creating across Europe and the world that we are ready to welcome all of those people .
They are entirely your responsibility .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I just wanted to ask how many more minutes ' silence we will have to observe before we get a common European policy on immigration .
( Applause )
This is not the time to open a debate on an issue we discussed just yesterday .
1 .
Draft amending budget No 1 / 2011 - Section III - Commission (
2 .
Mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund - Floods in 2010 in Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania (
3 .
EC-Comoros fisheries agreement (
4 .
Dispute settlement mechanism under the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an association between the EC and Jordan (
5 .
EU-Morocco agreement establishing a dispute settlement mechanism (
6 .
Dispute settlement mechanism under the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an Association between the EC and Egypt (
7 .
Participation of Ukraine in Union programmes (
8 .
Imports from Greenland of fishery products (
9 .
Granting and withdrawing international protection (
10 .
European statistics on tourism (
11 .
Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea (
12 .
Fisheries - transitional technical measures (
13 .
Estimates of revenue and expenditure for 2012 - Section I - Parliament (
Before the vote
Mr President , I would like to make a simple technical correction that does not alter this report in any way .
There is a transcription error in Article 400 on own revenue ; this article concerns proceeds from taxation on the salaries , wages and allowances of Members of the institutions , officials , other servants and recipients of pensions .
The figure given is 48 103 216 , whereas the correct figure is 63 103 216 .
This is merely a technical amendment or correction that does not alter the report in any way or have any other implication .
14 .
Authorisation and refusal of authorisation of certain health claims made on foods and referring to children 's development and health (
Before the vote
Mr President , MEPs have an important role to play in scrutinising decisions on health claims .
I have received many letters and emails of concern from parents , major health and consumer organisations , midwives , nurses and doctors ' organisations , as well as Unicef and the WHO .
Until there is real consensus in the scientific community about the validity of this claim , we must not allow it .
The evidence we currently have is not conclusive and no evidence exists to support the use of such a claim on follow-on formulas .
If , in the future , synthesised DHA is proven to be truly beneficial to babies , we should make it an essential ingredient in all formulas , and not allow it to be used as a marketing ploy by a specific brand .
I would urge you to support this resolution .
Mr President , I definitely do not want to reopen the debate , but we really should think twice about giving the floor to people who can put their personal opinion forward under the disguise of scientific evidence .
Let us just vote .
We have made up our minds .
( Applause )
15 .
European international investment policy (
16 .
Protection of Communities ' financial interests - fight against fraud (
17 .
Political parties at European level and rules regarding their funding (
18 .
Governance and partnership in the Single Market (
19 .
Single market for Europeans (
- Before the vote on Amendment 2
Mr President , on behalf of the ALDE Group , I wish to propose an oral amendment to Amendment 2 .
It takes the following words out of Amendment 2 : ' by providing public authorities with a ' tool-kit ' to evaluate the quality of such services ' .
20 .
Single market for enterprises and growth (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item on the agenda is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , the aim of the proposal is to establish a new protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Partnership Agreement in the fisheries sector between the European Community and the Union of the Comoros .
The proposed resolution will determine the fishing opportunities for European Union fishing vessels , depending on the surplus fish stocks available , and the financial contribution required in return for the access rights and the support for the fishery sector .
In principle , I welcome this agreement .
Controlled fishing is always better than uncontrolled fishing .
However , we must make proper use of this agreement and constantly assess its performance .
For me , the simple , naïve question is that even if there are currently surplus fish stocks , we must ensure that this situation remains unchanged in the years to come .
Mr President , reading our voting list today , I have the feeling that I am reading a long and expensive bill of fare .
Each of these items comes down to a reallocation of resources from European taxpayers either to some fishing fund , or the solidarity fund , or rescuing flood-stricken areas , or whatever it is .
I would like to focus on one particular abuse of this process , which is the use of Article 122 ( 2 ) to mobilise money for bail-outs of stricken economies , specifically that of Portugal .
This fund was designed for natural disasters such as earthquakes and floods .
It has been reinterpreted to mean an economy that has run out of money .
It is patently illegal .
Not only is it not provided for in the Treaties ; it is expressly forbidden under the ' no bail-out clause ' .
This Chamber is in plain violation of its own regulations .
In bailing out these countries , we are hurting them - because you do not help an indebted friend by pressing more loans on them - and , of course , we are hurting our own taxpayers as well as violating the law .
It is absurd that Ireland and Greece will be joining the bail-out of Portugal .
You cannot carry on forever getting deeper and deeper in debt .
The day of reckoning is coming .
Mr President , in yesterday 's votes , we discussed the issue of migration .
One of the issues that should have been discussed concerning migration is how do we make it less attractive for people to leave their own country , or more attractive to stay in their own country , and why do they seek to leave their country , often breaking family and other local emotional ties ?
One of the things we have to look at is the impact of our policies in the EU .
When we sign these fishing agreements - often with governments of countries and they benefit from this - do these agreements really benefit local fishermen ?
Surely we should be re-examining all these fisheries agreements , and instead of signing fisheries agreements , we should perhaps be increasing the fishing capacity of local fishermen to spread wealth and create more jobs locally so that people want to stay in their own countries rather than seek to leave .
If we do not think carefully about the implications of some of these agreements , we will see more demand for migration and will end up debating migration rather than the issues we are debating here .
( ES ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this agreement because Greenland 's exports of fishery products represent 82 % of their exports .
Eighty-seven per cent of those are sent to the European Union , mainly to Denmark , that is , 97 % .
There is disagreement with the Commission over the legal basis , but I share the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs , which unanimously adopted the application of Article 43 ( 2 ) , and Article 204 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the Sole Article of Protocol ( No 34 ) on Special Arrangements with Greenland .

The position is also supported by the European Parliament 's Legal Service .
Therefore , in accordance with the legislative process , it should be understood that this is the first reading in Parliament .
Finally , I appreciate the Commissioner 's position in accepting the legal basis and showing her willingness to facilitate an agreement with the Council and not to further delay such an important agreement .
Mr President , my group voted in favour of this report .
I take note that the discussion in Parliament on the issue of asylum seekers did not have the inflammatory tone frequently used in several EU Member States .
This is probably due to the fact that , contrary to widespread perceptions , the overall number of people claiming asylum in the west has dropped by more than 40 % over the past decade , according to data just released by the United Nations .
A total of 358 000 asylum applications were made in industrialised countries in 2010 , compared with 620 000 applications filed in 2001 .
The drop is mainly due to push factors in the areas of origin .
This means that the picture is much more encouraging than is usually thought .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , naturally , I wish to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur on this report which really signals a significant step forward in EU policies , in its invitation to the Commission to submit a proposal for a directive on the procedures to be adopted by Member States to recognise , and possibly revoke , international protection .
I believe that the events of recent days between the African and European coasts indicate that we need the ' asylum package ' - as it is to be called - to become a binding rule .
In particular , I think of the positive amendments that were approved ; for example , the whole question of greater safeguards with regard to minors , since I believe that children must not be detained under any circumstance ( which is exactly what has been happening in Lampedusa , where children have been treated in exactly the same way as adults , together with adults , often in totally unacceptable conditions ) .
It would have been better to have this directive in place before these dramatic events took place in Europe and Africa .
Another very important issue is that of vulnerable people and their issues , especially women , and problems relating to family matters and reunions .
Congratulations also to the rapporteur .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me say that perhaps , before making judgments about how children are treated in Lampedusa , Mr Costa should go there himself .
I have been to Lampedusa and have seen that all the children were treated according to Italian and , above all , international rules .
Now back to the subject which , as everyone has said , is very current .
I believe that all Member States should be obliged fully to respect the principle of non-refusal and the right to asylum .
Responsibility must , therefore , be shared , using the resources of the European Fund for Refugees and asking the European Office for strong support to implement the right of asylum , including provision for support in terms of border staff training and improving European asylum mechanisms .
( DA ) Mr President , the report that we have adopted today states that the Commission 's proposal is pragmatic .
I find it very difficult to see what is pragmatic about taking away the opportunity for people in the 27 Member States to decide for themselves the population makeup of their own countries .
Asylum policy and policy relating to foreigners are so closely linked to a country 's existence that it is appalling that the EU is starting to interfere in these matters .
It is also precisely why Denmark has retained its opt-out on justice and home affairs so that in the Danish Parliament , we have the chance to decide for ourselves on these matters and so that these are not issues which the European Parliament and the other EU institutions are to concern themselves with .
It is therefore shocking to see how the European Court of Justice is now trying to undermine the Danish justice and home affairs opt-out , and even more shocking is the fact that this Parliament can adopt a report - never mind that it is in contravention of my vote and that of the Danish People 's Party - without even dealing with this matter - the matter that entails removing people 's right to determine their own policy relating to foreigners and , in particular , in cheating and deceiving with regard to the promises that were originally given to a country like Denmark .
Mr President , I and my UKIP colleagues abstained on the amendments to the Guillaume report on granting and withdrawing international protection , but one should not take this as indifference .
This report is a development of the common immigration and asylum policy under the Lisbon Treaty .
I do not want the Lisbon Treaty , or a common immigration and asylum policy .
The peoples of Europe do not want a common immigration and asylum policy , and that is why they were denied a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
I abstained on the amendments because it would have involved endorsing existing EU law and a nit-picking exercise to decide which bits were worse than others .
I leave it to the quisling MEPs of the Conservative , Labour , Liberal Democratic and Green parties to haggle about the terms of surrender of their country .
I and my UKIP colleagues voted ' no ' to this report and ' no ' to a common immigration and asylum policy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I worked as shadow rapporteur on this dossier and so could not but vote in favour , together with my group .
I did so believing it to be a very useful tool for the development of a sector that will be a driving force for the European economy .
Industry is moving away from Europe ; agriculture suffers from serious deficiencies ; meanwhile , tourism is one area that can certainly offer prospects for employment , economic development and intelligent , inclusive and compatible growth .
To this end , the instrument we have approved today , which allows for more modern data gathering , processing , treatment and transmission than the previous situation , will surely give impetus to this activity .
This is why the ALDE Group and I have voted in favour .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since December 2009 , tourism has been recognised in the Treaty and so at last has a legal basis for development and support at European level .
Moreover , tourism represents a strong growth engine for Europe .
We have already noted that the tourism industry generates more than 5 % of GDP in the European Union , involving nearly two million small and medium-sized enterprises and contributes an employment rate that exceeds 12 % .
We need more studies and more comparable statistics , because these are useful for monitoring activities , making comparisons between Member States , showing how EU funds are used , helping develop best practice , and also for assessing and developing tourism programmes for those categories of people on low budgets .
( ES ) Mr President , with 40 % of all arrivals , the European Union continues to be the world 's number one tourist destination .
It is therefore an economic force for employment that also promotes the integration of rural areas .
However , tourism demand has changed in recent years .
That is why I supported the objective of creating a common framework for the systematic production of harmonised European statistics on supply and demand in Member States , and of adapting , as is necessary , the legal framework to reflect recent trends , such as same-day visits .
The systematic collection of information is a necessary tool for defining effective policies and facilitating decision making in the private sector .
I also supported the introduction of satellite accounts , because they would be better able to show the effects of tourism on the economy and on jobs , and would have enabled us to more accurately define policies for the future .
( GA ) Mr President , the tourism industry has been very important for Europe and will be more important in the future , especially if we are to create jobs , particularly in remote and rural areas .
However , it must be based on planning , especially planning based on the statistics we have .
So if we want to have proper planning and develop tourism , it has to be based on statistics that show trends regarding rented accommodation , one-day tourists , etc .
Based on that we can develop tourism , particularly to end seasonality , to encourage an ageing population to holiday more and , indeed , also to encourage young people to do so .
Any football team now has at least one statistician and bases its plans on that , and that applies also to the tourist industry .
( GA ) I am pleased to vote for this report .

( ES ) Mr President , Regulation ( EC ) No 1288 / 2009 extends the transitional technical measures so that they can be applied until the adoption of permanent measures .
It is preferable for everyone if these measures are adopted definitively and as quickly as possible .
Nevertheless , in view of the forthcoming reform of the common fisheries policy , the measures need to be adopted after a new legislative framework is in place .
That new framework is planned for 2013 , and it is therefore necessary to extend the validity of the transitional technical measures until 31 December 2012 , bearing in mind that the current regulation will cease to be in force in 2011 .
That is why I voted in favour of this initiative .
Mr President , I voted for the Grelier report but I voted against my group on four amendments - amendment 4 , amendment 5CP , amendment 6 and amendment 3 .
Amendment 4 is an amendment by my colleague , Pat the Cope Gallagher , to allow the use of tangle nets , which Irish fishermen use inshore .
Otherwise , we risk forcing the fishermen further out to sea in the North Atlantic , which is not practical and is very unsafe .
A 50 metre boat on the Atlantic is very different to a 50 metre boat in the Mediterranean .
I voted for amendment 5CP in relation to mesh sizes .
Again , this causes a major problem for our own fishermen on the west coast who are working in mixed fisheries with megrim , monkfish and hake .
This will not have adverse impacts on cod stocks , as there is very little low bycatch of cod at present .
I also voted for amendment 6 by Mr Struan Stevenson in relation to doing away with the scandalous business of the discarding of haddock .
Last , and by no means least , I supported amendment 3 , which was proposed by my Portuguese colleague , Mrs Patrão Neves , which supports Portuguese fishermen .
I have no problem with that .

( ES ) Mr President , I made a mistake in my previous speech : I spoke about the wrong subject because of a translation problem , so I will reverse my speeches and say now what I should have read out before .
I voted in favour of the financial measures because it was necessary to amend the regulation in order to adapt it to current demands and to the functioning of the Union .
I would also emphasise that the regulation envisages expanding the list of organisations eligible for financial aid and updating the list of advisory bodies .
It also guarantees uniform conditions for implementing measures concerning control and enforcement , and for the expenditure incurred by Member States in implementing the control system and enforcement applicable to the common fisheries policy , and in the area of the collection , management and use of basic data .
The financial measures also include the economic aspects of fisheries and aquaculture and a reference to data collection relating to environmental measures .
That is why I voted in favour of the initiative .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report , but we have to set an example and be very meticulous , especially as far as budgetary discipline is concerned .
I would like to say why I voted against the group with regard to Amendment 8 , which the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament had tabled .
In it , the rapporteur mentions the use of unspent appropriations for construction projects .
This has been a custom here for many years now , but financing construction projects in this way is not open or transparent .
We have to state what construction projects we have right at the stage when the budget is being planned , and we should not engage in a transfer of appropriations in this way , which is contrary to budgetary discipline .
That is why on this point , I voted against the group 's proposal on behalf of the S & D Group regarding Amendment 8 .

( DA ) Mr President , I voted against this budget report , but I would actually like to thank the many fellow Members - a few too many , unfortunately - who voted in favour , because it gave a wonderful picture of the shift in the perception of reality here in the European Parliament and here in the EU 's institutions in relation to the outside world where the people who we are actually creating regulations for are to be found .
Despite the fact that we have asked the Member States and other institutions to make cuts , we have doubled the expenditure in a number of areas for the European Parliament itself and for the EU institutions in general .
This has happened , for example , by introducing the intention now to build a completely new museum for glorifying European history and the European institutions , etc .
I believe that an incredible number of people out there in the Member States , where they are experiencing cuts at national level , are wondering how their representatives in the European Parliament can so casually play fast and loose with money , even in the middle of a financial crisis .
( ES ) Mr President , if you do not mind , I would like to mention something before I finish .
In my previous point I said , ' because of a translation problem ' , not meaning the excellent translators here , but an error I made when reading the text .
I am the one who made the translation error , and I wanted to make that clear because the translators always seem to get the blame .
Indeed , the interpreters merit our appreciation for the excellent work they do both in the House and in the Committees .
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to say a few words about this budget , revenue and expenditure .
We must definitely ensure in this economic situation and , furthermore , here in the European Parliament , that expenditure is kept under control .
For that reason , I voted differently from what had been recommended with regard to some aspects of the matter .
In my view , we should be prepared to cut down on travel costs , for example , but if we cut the number of flights , the airline tickets of Members of the European Parliament should be exchangeable .
Sometimes , the problem is that these cheap airline tickets cannot be exchanged .
I myself have to take several flights to get here ; for example , to get to Strasbourg , you have to take three different flights .
It is therefore important that airline tickets should be exchangeable .
Occasionally , proposals to make savings such as these can end up costing more , simply because there is no flexibility with them .
We have to cut costs , however ; that is absolutely clear .
Some costs are to be seen as investments , and I think that this European House may be a good investment and one which , in the future , will produce added value , even in economic terms , for the European Union and its institutions .
Mr President , it is spend , spend , spend , isn 't it ?
We keep hearing about the 500 million citizens in this Chamber , but this Chamber separates itself from them as much as possible .
Amendment 15 insisted that the salaries and allowances of MEPs should not be updated in 2012 to set an example , but 391 of our colleagues voted against it because they obviously do not care about the average EU citizen , do they ?
The average EU wage is EUR 368 a week , but some of our colleagues - 60 to 70 of our colleagues - continually sign in on a Friday here in Strasbourg , when there is no business , to claim EUR 304 .
What example is that giving ?
Another waste of money : how many billions is this House of History going to cost , to sell propaganda and tell how the European Union ' saved the world ' ?
( SK ) Mr President , the consolidation of democracy in the EU requires a constant effort towards building a fair and transparent environment both for the running and the funding of political parties at the European level .
EU citizens should be more involved in political life at the EU level , and it is therefore necessary to create favourable motivational conditions for the operation of political parties .
This is in order to avoid situations where , for example , less than 20 % of registered voters participate in European Parliament elections , as happened in my own country .
I agree with the idea that these political parties should have a common and single legal statute , as well as their own legal personality based directly on the laws and treaties of the EU .
As far as the funding system is concerned , transparency forms an inseparable part of the implementation of values , and the first priority must therefore be to have unambiguous funding conditions .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Article 325 obliges the Commission and Member States to protect the financial interests of the European Union and to combat fraud in areas where this responsibility is shared between the Union and the Member States .
According to Article 325 ( 5 ) , the Commission , in cooperation with the Member States , shall submit to the European Parliament and the Council an annual report on measures taken for the implementation of this Article .
I agree that we need to quantify in greater detail the recovery levels of funds unduly paid to the EU Member States by gathering specific data .
Another important point , rightly highlighted by Mrs Ivan in her report , is the use of better investigative methods regarding fraud carried out by Member States .
In this way , we can standardise counter measures throughout the European Union and determine whether similar types of fraud have been committed in other countries .
This is why I have supported this report .
Mr President , I voted against Amendment 1 , which stresses the need for zero tolerance for error .
I think it is extremely important to distinguish between fraud and error .
Yes , there should be zero tolerance for fraud , and indeed criminal prosecution , but in many cases , the error is inadvertent .
While we need to uncover all errors and ensure the recovery of such monies , I cannot agree with zero tolerance for one very simple reason . This is that I have worked with many community groups , voluntary groups , leader companies and partnership companies , and seen the level of sheer and utter frustration at the myriad of rules , the revision of the rules half-way or three-quarters of the way through the programme and the different interpretation of rules at local , at regional , at national and at European level - with any infringement considered an error .
Therefore , while we do need to remain vigilant about fraud , we also need to simply , simplify and simplify again the rules .
( FI ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this proposal , which is a very worthy one , as it concerns whether we should fund parties using taxpayers ' money .
In a case such as this , there obviously need to be clear rules that are the same for everyone .
In my opinion , the parties must also have their own system of fund raising , even if it is on a small scale .
In Amendment 2 , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament suggested that this share of selffunding should be just 5 % .
I think that it should be at least 10 % .
That is a very small amount when we consider that this is a matter of taxpayers ' money , and we should be very meticulous in these matters .

( PL ) Mr President , the Giannakou report paves the way to fulfilment of the provisions of Article 10 ( 4 ) of the Treaty on European Union and Article 244 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
Parliament and the Council should work together to define the status of a party at European level and their foundations , and should establish rules for funding both parties and foundations .
However , it is necessary to call attention to the provisions of paragraphs 10 and 11 of the report , which concern the future of transnational lists in elections to Parliament .
It is , admittedly , only a proposal for the future , but at the present time , it does not have the approval of the citizens .
This concerns , in particular , Member States which have had experience of national lists and have abolished them .
Another important matter is the timing of these proposals - the crisis and the proposed savings are also a cause of reluctance to increasing the size of European institutions .
From our point of view , I think a more important matter is the possibility of increasing the size of the European Parliament in connection with enlargement of the European Union by the accession of new Member States rather than the possibility of increasing its size on the basis of new lists .
( DA ) Mr President , I , too , would like to see clear rules for the European parties , but I must essentially question what the point of the European parties actually is .
The report states that they will create a greater understanding among European citizens for the EU 's institutions and cooperation across borders .
However , what we actually see is that , as the European parties grow larger , as more money is continually used both within the parties and in the funds and all manner of other institutions relating to these , in line with these things , the European people 's support for and understanding of the EU 's institutions falls .
The latest Eurobarometer survey showed support for the EU among the European people to be at an all-time low , so this is not working .
I would therefore ask the fundamental question of whether there really is any point continuing to waste billions of euro on these European parties .
I do not believe that there is , and therefore I voted against this report .
Mr President , I voted against this report .
You can keep your 30 pieces of silver .
I will not be joining any pan-European party .
I will not be selling out my principles as some in this Chamber are willing to do .
It is not fair that the public , once again , have to use their resources to fund politicians .
Politicians should be privately funded through donations , etc . , and that should be heavily regulated .
This Chamber found out only recently how politicians do need to be regulated , but the funding of political parties for a European ideal can never be right .
I will never join a pan-European party .
I will stand up for my principles and to hell with the lot of you .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have voted on three own-initiative reports on the Single Market Act , which is an important mechanism for growth in the European economy , and obviously for the creation of jobs , with concrete and direct results both for European citizens and for small and medium-sized enterprises .
There are many proposals made by the European Commission which tend towards the integration and liberalisation of European markets , resulting in measures to support small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular , to have an effect on innovation and the protection of creativity , improving the efficiency and sustainability of both material and non-material networks and infrastructure .
I hope that we will confront some obstacles in this structural context of support to small and medium-sized enterprises , such as the diversity of national laws , including rules and tax systems that fragment the market resulting in higher compliance costs for businesses to shoulder .
Mr President , today , we have voted on the three Single Market Act reports and their key priorities ; I hope the Commission and Council have taken note of these .
We need to make sure that we deliver on this for all citizens in order to allow the European economy to grow , provide jobs and compete globally .
We need to make sure that EU legislation is implemented across the board to reduce the barriers to trade , but also that we do not make EU legislation that increases the burden on our businesses .
( FI ) Mr President , this was a very important report for taking the Single Market forward .
When we talk of consumer protection , however , Amendment 3 was important in that connection .
It dealt with the fact that minimum harmonisation in the area of consumer legislation must be given priority over complete harmonisation .
I voted in favour of this amendment and against the recommendations of my group , because I believe that levels of consumer protection in my country , for example , are extremely high .
If we now quickly move to a position where we have fully harmonised consumer protection throughout the EU , I know that standards in my country will fall .
That is why I think that we can approach this harmonised standard of consumer protection only by first establishing certain minimum standards , and then , on that basis , taking the path to a completely harmonised standard .
( SK ) Mr President , the volume of the EU internal market in goods represents 17 % of the global market in goods .
The volume of the EU internal market in services represents 28 % of the global trade in services .
If this mass is set in motion in the right direction , it should achieve results in the form of economic growth based on the dynamic of our own resources .
This will hold true , however , only on the assumption that the implementation of the proposed measures , which I supported , results in the elimination of bottlenecks in the movement of people , capital , goods and services between the individual countries of the Union , increasing the availability and reliability of loans and banking services , as well as Internet commerce .
It will hold true only if a more functional Single Market unlocks new potential for the implementation of products and activities originating from the EU , and on the markets of the EU .
If that happens , a 4 % contribution to economic growth over the coming decades might not be unrealistic .
( DA ) Mr President , I share the view that the Single Market is essentially a good idea and that better governance of the Single Market is sensible and in the interest of consumers .
However , I am surprised that the six amendments I tabled for this report were voted against by such an overwhelming majority .
What does it boil down to in essence ?
Well , it came down to the fact that we should apply minimum harmonisation instead of total harmonisation and thereby ensure that the countries that already have good regulations for consumers are not forced to lower their level of consumer protection .
It was also about the totally unique labour market model that we know from the Nordic countries , where it is not legislators but the social partners who decide on wage conditions and conditions for the labour market , the fact that it is they who set the rules and that we should retain and protect the Nordic labour model rather than undermine it ; two completely harmless proposals that I am convinced would receive a significant majority in a vote amongst European citizens are voted down in this House .
This reveals the shift in the perception of reality that is characteristic of the Members here in the European Parliament .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Single Market is a valuable tool for economic recovery in the European Union , particularly for the creation of new jobs .
The reports regarding the Act for the Single Market are , generally speaking , contributions made by the European Parliament in the consultation process begun by the Commission with its announcement ' Towards a Single Market Act .
Fifty Proposals for improving our work , enterprises and dealings together for a highly competitive social market economy ' .
I think we should have put more emphasis on the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises , the fight against counterfeiting and piracy , and the stimulation of innovation and competitiveness by the lifting of bureaucratic , administrative and regulatory burdens .
However , I agree with the general structure of the report and , in particular , with the measures mentioned which aim to strengthen e-commerce and the simplification of the procurement system .
For this reason , I voted in favour of this report .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe it represents a further step forward towards the creation of a well-functioning , integrated single European market .
Today , Europe is one of the major economies of the world but its potential is still huge , especially with regard to economic and employment growth .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are the engine and the main players in the current economic recovery .
Europe needs to offer them greater protection , facilitating their access to credit , reducing bureaucracy and promoting the development of electronic commerce .
Only in this way will we be able to create a social economy based on growth , competitiveness and sustainability .
Giving the EU an efficient and innovative Single Market in today 's globalised world means making it the undisputed protagonist of the global economic scene .
( FR ) Mr President , I wanted to clarify why we voted in favour of this Single Market Act .
I think it is a step forward .
Parliament managed to find the right compromises that do not flush the text of its content but , instead , put real pressure on those who , in the Commission , want the Single Market to continue to adopt a purely free market approach , without including social issues , tax issues or environmental issues .
I also merely wanted to clarify that paragraph 54 , which deals with public services , services of general interest , is problematic , and we therefore voted against part of this paragraph , which continues to call , ideologically but in veiled terms , for further liberalisation .
We argue instead in favour of European public services and securing the European framework , leaving each Member State the option to continue organising public services as they wish , especially at territorial level .
( PL ) Mr President , a Single Market without exclusions , either of citizens or of businesses - that , in a word , is how I could describe the main thrust of today 's debate on the now endorsed package of reports on the Single Market Act .
It is with great interest , and also with pleasure , that I would like to emphasise the proposals which are intended to make it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises in particular to operate .
It is very important for SMEs to have access to public procurement procedures .
The announcement that these procedures are to be simplified , and , in particular , that the financial barriers in public procurement which exclude SMPs are to be reduced , and also that specific features of the local market are to be taken into account in procurement , is deserving of particular support .
Similarly , it should be recognised that SMEs expect help in gaining access to the market , they expect administrative measures which will make it easier for them to operate and they also expect a solution in the area of patents .
It is with great interest that I , personally , await the presentation announced by Mr Barnier of the 12 levers for stimulating the Single Market .
Greatly encouraging is the announcement that the period in which it will be possible to evaluate innovative solutions in particular which are related to these levers will also be relatively short .
Written explanations of vote
I am in favour of this report , since I agree with the amount recommended for repairing the damage caused by flooding in the countries of Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania , totalling EUR 182 388 893 .
I agreed with this report which approves without amendment the Council 's position on Draft amending budget 1 / 2011 .
This Draft amending budget aims at mobilising the EU Solidarity Fund for an amount of EUR 182.4 million in commitment and payment appropriations in order to mitigate the effects of flooding resulting from heavy rainfalls in Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania .
I believe that in general , the EU Solidarity Fund should be mobilised as swiftly as possible following a natural catastrophe , and that applications for financial assistance should be dealt with in an effective and fast-acting manner , so that it is possible to provide urgent financial assistance to countries that have suffered natural disasters .
I supported the report because the Member States which were affected by the flooding caused by torrential rain expect the sum of EUR 182.4 million to be included .
These are Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that it should be possible to mobilise the contributions from the Solidarity Fund much more quickly and efficiently than happens at present .
I agree with the adjusted amount for mobilisation from the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) , given that in several countries , namely Poland , Slovakia , Hungary and Romania , the direct damage caused by natural disasters exceeds the normal threshold of 0.6 % of Gross National Income required for mobilising the EUSF .
I also consider it important that the EUSF should be mobilised as swiftly as possible following a natural disaster , and that all related organisational , legislative and executive procedures should be dealt with quickly and efficiently .
I therefore agree with the Council 's common position on the Draft amending budget of the European Union for the financial year 2011 .
The Commission proposes to amend the Commission budget for 2011 so as to cater for the need to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund to the sum of EUR 182.4 million in commitment and payment appropriations in order to mitigate the effects of flooding resulting from heavy rainfall in Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania .
This proposal should be approved by Parliament on the terms proposed by the rapporteur .
The report under discussion deals with the Council 's position on Draft amending budget No 1 / 2011 of the European Union for the current year .
The Commission is empowered to present draft amending budgets whenever there are ' unavoidable , exceptional or unforeseen circumstances ' .
Certain EU Member States have suffered natural disasters that have destroyed various infrastructures , the damage amounting to some EUR 5.5 billion and exceeding the threshold of 0.6 % of Gross National Income in some cases .
This situation constitutes justification and grounds for mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) , the objective of which is solely to repair infrastructure .
Since existing budget appropriations are insufficient to cover the applications , I agree with this amending budget - the first proposal for mobilisation of the EUSF presented by the Commission - which proposes a reinforcement of EUR 182 388 893 in commitment and payment appropriations .
This amending budget aims to respond to the request for mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) to repair the damage caused by disasters that affected five Member States as well as Croatia in May and June 2010 .
These were ' unavoidable , exceptional or unforeseen circumstances ' , as defined in the Financial Regulation , and therefore , in our view , this procedure is both justified and necessary .
The amount mobilised in support of these countries - EUR 182.4 million - represents only about 3 % of the total damage , which is estimated at about EUR 5 512.7 million .
The Member States of the EU have been hard hit by a considerable number of disasters in recent years .
In the first six years of the EUSF , the Commission received 62 requests for financial support from 21 different countries .
About a third of these qualified as ' major natural disasters ' , as do four of the cases that we are considering here today .
The EUSF is an important instrument for helping to remedy the almost always considerable and often long-lasting impact of disasters on people , the environment and the economy .
However , there must also be a corresponding commitment to disaster prevention , putting into practice the recommendations recently approved by Parliament to that effect .
This is a report on the Draft amending budget that aims to respond to the request for mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) to repair the damage caused by disasters that affected five Member States , as well as Croatia , in May and June 2010 .
These were ' unavoidable , exceptional or unforeseen circumstances ' , as defined in the Financial Regulation , and therefore , in our view , this procedure is both justified and necessary .
The amount mobilised in support of these countries - EUR 182.4 million - represents only about 3 % of the total damage , which is estimated at about EUR 5 512.7 million .


The Member States of the EU have been hard hit by a considerable number of disasters in recent years .
In the first six years of the EUSF , the Commission received 62 requests for financial support from 21 different countries .
About a third of these qualified as ' major natural disasters ' , as do four of the cases that we are considering here today .
The EUSF is an important instrument for helping to remedy the almost always considerable and often long-lasting impact of disasters on people , the environment and the economy .
A commitment to prevention is also important .
I agreed with the report and the rapporteur 's proposal to accept without amendment the Council 's position on Draft amending budget 1 / 2011 , because financial assistance to these countries , i.e. Poland , the Czech Republic , Slovakia , Hungary , Croatia and Romania , has to be delivered and cannot be delayed further .
in writing . - I voted for this Commission proposal for mobilisation of the EUSF which is based on point 26 of the IIA of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management that allows for such mobilisation within an annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
The conditions of eligibility to the Fund are detailed in Council Regulation No 2012 / 2002 establishing the EUSF .
It should be recalled that the objective of the Fund is to repair infrastructure and act as a refinancing tool , and not to compensate private damages .
This proposal for mobilisation of the EUSF is the first to be presented by the Commission for the year 2011 .
This Draft amending budget makes sense , considering the purpose of the funds mobilised through the Solidarity Fund to address the effects of the landslides and severe flooding resulting from heavy rainfall in Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania .
After verifying that the requests meet the eligibility criteria of Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 , the Commission proposed the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund for the sum of EUR 182.4 million in order to deal with the events in those countries .
However , I would like to highlight the delay in the mobilisation of this type of support .
The procedure needs to be made less bureaucratic and more streamlined in order to respond to future disaster situations in a timely manner .

in writing . - Taking into account the fact that Draft amending budget No 1 / 2011 to the general budget 2011 aims at mobilising the EU Solidarity Fund for an amount of EUR 182.4 million in commitment and payment appropriations in order to mitigate the effects of flooding resulting from heavy rainfall in Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania , I voted ' for ' .
Natural disasters are no longer a rarity in Europe .
The most recent events , such as the floods in 2010 in Poland , Slovakia , Romania , the Czech Republic and Hungary , show that the Solidarity Fund is essential .
This fund is not used to compensate private individuals for damage to property , but primarily to rebuild infrastructure .
Therefore , it can be regarded as an appropriate refinancing instrument .
In particular , in countries such as Poland , Slovakia , Hungary and Romania , there have been large-scale disasters and the direct damages exceed the usual threshold of 0.6 % of Gross National Income .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of this proposal .

This report refers to Draft amending budget No 1 / 2011 to the general budget for 2011 , the aim of which is to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund to the sum of EUR 182.4 million in commitment and payment appropriations in order to mitigate the effects of flooding resulting from heavy rainfall in Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania .
The only purpose of Draft amending budget No 1 / 2011 is to formally incorporate this budgetary amendment into the budget for 2011 .
The reasons given fully justify this amending budget , and I therefore voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of this Draft amending budget , the aim of which is to respond to the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund to the sum of EUR 182.4 million in commitment and payment appropriations in order to mitigate the effects of flooding resulting from heavy rainfall in Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania .
in writing . - We have abstained .
The report concerns a transfer in payments for mobilising the EU Solidarity Fund for floods in 2011 in Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania .
We agree with the urgent need to mobilise the funds , but not with the proposed financing method ( via a ' negative reserve ' ) .
I am in favour of this report , which aims to provide EU aid from the European Union Solidarity Fund for Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania , following the flooding in May and June 2010 that affected these areas and their populations .
The EU must continue to be an organisation that shows solidarity .
I agreed with this report on allocating financial assistance from the European Union Solidarity Fund to Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania .
The interinstitutional agreement allows a mobilisation within an annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
I believe that in general , the EU Solidarity Fund should be mobilised as swiftly as possible following a natural catastrophe , and that applications for financial assistance should be dealt with in an effective and fast-acting manner , so that it is possible to provide urgent financial assistance to countries that have suffered natural catastrophes .
The aim of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) is to provide swift , effective and flexible assistance to the population of a Member State , or a country negotiating accession , in the event of a major natural disaster .
This fund supplements the Member States ' public funds in emergency situations , specifically for urgent infrastructure repairs , temporary shelter and emergency services to cater for the people 's immediate needs , as well as clearing up in the areas affected by the disaster .
Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania were affected by torrential rains in 2010 , which caused serious flooding resulting in huge losses in those countries .
Following the disasters , the countries in question requested assistance from the EUSF .
Since the eligibility criteria laid down in the relevant regulation were met , mobilisation of the EUSF was approved with a view to mitigating the pain , suffering and losses of the people affected by the abovementioned disasters .
For the above reasons , I supported this report .
The floods which hit the countries in the east of the European Union last year caused huge material damage in practically every region .
Many of them continue to struggle with the flood 's tragic effects .
Many people are still waiting for the financial assistance promised by the authorities .
The serious damage primarily concerns agriculture , infrastructure , the transport network and cultural heritage sites .
Many people have suffered , often losing everything they owned .
In Poland alone , direct losses have been estimated at nearly EUR 3 billion .
This , therefore , significantly exceeds the threshold for mobilising the Solidarity Fund .
A similar situation exists in the case of the other countries which are applying for support from the fund .
Finding the European funds foreseen in the interinstitutional agreement will bring significant relief to the regions worst affected by the catastrophe by allowing work to be carried out to mitigate the effects of the natural disaster .
I am strongly in favour of mobilising the Solidarity Fund .
I welcome the decision of the European Parliament to release funds from the EU Solidarity Fund for the Central European states affected by last year 's floods .
In the case of the Czech Republic , there is a sum of CZK 125 million to cover some of the damages caused by the floods in Northern Moravia last May and June .
As the overall level of damage was estimated at CZK 5 billion , which represents less than 0.6 % of Czech GDP , it did not constitute a ' serious natural disaster ' under European law , in the case of which assistance from the Solidarity Fund is virtually assured .
It was therefore necessary to request an exemption for the Czech Republic , based on the fact that our land was affected by the same natural disaster as neighbouring Poland , where the consequences were more destructive .
In the original draft resolution of the European Parliament , only Poland was mentioned as an affected country , and it was only after I pointed out that the floods had also affected other states that its scope was extended to the entire region of Central Europe .
I am pleased that the Czech Government , after its initial laxity and hesitation , swung into action and managed , within the set deadline , to submit an application for financial assistance from the Solidarity Fund , which will now undoubtedly prove very useful .
In light of the significant damage caused by the major natural disasters that have occurred , particularly with regard to private property , transport networks and cultural heritage sites , and also since the estimated total direct damage in all these countries exceeds the normal threshold for mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund , which stands at 0.6 % of Gross National Income , I agree with the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund in favour of Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania .
I voted in favour of the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund in favour of Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania following the severe flooding that affected these countries in May and June 2010 .
I should like to reiterate that the Council must urgently continue to revise the new Solidarity Fund regulation approved by Parliament , so as to make it swifter and more effective .
Mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund in favour of Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania is justified in view of the heavy rain and flooding that affected these countries and the serious damage which resulted .
The support that this decision received from a large majority in the relevant parliamentary committee shows the breadth of support that it enjoys .
I regret the suffering that people have endured , and I hope that mobilisation of the fund will mitigate it and help provide swifter and more effective reconstruction in the worst-affected areas .
In May and June 2010 , Central and Eastern Europe was lashed by a severe storm which caused enormous damage in certain Member States , particularly through the destruction of public infrastructure , farms , road and rail networks , and public and private assets .
Flooding in Poland affected almost the whole country , causing damage exceeding 0.85 % of Gross National Income ( GNI ) ; in Slovakia , the storm left some areas under water , caused landslides and flooding , and led to damage in the order of 0.89 % of GNI ; in Hungary , the damage amounts to 0.73 % of GNI ; in Romania , it is estimated at over EUR 875 million , or 0.67 % of GNI ; in Croatia , it exceeds EUR 153 million ( 0.6 % of GNI ) ; and in the Czech Republic , the amount is EUR 204 million ( 0.6 % of GNI ) .

This situation justifies the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund and has led to the approval of the first amending budget for 2011 .
Thus , since it is covered by the Draft amending budget that has already been approved , and in view of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development , I agree with the rapporteur 's position on the mobilisation of EUR 182 388 893 to help with the repair of public infrastructure damaged by the storms in the abovementioned Member States .
The report endorses the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) to assist six countries : Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania .
These countries were affected by torrential rainfall , in some cases , without precedent , extensive flooding , landslips and mudslides .
In four countries - Poland , Slovakia , Hungary and Romania - the disasters qualify as ' major natural disasters ' according to the definition given in the EUSF Regulation ; in other words , the damage is estimated to exceed 0.6 % of their Gross National Incomes .
We consider the mobilisation of this support to be important and necessary , and we therefore voted in favour of the report .
Once again , we must draw attention to the excessive delays between the occurrence of the disaster , the decision to mobilise the EUSF and the actual delivery of EU support to the Member States and regions affected .
In this case , the disasters occurred in May and June 2010 .
Parliament has only just approved mobilisation of the EUSF , almost a year later .
Now , other procedural requirements will delay the money 's arrival at its destination even more .
That is why we have been advocating the need to adapt the rules for mobilising this fund , so as to make its mobilisation more flexible and timely .
We voted in favour of this report , which endorses the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund ( EUSF ) to assist six countries : Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania .
These countries were affected by torrential rainfall , in some cases , without precedent , extensive flooding , landslips and mudslides .
In four countries - Poland , Slovakia , Hungary and Romania - the disasters qualify as ' major natural disasters ' according to the definition given in the EUSF Regulation ; in other words , the damage is estimated to exceed 0.6 % of their Gross National Incomes .
We consider the mobilisation of this support to be important and necessary , and we therefore voted in favour of the report .
We must , however , draw attention to the excessive delays between the occurrence of the disaster , the decision to mobilise the EUSF and the actual delivery of EU support to the Member States and regions affected .
It should be noted that the disasters occurred in May and June 2010 .
Parliament has only just approved mobilisation of the EUSF , almost a year later .
Now , other procedural requirements will delay the money 's arrival at its destination even more .
That is why we advocate the need to adapt the rules for mobilising this fund , so as to make its mobilisation more flexible and timely .
The floods of 2010 affected extensive areas across several Central European countries .
The natural disaster mainly affected Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania .
The people living in these areas cannot cope with the consequences of the floods on their own .
They cannot resolve the consequences from their own resources , because the budgets of the individual states are burdened with the economic and financial crisis .
However , the Commission is proposing to mobilise the EU 's Solidarity Fund for the benefit of the affected countries .
All of the countries mentioned requested assistance from the fund after they were struck and paralysed , in the spring and summer months of last year , by landslides , flood waves and almost continuous rainfall .
The natural elements consequently did extensive damage in the affected areas to both public and private infrastructure , as well as road and rail transport , while agriculture was also affected .
There was also serious damage to property , residential buildings and cultural monuments .
It is therefore appropriate to provide the affected European states with the necessary financial assistance , so that they can tackle the consequences of the natural disaster and be able to return to normal life as soon as possible .
I agreed with this document , because the Commission has informed Parliament in its proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund ( COM ( 2011 ) 0010 ) that , on the basis of applications for assistance by Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Romania and candidate country Croatia relating to the flooding disasters of May , June and July 2010 , it proposes the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund .
In order to avoid undue delay in approving this measure , which the Committee on Budgets intends to adopt as soon as possible , it should be noted that the Committee on Regional Development has no objection to the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund to provide the sum of EUR 182 388 893 to the countries concerned as proposed by the Commission , and in accordance with the rules laid down in the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 and in Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 .
The Solidarity Fund is an instrument of paramount importance to the EU .
Apart from its financial impact , it also conveys an expression of European solidarity .
However , the Council has just shown us that this solidarity is starting steadily to diminish .
At the moment , in order to help citizens who have already suffered so much following last year 's floods , the Council is forcing us to slash funds from very important programmes .
Furthermore , if we look at which Member States are currently blocking in Council the notion of ' new money ' to cover the fund 's needs , we will notice that it is those which , in their turn , have benefited from receiving large sums of money in previous years .
The Union is based on the concept of solidarity .
Without it , we could not have shaped the Europe we have today , nor will we be able to shape the Europe of tomorrow .
In contrast to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , I consider the Solidarity Fund , the resources of which are intended for covering damage caused by natural disasters , as a genuine manifestation of European solidarity .
I very much appreciate the fact that this report also proposes the allocation of resources to cover flood damage to public property in the Czech Republic .
This is specifically in Northern Moravia , which was affected in May last year by the same flood wave that caused damage throughout the region of Central Europe .
I appreciate the fact that the Czech Republic has obtained resources from the Solidarity Fund to cover damages all the more for the fact that the surrounding countries were affected by the flood wave more than the Czech Republic .
Compensation for the Czech Republic was nonetheless not forgotten within the framework of European solidarity .
I would also like to thank Mr Březina and Mr Tošenovský , with whom I successfully pushed for the inclusion of the Czech Republic in the group of countries to receive compensation from the Solidarity Fund in connection with this flood wave .
Special thanks are also due to the President of Parliament , Mr Buzek , for visiting the affected areas of Moravia together with us , and personally backing support for the Czech Republic .
The year 2010 was marked by disastrous flooding in many countries of Europe , with Poland suffering two floods .
We should welcome the expressions of solidarity of the European Union in mitigating the effects of the flooding and the action taken to relieve the terrible plight of those affected - people who have lost a large part and , in many cases , all of their material possessions , suffered damage to their health and even lost their loved ones .
As part of support for the idea of solidarity in times of need and suffering , reflection is needed on how to prevent floods .
The way to do this is to undertake water management : regulation of rivers , construction of reservoirs , etc .
We should direct much more of the money allocated to environmental purposes in the Cohesion Fund to the purpose of flood prevention .
In endorsing the Böge report , I call for support for the proposal for greater funds in the budget after 2013 .
I am very pleased that such constructive decisions are made in the European Parliament .
The Members who come from regions affected by the floods tried very hard for Union assistance to be granted and , as we know , the route to this success has not been easy .
The provision of EUR 182.4 million as compensation for the effects of last year 's floods is extremely important , not only for the regions affected by the natural disaster , but also for the people who live there .
Poland and the Podkarpacie region is an area which has particularly suffered as a result of the disaster , and it is my hope that the financial resources made available for the reconstruction of infrastructure will be used effectively .
Today 's decision of Parliament is final and begins the procedure for the provision of EU money , and this is why I voted in favour of the resolution on mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund - floods in 2010 in Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania .
in writing . - I support this Commission proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund .
On the basis of applications for assistance by Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Romania and candidate country Croatia relating to the flooding disasters of May , June and July 2010 , it proposes the application of the EU Solidarity Fund .
I would like to express my satisfaction at today 's vote in favour of approving mobilisation of the European Solidarity Fund in order to provide aid to Poland , Slovakia , Czech Republic , Hungary , Romania and Croatia for the floods there last year .
Although there remains disagreement between Parliament and the Council on the technical procedure for the procurement of EUR 182.4 million needed to compensate Member States for damages , Europe has once again demonstrated its solidarity with its citizens .
I agree with the use of the 2010 budget surplus to cover the ' negative reserves ' used to find the necessary funds .
Indeed , this reserve is an ' accounting ' method which should be used for any emergency contingencies that may arise during the current financial year .
Solidarity is the main feature of the European Union .
Based on this solidarity , I consider timely and necessary the report on the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund for the floods which affected Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania in 2010 .
This solidarity will be all the more necessary as climate change continues to trigger disasters throughout the whole of Europe .
In this respect , strategies need to be devised which will also help reduce the level of greenhouse gas emissions .
The European Union 's efforts must be channelled towards consolidating the actions taken by Member States to prevent and reduce the impact of major floods in Europe , which have become increasingly frequent .
One priority on this point must be for Member States to assess the activities which raise the risk of flooding and increase the speed of response , mobility and flexibility of the interventions made .
Last but not least , I would like to stress how important it is for citizens to be informed about and participate in the actions and plans for flood management .
This solidarity instrument has been used in the past - specifically in my country , with the support sent to Madeira following the heavy rains there in February 2010 - and now it makes every sense to mobilise it in an attempt to mitigate the effects that natural disasters always have on the populations of the countries they affect .
Last year 's intense rainfalls resulted in a disastrous situation in Central European countries .
Overflowing rivers flooded streets and homes .
People became destitute , and many of them lost almost everything they had .
This is why a rapid assessment of the situation and quick assistance were crucial at that time .
Slovakia , Hungary , Poland , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania all requested assistance from the European Union in order to be able to help those in need by drawing on the Solidarity Fund .
I am very pleased to note that the European Parliament , too , recognised this situation , and it , too , intended to help these countries .
This is why I consider supporting this proposal for a decision very important , and I would like to use this opportunity to extend my gratitude to all who expressed their solidarity with my fellow Central European citizens at that time .
Thank you .
Following the heavy rainfall in August 2010 , which caused rivers to burst their banks and forced people to leave their homes , the Czech Republic applied for assistance from the Solidarity Fund in October 2010 .
The threshold of 0.6 % of Gross National Income was not exceeded , but the majority of the population suffered as a result and the economy of the region was on the brink of collapse .
Important areas such as tourism and industry were severely damaged .
This assistance will cover part of the cost of the immediate measures needed to rebuild damaged infrastructure .
Therefore , I support this proposal .
Last summer , most of Romania 's territory was hit by severe flooding and landslides .
The damage was estimated at almost EUR 900 million , which is nearly 0.7 % of Romania 's GDP .
I welcome the assistance from the Solidarity Fund and it will help both to mitigate the impact of the disaster and prevent other incidents of the same nature occurring .
The Solidarity Fund is one of the specific examples which can be offered to our citizens showing the importance of joint actions at EU level .
The Commission is proposing to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund in favour of Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania , in accordance with the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management ( IIA ) .
The IIA allows for the mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund within the annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
Alongside this proposal to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund in favour of Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania , the Commission also presented a Draft amending budget .
It is clear from the report that all the applications meet the eligibility criteria laid down in Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 .
I therefore voted in favour of the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund for the amounts of EUR 105 567 155 for Poland , EUR 20 430 841 for Slovakia , EUR 22 485 772 for Hungary , EUR 5 111 401 for the Czech Republic , EUR 3 825 983 for Croatia and EUR 24 967 741 for Romania , making a total of EUR 182 388 893 in commitment and payment appropriations .
The direct costs of the floods which hit Poland , Slovakia , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Croatia and Romania in 2010 amount to EUR 5 512 719 662 .
I voted for this report so that the mobilisation of EUR 182.4 million from the EU Solidarity Fund intended for these floods is approved .
I disagreed with the source of funding , a ' negative reserve ' proposed by the Council .
However , I voted for the Council 's proposal as I think that citizens who were victims of the flooding cannot become victims of an interinstitutional battle between Member States and the European Parliament .
The issue at hand is the requests for assistance submitted by Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Romania and Croatia ( as a candidate country ) in order to deal with the substantial damage caused by the disastrous floods in these countries in May , June and July 2010 .
Since all these requests meet the eligibility criteria laid down in Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 , I voted in favour of this proposal to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund to allocate the sum of EUR 182 388 893 to the countries in question , in the expectation that this support may help to speed up the reconstruction of the areas affected and mitigate the suffering of their populations .
I was delighted to vote for the draft decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on the release of funds from the EU Solidarity Fund to Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania .
All of these states were affected last year by powerful floods , as a result of torrential rain which caused landslides and substantial loss of human life , as well as damage to residential buildings , businesses , farming areas , the road and rail networks and other infrastructure .
Although the amount of the proposed assistance represents only a few percent of the total quantified damage for most countries , it is still significant assistance , amounting in total to EUR 182 million .
I would like to point out that the EU established the Solidarity Fund in order to assist the inhabitants of regions hit by natural disasters .
I would like to thank Members for supporting this report .
in writing . - In favour .
The Commission proposes to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund for Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania on the basis of point 26 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management ( IIA ) .
The IIA allows for mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund within the annual ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
In parallel to the proposal to mobilise the Solidarity Fund for Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania , the Commission has presented a Draft amending budget ( DAB No 1 / 2011 of 14 January 2011 ) in order to enter the corresponding commitment and payment appropriations in the 2011 budget , as foreseen in point 26 of the IIA .
I voted in favour of this text because we need to mobilise the European Union Solidarity Fund on behalf of those countries in Central and Eastern Europe which suffered damage due to flooding in 2010 .
Countries such as Poland , Slovakia , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Croatia and Romania incurred huge costs following the heavy rains of that period , which caused massive damage to their infrastructure .
Poland alone , for example , suffered two consecutive floods of its major rivers in May and June 2010 , which caused serious damage to agriculture , transport networks and sites of cultural heritage , resulting in total damage of almost EUR 3 billion .
The priority now is to rebuild the regions most affected by the tragic events of last year , allowing them to restart their systems of production without further delay .
The floods of 2010 affected several European countries , to varying degrees .
For example , in the Czech Republic , the flood was smaller in terms of the area of land , but the consequences were truly destructive for this country , just as in Poland .
I therefore supported the release of funds on the basis of the option provided under Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 for such exceptional situations .
I voted for the adoption of the report , including the release of funds for the Czech Republic and for Croatia , which presents a similar case .
I endorsed the report on mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund , in accordance with point 26 of the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management .
It is extremely important for the EU to support those countries which have suffered as a result of natural disasters .
The losses caused by this disaster exceed EUR 2.9 billion .
EU financial support will help in the reconstruction of public infrastructure which was damaged by the disaster : water mains , sewage systems , roads and bridges .
Almost a year has already passed since the floods .
Help is still imperative .
It should be mobilised faster .
To do this , procedures for granting financial aid from the Solidarity Fund should be shortened .
I am in favour of this report since it advocates responsible fishing in the Comoros fishing zone based on a policy of non-discrimination between the various fleets in the zone , while launching a dialogue on necessary reforms .
I am also in favour of this report because it represents an advance on the previous agreement , in that it provides for implementation of the protocol to be suspended in the event of human rights violations .
However , since the aim of this protocol is to strengthen partnership and cooperation in the fisheries sector through the use of all available financial instruments , I would draw attention to the immediate need for a framework favouring increased investment in the sector and optimisation of small-scale fishery production in the sector .
I supported this report as it marks a commitment to promoting responsible and sustainable fishing wherever EU vessels might be operating , based on a thorough assessment of the resources available and making sure that the fishing opportunities to be used have been vouched for by credible scientific opinions and ruling out any risk of depleting local stocks .
The Union of the Comoros is regarded as one of the least developed countries , with an economy which depends , to a huge extent , on foreign subsidies and technical assistance .
While exploitable stocks in the Union of the Comoros , mostly large pelagic fish , are estimated at 33 000 tonnes per year , annual catches by local fishermen amount to approximately 16 000 tonnes , which are completely absorbed by the local market .
The main objective of the new protocol is to define the fishing opportunities offered to EU vessels for access rights and sectoral support and to continue the cooperation between the EU and the UoC , with a view to expanding the partnership framework within which to develop a sustainable fisheries policy and responsible exploitation of fisheries resources in the Comorian fishing zone in the interests of both parties .
The conclusion of bilateral agreements in the fisheries sector between the European Union and countries outside it , termed ' Fisheries Partnership Agreements ' , is standard practice under the common fisheries policy .
I voted in favour because I think that the new protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement with the Union of the Comoros also serves the interests of both parties .
On the one hand , it improves the fishing opportunities offered to EU vessels in the Comorian fishing zone as any opportunities for depleting the local stocks in the area are excluded .
On the other hand , the EU allocates funds for the development of the sectoral fisheries policy in the Comoros .
I agree with the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Partnership Agreement in the fisheries sector between the European Community and the Union of the Comoros .
I consider said protocol to be positive since it promotes responsible and sustainable fishing in Comorian territorial waters and serves the interests of both parties , as it offers EU vessels fishing opportunities in exchange for important sectoral support for the community in the archipelago of the Comoros .
I voted in favour of the recommendation on the EC-Comoros fishing agreement , since the parties undertake to promote sustainable and responsible fishing in the Comorian fishing zone and since it provides for a suspension clause in the event of human rights violations in the Union of the Comoros .
The current protocol to the Fisheries Agreement in force between the European Community and the Union of the Comoros , one of many fisheries partnership agreements of which the European Union is a co-signatory , expired on 31 December 2010 .
The new protocol will be concluded for a three-year period ( 2011-2013 ) , starting with the entry into force of the Council decision on the provisional application of said protocol and following the expiry of the protocol in force .
The aim of the proposal for a decision is to set out the fishing opportunities for European Union vessels on the basis of the excess stock available , as well as the financial contribution separately due for access rights and sectoral support .
The new protocol serves the interests of both parties and aims to reinforce fisheries cooperation through the use of the financial instruments that are available .
The need has been felt to create a framework favouring the development of investment in this sector and to optimise small-scale fishery production .
Like the rapporteur , I believe Parliament should be allowed to closely monitor the way in which the agreement develops and is complied with , and it is up to the Commission to ensure that it can do so .
This report focuses on a proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of a protocol setting out the terms on which European Union ( EU ) fishing vessels can carry out fishing operations in the waters of the Union of the Comoros .
Over the years , the EU has established fisheries partnership agreements with a number of countries and , in exchange , has made a certain financial contribution intended essentially to support national fisheries policies , particularly to protect stocks .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has taken on increased responsibilities in this sector , and we now have to give our consent to new fisheries agreements .
As the EU / Union of the Comoros protocol expired on 31 December 2010 , it urgently needs to be renewed .
The proposal in question serves the interests of both parties , as the rapporteur explains very well , and I therefore voted in favour of the proposal .
It is just a pity that it is overdue .
This report supports the new protocol of the partnership agreement in the fisheries sector between the EU and the Comoros , which will be in force for three years , and whose main objective is to define the fishing opportunities offered to EU vessels , the financial contribution owed for access rights and sectoral support .
This is an agreement concerning access rights to Comorian waters for 70 European boats in exchange for a financial contribution of around EUR 600 000 per year , with around half of this amount being intended for the development of the country 's fisheries sector .
This country has practically no other resources ; 30 000 of the country 's 800 000 inhabitants depend on this sector .
It is here that the so-called partnership agreements in this area have failed most visibly , which should be cause for reflection and for policy changes .
Authorisation to fish will be given to 45 tuna seiners - 22 of which are French and 22 Spanish - and 25 surface longliners : this is more than the protocol currently in force , which authorises 40 seiners and 17 longliners .
Portugal still has the five longliners it had before .
France and Spain are still the major beneficiaries .
I agree with this document , because the conclusion of bilateral fisheries agreements between the European Community and non-member countries , termed ' Fisheries Partnership Agreements ' ( FPA ) since 2004 , has been standard practice under the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and is central to the policy 's external dimension .
Under the agreements with African and Pacific countries , the EU 's financial contribution is , to a large extent , expressly intended to support national fisheries policies based on the principle of sustainability and sound management of fishery resources .
The partnership agreements therefore amount to a commitment to promoting responsible and sustainable fishing wherever EU vessels might be operating , based on a thorough assessment of the resources available and making sure that the fishing opportunities to be used have been vouched for by credible scientific opinions and rule out any risk of depleting local stocks .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , increased powers have been conferred on Parliament regarding fisheries partnership agreements : under Article 218 ( 6 ) ( a ) TFEU , the EP now has to give its prior consent to the conclusion of an agreement , a requirement that replaces the earlier ordinary consultation procedure .
I believe that the proposed new protocol for the Fisheries Partnership Agreement with the Union of the Comoros serves the interests of both parties .
The fisheries sector in the region of the Comoros is very specific .
The catches made by local fishermen hardly ever suffice to meet the needs of the local community .
This is caused by poorly developed and , frankly , non-existent port and fishing fleet infrastructure .
The people who live on the islands in this part of the Indian Ocean are very poor , face the problem of unemployment and , as the rapporteur himself writes , are , in practice , dependent on financial help from abroad .
The partnership agreement , which allows vessels from the EU to fish in Comorian territory in exchange for financial support , will undoubtedly contribute to a strengthening of the region 's economy .
We should , however , monitor the way in which these funds are spent , and whether they do , in fact , contribute to an improvement in the situation in the sector .
The aim of the new protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the partnership agreement in the fisheries sector between the European Community and the Union of the Comoros is to strengthen the partnership and cooperation in the fisheries sector using all the available financial instruments .
The protocol will create a framework which is conducive to the growth of investment in this sector and which will help to increase the value of the products of small-scale fisheries .
I welcome the proposal to establish this new protocol .
The Council 's draft recommendation regarding the establishment of a protocol which stipulates fishing quotas and financial contribution as set out by the partnership with the fisheries sector of the Union of the Comoros is intended to outline the role that the European Parliament should play in the procedure of reviewing this agreement .
Europe has always pursued partnership agreements in the fisheries sector and the partnership with the Union of the Comoros has been in force since 1988 .
The objective of this new protocol is to set out the fishing quotas to be offered to fishing vessels of the Union of the Comoros , providing a sustainable and responsible use of fishery resources , increasing investment in small-scale fisheries and enhancing their activity .
The draft Council decision on the project ensures that both partners , Europe and the Union of the Comoros , will benefit from the renewal of the agreement but , since , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament has gained a specific role in the implementation of the agreements , it seems inevitable that , at each step until the final approval of the agreement , we must identify the measures that will involve Parliament .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The conclusion of bilateral fisheries agreements between the European Community and non-member countries , termed ' Fisheries Partnership Agreements ' ( FPA ) since 2004 , has been standard practice under the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and is central to the policy 's external dimension .
Under the agreements with African and Pacific countries , the EU 's financial contribution is , to a large extent , expressly intended to support national fisheries policies based on the principle of sustainability and sound management of fishery resources .
The partnership agreements therefore amount to a commitment to promoting responsible and sustainable fishing wherever EU vessels might be operating , based on a thorough assessment of the resources available , making sure that the fishing opportunities to be used have been vouched for by credible scientific opinions and ruling out any risk of depleting local stocks .
This new agreement replaces the one previously in force , which expired on 31 December 2010 .
This kind of agreement makes it possible for EU fishing vessels to access the fishing zones of the Comoros islands in exchange for a financial contribution .
The great advantage of this kind of protocol is that the European Union can help with these countries ' development .
In this case , it will give more help to the fisheries sector , since this sector will absorb about 50 % of the funds contributed .
We should bear in mind that about 30 000 people in the Comoros depend directly on the fisheries sector , hence the importance of this support .
in writing . - The Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Comoros expired in December 2010 .
The new protocol is valid from 2011 to 2013 and should be provisionally applied while the European Parliament 's consent procedure is not closed .
Under the draft agreement , the parties undertake to promote responsible fishing in the Comoros fishing zone based on the principle of non-discrimination between the different fleets fishing in this fishing zone .
With regard to fishing opportunities , 45 tuna seiners and 25 surface longliners will be authorised to fish .
The new agreement in comparison with the former one contains a clause to interrupt the implementation of the protocol in case of human rights violations .
I believe that it is necessary to strengthen partnership and cooperation in the fisheries sector using all financial instruments available .
Therefore , I voted ' for ' .
The conclusion of bilateral fisheries agreements between the European Community and non-member countries , termed ' Fisheries Partnership Agreements ' ( FPA ) , has been standard practice under the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and is central to the policy 's external dimension .
This proposal for a new protocol to the FPA between the European Union and the Comoros islands is an integral part of the CFP 's external dimension and serves the interests of both parties .
This report makes the following recommendations , which are considered relevant :
• The Commission should send Parliament the conclusions of the meetings and proceedings of the Joint Committee provided for in Article 9 of the agreement , as well as the multiannual sectoral programme referred to in Article 7 ( c ) of the protocol and the findings of the annual assessments ;
• Representatives of the European Parliament , acting as observers , should be allowed to attend Joint Committee meetings and proceedings ;
• The Commission should submit an implementation review of the agreement to Parliament and the Council before the agreement is renegotiated ;
• Parliament and the Council should be treated fairly both as regards the right to be immediately and fully informed and in connection with the monitoring and assessment of the implementation of international fisheries agreements and with negotiations on their revision .
For the above reasons , I voted in favour of this report .
The purpose of this protocol is to replace the protocol annexed to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Comoros islands , which expired on 31 December 2010 .
The main objective of the new protocol is to define the fishing opportunities offered to EU vessels for access rights and for sectoral support and to continue the cooperation between the European Union and the Union of the Comoros , so as to encourage the establishment of a partnership framework within which to develop a sustainable fisheries policy and sound exploitation of fisheries resources in the Comorian fishing zone .
Based on the new protocol , the overall annual financial contribution by the EU will be EUR 1 845 750 over the whole three-year period .
The development of investments in the fisheries sector in order to optimise small-scale fisheries operations is also envisaged .
Since I believe this proposal for a new protocol to the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Union and the Comoros islands serves the interests of both parties , I voted in favour of it .
in writing . - I voted against .
The conclusion of bilateral fisheries agreements between the European Community and non-member countries , termed ' Fisheries Partnership Agreements ' ( FPA ) since 2004 , has been standard practice under the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and is central to the policy 's external dimension .
Under the agreements with African and Pacific countries , the EU 's financial contribution is , to a large extent , expressly intended to support national fisheries policies based on the principle of sustainability and sound management of fishery resources .
The partnership agreements therefore amount to a commitment to promoting responsible and sustainable fishing wherever EU vessels might be operating , based on a thorough assessment of the resources available and making sure that the fishing opportunities to be used have been vouched for by credible scientific opinions and rule out any risk of depleting local stocks .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , increased powers have been conferred on Parliament regarding Fisheries Partnership Agreements : under Article 218 ( 6 ) ( a ) TFEU , the EP now has to give its prior consent to conclusion of an agreement , a requirement that replaces the earlier ordinary consultation procedure .
We , as Greens , are very critical of how these types of agreements have been implemented so far .
The signing of bilateral fisheries agreements between the European Community and third countries has always been a practice of the common fisheries policy and , hence , a central aspect of its foreign policy dimension .
The agreements with African and Pacific countries provide that a substantial share of the EU reciprocal financial arrangements be designated to support the national fishery policies based on principles of sustainability and good resources management .
Bilateral relations in the fisheries sector between the European Community and the Union of the Comoros date back to 1988 .
The resolution adopted today emphasises the fact that better information for and greater control by the European Parliament at all stages of negotiations would strengthen the partnership and would have a positive impact on the development of fisheries .
It is necessary that both the European Parliament and the Council be placed on an equal footing , whether regarding the right to be fully and immediately informed , or relating to the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of international agreements in fisheries and also to any negotiation of revisions to those agreements .
The EU fishing fleet is in operation throughout the world .
A bilateral relationship has been in place between what is now known as the EU and the Union of the Comoros since 1988 .
The current revision of the 2006 Partnership Agreement in the fisheries sector as part of the process of extending it has also resulted in the basic principles of a sustainable fisheries policy and the responsible use of fishery resources in the Comoros fishing zone being included in the agreement .
This is not only a welcome development , but also a necessity , if the EU and its common fisheries policy are to remain credible .
In this context , the rapporteur 's call for more information and more control on the part of Parliament must be strongly supported .
For this reason , I have voted in favour of the report .
Improving the Euromed trade agreement may contribute towards economic and political stability in this region with a view to consolidating a single space governed by values such as peace , justice , equality , freedom and democracy .
The creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism is intended to provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within fixed time limits , which could increase the security and the predictability of bilateral trade relations , thereby improving the functioning of the Euromed Free Trade Area .
I voted in favour of this draft resolution .
in writing . - ( BG ) I voted for this resolution because an effective mechanism needs to be established for settling trade disputes between the European Union and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan .
The proposed mechanism is modelled on the dispute settlement mechanisms from the most recent agreements concluded by the European Union , which comply with the World Trade Organisation 's dispute settlement rules and procedures .
This mechanism will support the functioning of the Euromed Free Trade Area , but will mainly bring stability to bilateral trade relations between the European Union and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan .
All improvements to the Euro-Mediterranean agreements have an important impact on the countries ' economic and political stability , contributing to the innumerable social and democratic gains that result from them .
I therefore welcome any efforts in that direction .
Given the incomplete resolution of certain disputes under the trade provisions of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , I acknowledge that the diplomatic approach has been ineffective in this context .
I therefore accept the need for a mechanism to apply resources simply and effectively , so I agree with the draft Council decision on the conclusion of an agreement in the form of a protocol between the European Union and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan .
The aim of this protocol is to establish a dispute settlement mechanism applicable to disputes under the trade provisions of the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement .
The Euro-Mediterranean agreements contain provisions to liberalise the trade in goods , but the rules for settling disputes arising from them relied primarily on diplomacy and could easily be blocked by the ' injuring ' party .
The Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with its partners from the Mediterranean in 2006 with a view to establishing trade dispute settlement mechanisms , modelled on the dispute settlement mechanisms of the most recent agreements concluded by the European Union within the World Trade Organisation .
A draft agreement was initialled with Jordan on 9 December 2009 .
I support the dispute settlement mechanism and hope that it will have a deterrent rather than repressive function .
I also hope that Jordan can withstand the instability affecting the region and remain the moderate and responsible partner that it has been during the reigns of King Hussein and King Abdullah II .
This recommendation is based on a draft Council decision on the conclusion of a protocol between the European Union and Jordan , the aim of which is to implement a dispute settlement mechanism as part of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement .
In general , resolving trade conflicts between countries by diplomatic means has not always had the desired effect .
Therefore , in the context of the Euro-Mediterranean region , negotiations were started between the EU and its Mediterranean partners , specifically Jordan .
The draft agreement was signed on 9 December 2009 at the conference of Euro-Mediterranean Trade Ministers held in Brussels .
I am voting for this draft legislative resolution of the European Parliament , as I am aware that it will significantly improve relations between the states in terms of free trade and contribute to the political and economic stability of this region .
I therefore welcome the new agreement and hope that , after it comes into force , no conflict of any kind will arise between the EU or its Member States and Jordan .
As is mentioned in this report 's explanatory statement , to date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
The ' alternative ' model being proposed to us fits into the logic promoted within the World Trade Organisation which , in search of supposed efficiency , seeks to bypass national sovereignty , the resolution of disputes through respect for each country 's particularities , and the right of these countries to defend their interests and those of their peoples .
Resolving disputes by diplomatic means guarantees equality of treatment between countries .
This mechanism , by contrast , subverts this principle , encouraging the movement of capital and putting economic power before political power , and the interests of capital before the interests of countries and their peoples .
Our opposition to this mechanism and its implications is all the more justified because it results from the conclusion of an agreement between the EU , whose legitimacy resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon is questionable ( and in any case deplorable ) , and the regime of King Abdullah , which continues to violently repress the emerging , peaceful youth movement demanding reforms and democratic freedoms .
To date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for resolution .
The ' alternative ' model being proposed to us fits into the logic promoted within the World Trade Organisation which , in search of supposed efficiency , seeks to bypass national sovereignty , the resolution of disputes through respect for each country 's particularities , and the right of these countries to defend their interests and those of their peoples .
Resolving disputes by diplomatic means guarantees equality of treatment between countries .
By contrast , the mechanism now proposed subverts this principle , encouraging the movement of capital and putting economic power before political power , and the interests of capital before the interests of countries and their peoples .
Our opposition to this mechanism and its implications is all the more justified because it results from the conclusion of an agreement between the EU , whose legitimacy resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon is questionable , and the regime of King Abdullah , which continues to violently repress the emerging , peaceful youth movement demanding reforms and democratic freedoms .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism is welcomed , as it should provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits .
The rapporteur believes that these upgrades to the Euromed free trade agreements can contribute towards economic and political stability in this key region with a view to consolidating a single area of peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
Furthermore , the proper application of such a mechanism could increase the security and the predictability of our bilateral trade relations and could represent a further step towards the setting up and proper functioning of the Euromed Free Trade Area .
The past shows us that diplomacy has not managed to be effective at resolving the various disputes that exist .
I therefore welcome the creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism , which should provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits .
I agree with the rapporteur that these improvements to the Euro-Mediterranean free trade agreements can contribute to economic and political stability in this region , which is key to the consolidation of a single area of peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
In addition , the proper application of such a mechanism could increase the security and predictability of our bilateral trade relations , and represents a further step towards the creation and proper functioning of the Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area .
in writing . - I know that the proposed mechanism is modelled on the dispute settlement mechanisms of the most recent agreements concluded by the European Union and on the WTO .
Bilateral trade agreements should always be fully compatible with the multilateral trading system .
The Commission needs to ensure that the implementation is effective .
Lingering disputes have a negative effect on the business community .
Therefore , I voted ' for ' .
With this report , the European Parliament is agreeing to the creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism , which will provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits when there is a need to settle conflicts between the European Union and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan , resulting from the trade provisions of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement .
To date , the settlement of disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic means .
In practice , such an approach proved ineffective and led to situations in which certain disputes remained unresolved , as they could easily be blocked by the ' injuring ' party .
These upgrades to the Euro-Mediterranean free trade agreements can contribute to economic and political stability in this key region , consolidating a single area of peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
The proper application of such a mechanism could increase the security and the predictability of our bilateral trade relations , and could represent a further step towards the creation and proper functioning of the Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area .
My vote in favour was motivated by each of these facts .
I voted in favour of concluding this EU-Jordan agreement whose goal is establishing a mechanism for settling disputes under the trade provisions of the Euro-Mediterranean agreements .
To date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
In practice , this approach is not effective and has led to situations where disputes remained unresolved or were blocked .
I hope that the application of this standard dispute settlement mechanism will increase the security and the predictability of EU-Jordan trade relations .
Within the framework of the Euro-Mediterranean association agreements , trade disputes that may arise between two parties , the European Union on the one hand , and Jordan on the other , are still settled through diplomatic channels .
This solution is neither efficient nor transparent , which is why I voted in favour of establishing a standard dispute settlement mechanism , as this will enable players on both sides of the Mediterranean to trade in a safer and more predictable environment .
This standard mechanism is based on solutions advocated by the World Trade Organisation in its memorandum of understanding on dispute settlement , as well as mechanisms incorporated into bilateral trade agreements recently concluded by the EU .
Ultimately , therefore , adding such mechanisms to an increasing number of agreements will create a level playing field not only for European economic players , but also for their partners in third countries .
These negotiations originate from what was , in fact , an area ungoverned by legislation , which meant that no procedures were available for resolving disputes between the EU and the Mediterranean countries .
The dispute settlement mechanism is modelled on standard international procedures .
As the existing approach has led to insoluble problems in the past , I have followed the rapporteur 's recommendation .
I voted for this resolution because an effective mechanism needs to be established for settling trade disputes between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco .
The proposed mechanism is modelled on the dispute settlement mechanisms from the most recent agreements concluded by the European Union , which comply with the World Trade Organisation 's dispute settlement rules and procedures .
This mechanism will bring stability to bilateral trade relations between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco .
All improvements to the Euro-Mediterranean agreements have an important impact on the countries ' economic and political stability , contributing to the innumerable social and democratic gains that result from them .
I therefore welcome any efforts in that direction .
Given the incomplete resolution of certain disputes relating to the trade provisions of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and the Kingdom of Morocco , I acknowledge the inefficiency of the system created in relation to this area using diplomatic means .
I therefore accept the need for a mechanism that will enable the application of resources in a simple and efficient way , so I agree with the draft Council decision on the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco establishing a Dispute Settlement Mechanism .
in writing . - ( RO ) Given that the current regulations for settling disputes rely on a diplomatic approach and can easily be blocked by the party which is failing to fulfil its obligations , I think that adopting this agreement will improve the security and predictability of trade relations between the European Union and Morocco , making it beneficial to both companies and consumers .
The adoption of the agreement follows the Euro-Mediterranean road map for trade after 2010 .
Like the others , the agreement between the European Union and the Kingdom of Morocco lacked conflict resolution measures which , naturally , contributed to making it less reliable and to reducing the expectations of the parties as regards obtaining fair solutions in cases of dispute .
I hope that the envisaged mechanism will come into force and that it will contribute to reinforcing the parties ' trust , as well as that the Kingdom of Morocco will be able to continue with the reforms already started by Hassan II and carried forward by Mohammed VI .
This recommendation is based on a draft Council decision on the conclusion of a protocol between the European Union and Morocco , whose goal is to implement a dispute settlement mechanism as part of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement .
In general , resolving trade conflicts between countries using diplomatic means has not always had the desired effect .
Therefore , in the context of the Euro-Mediterranean region , negotiations were started between the EU and its Mediterranean partners , specifically Morocco .
The draft agreement was signed on 9 December 2009 at the conference of Euro-Mediterranean Trade Ministers held in Brussels , and was confirmed on 7 March 2010 during the EU-Morocco Summit .
I am voting in favour of this draft legislative resolution of the European Parliament as I am aware that it will significantly improve relations between the states in terms of free trade and contribute to the political and economic stability of this region .
I therefore welcome the new agreement and hope that , after it comes into force , no conflict of any kind will arise between the EU or its Member States and Morocco .
As is mentioned in this report 's explanatory statement , to date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
The ' alternative ' model being proposed to us fits into the logic promoted within the World Trade Organisation which , in search of supposed efficiency , seeks to bypass national sovereignty , seeks to bypass the resolution of disputes through respect for each country 's particularities , and seeks to bypass their right to defend their interests and those of their peoples .
Resolving disputes by diplomatic means guarantees equality of treatment between countries .
This mechanism , by contrast , subverts this principle , encouraging the movement of capital and putting economic power before political power and the interests of capital before the interests of countries and their peoples .
Our opposition to this mechanism and its implications is all the more justified because it results from the conclusion of a free trade agreement with Morocco , a country that continues to occupy Western Sahara , and to make use of and profit from resources that do not belong to it : it is violating international law and denying the Sahrawi people their right to self-determination .
This report is about changing the current situation by creating a mechanism for conflict resolution .
As is mentioned in this report 's explanatory statement , to date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
However , the Commission is now proposing an ' alternative ' model that fits into the logic promoted within the World Trade Organisation which , in search of supposed efficiency , seeks to bypass national sovereignty , seeks to bypass the resolution of disputes through respect for each country 's particularities , and seeks to bypass their right to defend their interests and those of their peoples .
Resolving disputes by diplomatic means guarantees equality of treatment between countries .
This mechanism , by contrast , subverts this principle , encouraging the movement of capital and putting economic power before political power and the interests of capital before the interests of countries and their peoples .
Our opposition to this mechanism and its implications is all the more justified because it results from the conclusion of a free trade agreement with Morocco , a country that continues to occupy Western Sahara , and to make use of and profit from resources that do not belong to it : it is violating the Sahrawi people 's rights and denying their right to self-determination .
For this reason , we voted against .
in writing . - I support the rapporteur who proposes that Parliament gives its consent to this agreement .
Lingering disputes have a negative effect on the business community and on end consumers on both shores of the Mediterranean .
Civil rebellions against Arab despots have set the other side of the Mediterranean alight .
This is clearly not a sufficient reason for the EU to stop advancing towards the establishment of the free trade area it agreed to with those same despots .
We have sent a clear signal : the EU does not want to negotiate with the Arab democracies that might emerge .
This is absurd .
I shall vote against .
The past shows us that diplomacy has not managed to be efficient in resolving a number of existing disputes .
I therefore welcome the creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism , which should provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that these upgrades to the EU-Morocco free trade agreements can contribute to economic and political stability in this key region , with a view to consolidating a single area of peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
Moreover , the proper application of such a mechanism could increase the security and the predictability of our bilateral trade relations , and represents a further step towards the setting up and the proper functioning of the EU-Morocco Free Trade Area .
Until now , one of the tasks of diplomatic services has been to arbitrate in disputes relating to the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement .
Now , the plan is to introduce mechanisms at an EU level to settle disputes and to support politically unstable regions , such as Morocco , in establishing a homogeneous state characterised by peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
I have abstained from voting because the rapporteur has not described in detail how we can guarantee that these mechanisms are complied with .
The liberalisation agreement between the EU and Morocco should be an emblem for the development , the stability and the economic recovery of the entire North African region .
The Union cannot and must not lose the opportunity to play a part in creating a renewed trade policy , able to assist those countries which have been overwhelmed by social and political turmoil with dramatic consequences for national economies and , consequently , our investments in those areas .
With today 's vote on creating a standard mechanism for appropriate and efficient dispute resolution , we have a greater guarantee in support of European investments in Morocco , investments which are key to economic wellbeing in the entire region , covering almost all sectors .
Today 's vote also highlights the Union 's desire to avoid having a negative effect on the economies and end consumers on both sides of the Mediterranean by opting for protectionist policies which continue to prioritise special interests , delaying the ratification of agreements which are fundamental to rebalancing and stabilising the economic choices of an area that is beginning to be of interest to our trade competitors like China and the countries of the Middle East .
With this report , the European Parliament is approving the creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism which should provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits in disputes resulting from Euro-Mediterranean agreements between the EU and Morocco .
Dispute resolution through diplomacy was not effective and led to situations in which certain disputes remained unresolved , as they could easily be blocked by the ' injuring ' party .
Delays that occur in dispute resolution have a negative impact on companies and end consumers on both sides of the Mediterranean .
These upgrades to the Euro-Mediterranean free trade agreements can contribute to economic and political stability in this key region , with a view to consolidating a single area of peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
The model for the proposed mechanism is the dispute settlement mechanisms included in the latest agreements concluded by the European Union and the World Trade Organisation 's Understanding on Rules and Procedures governing the Settlement of Disputes .
The Commission must ensure that the mechanism is effectively and efficiently implemented .
For the above reasons , I voted in favour of this resolution approving the conclusion of the agreement .
I voted in favour of concluding this agreement between the EU and the Kingdom of Morocco , whose goal is establishing a mechanism for settling disputes under the trade provisions of the Euro-Mediterranean agreements .
To date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
In practice , this approach is not effective and has led to situations where disputes remained unresolved or were blocked .
I hope that the application of this standard dispute settlement mechanism will increase the security and the predictability of trade relations between the EU and the Kingdom of Morocco .
in writing . - In favour .
To date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
In practice , this is not efficient and has led to situations were disputes remained unresolved , as they could easily be blocked by the ' injuring ' party .
The Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with its partners from the Mediterranean in 2006 with a view to negotiating a proper dispute settlement mechanism .
A draft agreement was initialled with Morocco at the Euro-Mediterranean Trade Ministerial conference in Brussels on 9 December 2009 , and confirmed during the EU-Morocco Summit on 7 March 2010 .
The creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism is welcomed , as it should provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits .
I support the creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism with Egypt , enabling inefficiencies and deadlocks to be resolved and concluding the draft agreement with that country .
This agreement can help contribute to economic and political stability in the Euro-Mediterranean area , which will allow a future based on peace , justice , freedom , plurality and democracy .
I voted for this resolution because an effective mechanism needs to be established for settling trade disputes between the European Union and the Arab Republic of Egypt .
The proposed mechanism is modelled on the dispute settlement mechanisms from the most recent agreements concluded by the European Union , which comply with the World Trade Organisation 's dispute settlement rules and procedures .
This mechanism will support the functioning of the Euromed Free Trade Area , but will mainly bring stability to bilateral trade relations between the European Union and the Arab Republic of Egypt .
I voted in favour of the dispute settlement mechanism as proposed by Mr Susta .
I completely agree that proper application of a standard mechanism for the settlement of disputes could be a further step towards the establishment and effective functioning of Euro-Mediterranean free trade .
Until now , disputes arising from Euro-Mediterranean agreements have only been resolved , where possible , through diplomatic channels .
Instead , we need a firm procedure because dragging out commercial disputes can result in adverse effects on final consumers on both sides of the Mediterranean .
In the light of what is happening in some North African countries , there is no doubt that the path towards economic and political stability in those territories passes through , among other things , well-functioning free trade agreements in the Mediterranean .
All improvements to the Euro-Mediterranean agreements have an important impact on the countries ' economic and political stability , contributing to the innumerable social and democratic gains that result from them .
I therefore welcome any efforts in that direction .
Given the incomplete resolution of certain disputes relating to the trade provisions of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement establishing an association between the European Communities and the Arab Republic of Egypt , I acknowledge the inefficiency of the system created in relation to this area using diplomatic means .
I therefore accept the need for a mechanism that will enable the application of resources in a simple and efficient way , so I agree with the draft Council decision on the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Union and the Arab Republic of Egypt establishing a Dispute Settlement Mechanism .
The present situation in Egypt perhaps eclipses the need to press ahead with adopting agreements like this .
Nonetheless , with the turbulence and uncertainty characteristic of times like those recently experienced in Cairo now over , the Egyptian State should be careful to take up once again its functions in their entirety . Amongst those is foreign relations , specifically with the European Union , which is its partner in a Euro-Mediterranean agreement .
While putative future disputes with the EU are probably the least of Egypt 's concerns for the moment , I believe that there can be no disadvantage in adopting mechanisms that enable these to be resolved easily , for the good of both parties .
Egypt is inseparably bound up in the history of Europe and the world .
I hope that it will have a future as great as its past .
This recommendation is based on a draft Council decision on the conclusion of a protocol between the European Union and the People 's Republic of Egypt , whose goal is to implement a dispute settlement mechanism .
This protocol takes on a very special meaning at a time when Egypt is taking the first steps towards implementing a democratic regime .
In general , resolving trade conflicts between countries using diplomatic means has not always had the desired effect .
Therefore , in the context of the Euro-Mediterranean region , negotiations were started between the EU and its Mediterranean partners , specifically Egypt .
The draft agreement was signed on 27 April 2010 at the EU-Egypt Association Council held in Luxembourg .
I am voting for this draft legislative resolution of the European Parliament as I am aware that it will significantly improve relations between the states in terms of free trade and contribute to the political and economic stability of this region .
I therefore welcome the new agreement and hope that , after it comes into force , no conflict of any kind will arise between the EU or its Member States and the Arab Republic of Egypt .
As is mentioned in this report 's explanatory statement , to date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
The ' alternative ' model being proposed to us fits into the logic promoted within the World Trade Organisation which , in search of supposed efficiency , seeks to bypass national sovereignty , seeks to bypass the resolution of disputes through respect for each country 's particularities , and seeks to bypass their right to defend their interests and those of their peoples .
Resolving disputes by diplomatic means guarantees equality of treatment between countries .
This mechanism , by contrast , subverts this principle , encouraging the movement of capital and putting economic power before political power and the interests of capital before the interests of countries and their peoples .
Our opposition to this mechanism and its implications is all the more justified because it results from the conclusion of an agreement between the EU and the regime of the dictator Mubarak .
The Egyptian people 's uprising in favour of democratic changes , defending its sovereignty against foreign interference , and the regime 's collusion with the interests of imperialism in the region is a positive sign , which we hope will end up having practical expression in relation to this agreement and others .
To date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for resolution .
The ' alternative ' model being proposed to us fits into the logic promoted within the World Trade Organisation which , in search of supposed efficiency , seeks to bypass national sovereignty , seeks to bypass the resolution of disputes through respect for each country 's particularities , and seeks to bypass their right to defend their interests and those of their peoples .
Resolving disputes by diplomatic means guarantees equality of treatment between countries .
This mechanism , by contrast , subverts this principle , encouraging the movement of capital and putting economic power before political power and the interests of capital before the interests of countries and their peoples .
Our opposition to this mechanism and its implications is all the more justified because it results from the conclusion of an agreement between the EU , whose legitimacy resulting from the Treaty of Lisbon is questionable , and the regime of the dictator Mubarak .
The Egyptian people 's uprising in favour of democratic changes , defending its sovereignty against foreign interference , and the regime 's collusion with the interests of imperialism in the region is a positive sign , which we hope will end up having practical expression in relation to this agreement and others .
in writing . - Notwithstanding the uncertain situation in Egypt , I think Parliament is right to press ahead with the approval of this agreement which should make life easier for businesses without making any political comment on the current Egyptian Government .
The past shows us that diplomacy has not managed to be efficient in resolving a number of existing disputes .
I therefore welcome the creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism , which should provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that these upgrades to the EU-Egypt free trade agreements can contribute to economic and political stability in this key region , with a view to consolidating a single area of peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
Moreover , the proper application of such a mechanism could increase the security and the predictability of our bilateral trade relations , and represents a further step towards the setting up and the proper functioning of the EU-Egypt Free Trade Area .
in writing . - I voted against this report as I have serious concerns in relation to the EU 's economic and political approach towards the countries that are covered by the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement .
The establishment of a free trade area would have dramatic consequences for working people in the region .
On the basis of the EU 's own figures , Egypt is expected to lose 1.5 million jobs .
The dire economic prospects for young people and the anger against corruption and excesses of the tiny dictatorial elite lie at the heart of the revolutionary movements and the aspirations of the Egyptian people .
A continuation of the free trade doctrine in the interest of European big business and the rich elites mean more of the same and therefore needs to be rejected .
The negotiations on this deal were led by representatives of the dictatorial Mubarak regime which has been ousted by the revolutionary upheaval .
The top tier of the army , however , is deeply tied to the economic interests of the former regime and does not represent the legitimate demands and aspirations of the working people .
Trade relations must be based on the needs of the majority of the population , not the greed of tiny elites and corporations .
With this report , the European Parliament is approving the creation of a standard dispute settlement mechanism which should provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits in disputes resulting from Euro-Mediterranean agreements between the EU and the Arab Republic of Egypt .
Dispute resolution through diplomacy was not effective and led to situations in which certain disputes remained unresolved , as they could easily be blocked by the ' injuring ' party .
Delays that occur in dispute resolution have a negative impact on companies and end consumers on both sides of the Mediterranean .
These upgrades to the Euro-Mediterranean free trade agreements can contribute to economic and political stability in this key region , with a view to consolidating a single area of peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
The model for the proposed mechanism is the dispute resolution mechanisms included in the latest agreements concluded by the EU and the World Trade Organisation 's Understanding on Rules and Procedures governing the Settlement of Disputes .
The Commission must ensure that the mechanism is effectively and efficiently implemented .
For the above reasons , I voted in favour of this resolution approving the conclusion of the agreement .
I voted in favour of concluding this EU-Egypt agreement whose goal is establishing a mechanism for settling disputes under the trade provisions of the Euro-Mediterranean agreements .
To date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
In practice , this approach is not effective and has led to situations where disputes remained unresolved or were blocked .
I hope that the application of this standard dispute settlement mechanism will increase the security and the predictability of EU-Egypt trade relations .
I am voting for this recommendation and welcome the creation of a dispute settlement mechanism , which should provide streamlined and effective redress procedures within firm time limits .
I also agree with the rapporteur 's position that upgrades to the Euro-Mediterranean free trade agreements can contribute to economic and political stability in this region that is key to consolidating a single area of peace .
I agreed with this document because to date , disputes arising from the Euro-Mediterranean agreements relied solely on diplomatic approaches for a resolution .
In practice , this is not efficient and has led to situations where disputes remained unresolved , as they could easily be blocked by the ' injuring ' party .
The upgrades to the Euromed free trade agreements can contribute towards economic and political stability in this key region with a view to consolidating a single area of peace , development , justice , equality , freedom , plurality , democracy and respect .
Furthermore , the proper application of such a mechanism could increase the security and the predictability of our bilateral trade relations and could represent a further step towards the setting up and the proper functioning of the Euromed free trade area .
Lingering disputes have a negative effect on the business community and on end consumers on both shores of the Mediterranean .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , foreign direct investment became part of EU trade policy , and thus part of the Union 's exclusive competence .
In an era where foreign direct investment plays an important role in the economic welfare of countries and regions , a well functioning and effective dispute settlement mechanism will also serve to solve disputes in this area .
As the rules for resolving disputes are based on a diplomatic approach and have led to a situation where disputes can easily be blocked , the new settlement mechanism for trade disputes deserves our support .
This mechanism is modelled on the most recent agreements concluded by the EU and on the World Trade Organisation understanding .
Draft agreements with Jordan , Morocco and Egypt are already in place , which also cover trade in agricultural products .
I welcome the decision by the European Parliament to support these agreements .
I am voting in favour of this resolution because I consider it essential that the EU provide a suitable mechanism for resolving disputes arising from the implementation of Euro-Mediterranean agreements .
In 2006 , the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with partners in the Mediterranean region and only in 2009 was that agreement signed .
The creation of a standard method for resolving disputes should ultimately introduce simplified and effective resolution procedures within specific time limits .
I agree with the opinion of the rapporteur who considers it essential that revisions of the Euromed free trade agreements be made in order to contribute to economic and political stability in this region and to consolidate an area of peace and development .
The proposed method is modelled on the most up-to-date mechanisms for dispute resolution in partnership agreements as agreed by the European Union and the WTO .
At a time when foreign direct investment has a crucial role in the economic wellbeing of European Member States , I hope that an effective dispute settlement mechanism will help to resolve disputes in this area also .
I am voting for this report , and would stress that it is an important step in the pursuit of negotiations between the EU and Ukraine towards establishing a path that may enable its full accession to the EU in the future .
I voted in favour of this report .
With the implementation of the European Neighbourhood Policy , partner countries are gradually being given the opportunity to participate in certain Union programmes and agency activities .
This is one of many measures aimed at promoting reforms , modernisation and transition in countries neighbouring the European Union .
In June 2007 , the Council of the European Union once again stressed the huge importance of the European Neighbourhood Policy , and therefore this protocol will create the conditions for Ukraine to participate in important EU programmes and benefit from EU best practices contributing to the development of democratic processes .
I voted for our rapporteur 's proposal .
I believe that both parties will stand to gain if the obligations assumed under this protocol are fulfilled .
The European Union will gain a sound , stable , democratic partner at its eastern border , while Ukraine 's citizens will gain a somewhat clearer European perspective .
From the very outset of my work in the European Parliament , I have strongly supported the pro-EU aspirations of Ukraine .
Ukraine is one of the most important partners in Poland 's Eastern policy .
In addition , together with Ukraine , my country is preparing to host next year 's European football championship .
In order to achieve the objectives of Union foreign policy , and also for reasons of security , it is extremely important for the whole of the EU to step up cooperation with Ukraine .
I consider supporting the fledgling democracy in Ukraine to be one of our most important obligations .
I support , therefore , acceleration of negotiations concerning the free trade zone , and the broadest possible participation of Ukraine in Union programmes .
I voted in favour of the resolution , and in so doing expressed my consent to the conclusion of the protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and Ukraine .
This protocol contains the framework agreement on the general principles for the participation of Ukraine in Union programmes .
It includes standard clauses which are intended to be applied to all European Neighbourhood Policy partnership countries with which such protocols are due to be concluded .
In my view , Ukraine is making the necessary efforts , and I support the conclusion of this agreement .
I voted in favour of this legislative resolution on the consent of the European Parliament to the draft Council decision , on the basis of which there will be a supplementary protocol to the EU-Ukraine Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
On the basis of this protocol , Ukraine will be given the opportunity to participate in EU programmes concerning businesses and entrepreneurship , energy and information and communication technologies .
According to this agreement , Ukraine will have to make a financial contribution to the EU 's general budget depending on the programmes it wishes to participate in , and the EU will , in turn , guarantee that these programmes are controlled and audited by the EU institutions .
I am the Vice-President of the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee , and I am convinced that the conclusion of this protocol will give Ukraine more opportunities for the convergence of its policies with policies , standards and norms pursued by the EU in the areas mentioned .
The relationship between the European Union and Ukraine has experienced progress and setbacks which have , at times , resulted from the country 's decreased or increased strategic closeness to its neighbour Russia .
On 18 June 2007 , the Council issued guidelines to the Commission on negotiating framework agreements with Algeria , Armenia , Azerbaijan , Egypt , Georgia , Israel , Jordan , Lebanon , Moldova , Morocco , the Palestinian Authority , Tunisia and Ukraine on the general principles governing these countries ' participation in EU programmes .
I believe that the conclusion of the aforementioned agreement is positive , because of the need to stipulate clearly the framework in which Ukraine will participate in European programmes , thereby contributing to improving its relations with the Union .
The European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) provides for the gradual opening up of European Union programmes to the participation of neighbouring countries , with the goals of promoting reform , of modernisation and , often , of their democratisation .
As such , on 5 March 2007 , the Council adopted a general approach intended ' to enable ENP partners to participate in Community agencies and Community programmes ' .
As a result of this approach , the Commission started negotiating framework agreements with neighbouring countries , including Ukraine , whose documentation is complete and ready to be submitted for the European Parliament 's approval , under the terms of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
I am voting for this Partnership and Cooperation Agreement establishing a partnership between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Ukraine , of the other part , on the general principles for the participation of Ukraine in Union programmes , and I welcome it because it is another step in pursuing the objectives that guided the creation of the common market .
For us , the conclusion of this agreement poses a number of questions , given the extremely vague nature of the proposal tabled .
Mention is made of programmes , but we have not been told which programmes Ukraine will be able to participate in , what form such participation will take , or what the financial conditions and implications of this will be .
Benefits are announced , without making it clear where they will come from .
We believe that the establishment of agreements with objectives such as those announced should be based on respect for the sovereignty of countries and their peoples , on mutual interest , on reciprocity , and on cooperation , taking into account each country 's particularities ; that they should evaluate what each may bring to the agreement from the economic , social and cultural points of view .
There is little else that we can say about this report , other than that it is regrettable that it agrees to the establishment of a protocol whose exact content and implications we are not allowed to know .
The establishment of this agreement poses a number of questions , given the extremely vague nature of the proposal before us .
Mention is made of programmes , but we have not been told which programmes Ukraine will be able to participate in , what form such participation will take , or what the financial implications of this will be .
Mention is made of the general principles governing participation , but these are not specified .
Benefits are mentioned without this report making it clear where they could come from .
We believe that it is still essential to refer to the following when establishing agreements between sovereign countries : respect for the sovereignty of the country and its peoples , mutual interest , reciprocity and cooperation , taking into account each country 's particularities ; evaluation of what each may bring to the agreement from the economic , social and cultural points of view .
It is regrettable that we have voted for a report that agrees to the establishment of a protocol , having been given almost no information about its content and implications .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the consent of the European Parliament to the draft Council decision , on the basis of which there will be a supplementary protocol to the EU-Ukraine Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
Ukraine will be given the opportunity to participate in EU programmes concerning businesses and entrepreneurship , energy and information and communication technologies .
Ukraine will have to make a financial contribution to the EU 's general budget depending on the programmes it wishes to participate in , and the EU will , in turn , guarantee that these programmes are controlled and audited by the EU institutions .
This partnership and cooperation policy will give Ukraine more opportunities for the convergence of its policies with policies pursued by the EU in these areas .
in writing . - I voted for this technical report giving approval for the Ukraine to participate in European Union programmes .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the draft resolution on the Council 's decision on a framework agreement between the European Union and Ukraine on the general principles concerning this country 's participation in Union programmes .
This document is part of the European Neighbourhood Policy , but also meets Ukraine 's desire to participate in more current and future EU programmes .
Furthermore , Ukraine will be able to request assistance from the Union to participate in a particular programme in accordance with the general provisions on setting up a European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument or based on any other similar regulation which provides for external assistance .
This may also give a new lease of life to Romania 's relations with Ukraine .
We must develop these ties in a pragmatic way so that citizens benefit directly from our political decisions .
For a long time , EU-Ukraine relations have been going through their good and bad moments .
The majority of the time , these moods are dictated by Ukraine 's increased or decreased closeness to its neighbour Russia .
This protocol will contribute to the creation of a clear framework for Ukraine 's participation in the various European programmes so that in the future , EU-Ukraine relations do not have the highs and lows they have had to endure hitherto .
The participation of Ukraine in European Union programmes represents an important step both for Ukraine and for the EU .
This will help to promote the exchange of scientific knowledge and research .
The student programmes will be expanded and there will be financial , economic and social benefits for both sides .
The geographical position of Ukraine is an important factor and also represents a major advantage for the EU , because it will enable the EU to improve its contacts with other Eastern European states .
For this reason , I am in favour of this project .
I voted in favour of the recommendation to allow Ukraine to participate in current EU programmes and those established in the future , in areas such as enterprise , energy , technologies and communications .
This agreement will accelerate the reform of public administration in Ukraine and the convergence of various areas of the country 's economy with EU legislation , standards and examples of good practice .
In exchange for its financial contribution to programmes , Ukraine will have the right to participate as an observer in committees coordinating EU programmes .
The programme initiatives proposed by Ukraine will be taken into account like those proposed by EU Member States .
This will enable Ukraine to gradually come closer to the EU .
Relations between the European Union and Ukraine have been up and down .
On 18 June 2007 , the Council mandated the Commission to negotiate framework agreements with Algeria , Armenia , Azerbaijan , Egypt , Georgia , Israel , Jordan , Lebanon , Moldova , Morocco , the Palestinian Authority , Tunisia and Ukraine on the general principles governing these countries ' participation in EU programmes .
It is essential to establish a clear and precise legal framework for Ukraine 's participation in European programmes , thereby contributing to improving its relations with the Union .
I therefore voted for the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement establishing a partnership between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Ukraine , of the other part , on a framework agreement between the European Union and Ukraine on the general principles for the participation of Ukraine in Union programmes .
in writing . - Having regard to the draft Council decision ( 13604 / 2010 ) , having regard to the draft protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement establishing a partnership between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and Ukraine , of the other part , concluded on 14 June 1994 , on a framework agreement between the European Union and Ukraine on the general principles for the participation of Ukraine in Union programmes ( 13962 / 2010 ) , having regard to the request for consent submitted by the Council in accordance with Articles 114 , 168 , 169 , 172 , 173 ( 3 ) , 188 and 192 and Article 218 ( 6 ) , second subparagraph , point ( a ) , of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( C7-0401 / 2010 ) , having regard to Rules 81 , 90 ( 8 ) and 46 ( 1 ) of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , and having regard to the recommendation of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , we consent to conclusion of the protocol .



Participation in EU programmes and agencies by countries which are included in the Neighbourhood Policy is one of the most specific forms of those countries ' cooperation with the Union .
We should endeavour to ensure that the programmes which are offered give the greatest possible support to the reforms being undertaken in these countries to bring them closer to the Union .
The 18th round of Ukraine-EU negotiations on the signing of the association agreement is taking place this week in Brussels .
The process has taken too long .
It is time to sign the agreement , because it is in the interests of both the EU and Ukraine .
With a population of 46 million , Ukraine needs stability in the region .
In recent years , Ukraine has turned into a political football pitch : it must not be forced to choose between Russia and the West .
It is important for EU Member States , in particular , Lithuania , to actively seek closer cooperation with their Eastern neighbours , even if some differences remain .
The conclusion of a successful association agreement would encourage modernisation and reforms in Ukraine and help it to come closer to EU standards .
As for negotiations on the free trade area , we must seek agreements on tariff proposals , energy taxation procedures and sustainable development .
Liberalising the movement of people is also crucial .
Lithuanians still remember the travel restrictions they experienced .
We know what it means to live on Europe 's external border .
It is important for the issue of visa-free travel to be the number one priority .
I am voting for this report , since it is in the interests of the affected regions to establish a legal basis for trade between the EU and Greenland , in this case , coming under the umbrella of the rules of the EU 's internal market .
In 2010 , the Commission submitted to the Council a proposal for EU rules on the importation of fishery products , using Article 203 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union as its legal basis .
I agree with the interpretation that this activity should be regulated on the legislative basis of Article 43 , in conjunction with the provisions of Article 204 , thus allowing revisions to be made through the ordinary legislative procedure .
In 2007 alone , almost 87 % of fishery products exported from Greenland came to the EU .
For this reason , establishing general rules for trade and the importation of fishery products originating from Greenland cannot be left entirely to the Commission and the Council because this would contradict the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is why I believe that Parliament should make its voice heard in such an important sector .
I voted for the report on imports from Greenland of fishery products , which aims to apply internal market rules to these imports once Greenland undertakes to transpose European legislation , notably , legislation on animal health and food safety .
However , I believe that the proposal 's legal basis should be adapted so that the text takes the form of a regulation rather than a Council decision .
This proposal sets out general rules for EU-Greenland trade in , inter alia , fishery products , live bivalve molluscs , echinoderms , tunicates , marine gastropods and their by-products .
The Member States should authorise the importing of products originating in Greenland , in line with Union legislation on internal trade .
The importing of products to the Union will be subject to a number of conditions , including the effective transposition and application of applicable rules established in Union legislation regarding animal health and food safety .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that the proposed text should be adopted using the ordinary legislative procedure , and that Parliament should exercise its legislative rights in similar cases in the future .
Exports of fishery products from Greenland represent around 82 % of its total exports , totalling EUR 255 million in 2007 .
The majority - 87 % - were directed to the EU , notably to Denmark , at 97 % .
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted unanimously an opinion supporting the request that Articles 43 ( 2 ) and 204 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) and the Sole Article of the Protocol ( No 34 ) on Special Arrangements for Greenland must form the legal basis for the proposed legislative text , instead of the legal basis chosen by the Commission : that is , Article 203 of the TFEU .
Therefore , given that it is a legal issue that is in question and not the content of the proposal for a resolution , and given the consensus obtained , I agree with its adoption .
The great debate surrounding this report is a side issue to its motivation .
Specifically , the European Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries expressed its disagreement with the legal basis chosen by the Commission for tabling this proposal : Article 203 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , which provides for the Council examining ' provisions as regards the detailed rules and the procedure for the association of the countries and territories with the Union ' after consulting the European Parliament .
The Committee on Fisheries believed that Articles 43 ( 2 ) - referring to the ordinary legislative procedure , or colegislation - and 204 of the TFEU should be adopted as its legal basis , along with the Sole Article of the Protocol ( No 34 ) on Special Arrangements for Greenland .
This position was supported by the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
The important issue that should , at its base , constitute the substance of the report remains on its margins : the defining of rules applicable to imports of fishery products from Greenland to the EU .
Key fisheries exports from Greenland include prawn ( 59 % ) , Greenland halibut ( 23 % ) , cod ( 9.5 % ) , crabs ( 1.9 % ) , scallops ( 1.4 % ) and spawn ( 1.3 % ) .
in writing . - I voted in favour of Ms Fraga 's report , which allows Greenland to export fishery products to the EU despite not being a member .
When Greenland won significant home-rule and decided to opt out of the EC , they had to negotiate their exit .
This precedent gives the lie to false claims that internal enlargement of the EU would require newly independent EU states to reapply for membership .
I voted in favour of this report on the proposal for a Council decision laying down rules for imports into the European Union from Greenland of fishery products , live bivalve molluscs , echinoderms , tunicates , marine gastropods and by-products thereof .
Greenland 's exports of fishery products , approximately 82 % of its total exports , totalled EUR 255 million in 2007 , the largest part of which ( 87 % ) were directed to the EU , notably ( 97 % ) to Denmark .
Key fisheries exports from Greenland include prawn ( 59 % ) , Greenland halibut ( 23 % ) , cod ( 9.5 % ) , crabs ( 1.9 % ) , scallops ( 1.4 % ) and spawn ( 1.3 % ) .
This decision includes an amendment to the legal framework , from a Council decision to a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council .
in writing . - ( DE ) The trade in fishery products , live bivalve molluscs , echinoderms , tunicates , marine gastropods and their by-products between Greenland and the European Union in accordance with the rules laid down in Union legislation and other conditions is perfectly acceptable .
Therefore , there is no reason to object to the content of the agreement .
The import of these products makes a welcome contribution to trade within the Union .
Commercial relations between the EU and Greenland have been significant in nature for some years .
Indeed , since 2007 , Greenland has exported 82 % of its fishery products , of which 87 % comes to the European market .
We can therefore say that this is an important resource for Greenland , in addition to what Europe offers in terms of financial support in exchange for maintaining their fishing rights in Greenland 's waters .
On 26 April 2010 , the European Parliament asked the Committee on Legal Affairs to give an opinion so as to determine a legal basis on which to establish agreements with Greenland .
The Committee on Legal Affairs recently supported Parliament and confirmed that the legal basis of the agreements can be found , as upheld , in Article 43 ( 2 ) and in Article 204 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
in writing . - I voted for this proposal which lays down rules regarding imports into the EU from Greenland of fishery products and other marine products .
Greenland and the EU intend to enter into a sanitary arrangement on these products , with the objective being that Greenland can trade these commodities with the EU on the basis of internal market rules , provided that Greenland transposes EU sanitary and animal health rules on fishery products .
With the laying down of rules on EU-Greenland trade in fishery products , live bivalve molluscs , echinoderms , tunicates , marine gastropods and their by-products , imports from Greenland are in compliance with EU legislation .
Imports of products to the Union have to be subject to applicable rules established in Union legislation regarding the issues of animal health and food safety .
That is why the adoption of this report is important .
in writing . - It is known that Greenland and the European Union intend to sign a sanitary arrangement concerning fish and fishery products for human consumption .
The objective of such an arrangement would be that Greenland can trade these commodities with the Union on the basis of internal market rules , provided that Greenland transposes EU sanitary and , where appropriate , animal health rules on its fishery products .
I support that arrangement and I voted ' for ' .
On 26 April 2010 , the European Parliament was consulted on this proposal by the Council under the consultation procedure provided for in Article 203 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
The Committee on Fisheries and Parliament 's legal service expressed serious doubts as to the Commission 's choice of Article 203 of the TFEU as the legal basis , suggesting instead as its correct legal basis Articles 43 ( 2 ) and 204 of the TFEU and the Sole Article of the Protocol ( No 34 ) on Special Arrangements for Greenland .

The Commission 's draft was amended in line with the report that is currently being voted on , following the recommendations of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
This report deserves my vote in favour as it is absolutely desirable that it be adopted now , at first reading .
in writing . - In favour .
Greenland 's exports of fishery products , approximately 82 % of its total exports , totalled DKK 1.9 billion ( EUR 255 million ) in 2007 , the largest part of which ( 87 % ) went to the EU , notably ( 97 % ) to Denmark .

Key fisheries exports from Greenland include prawn ( 59 % ) , Greenland halibut ( 23 % ) , cod ( 9.5 % ) , crabs ( 1.9 % ) , scallops ( 1.4 % ) and spawn ( 1.3 % ) .
On 26 April 2010 , the European Parliament was consulted on this proposal by the Council under the consultation procedure provided for in Article 203 TFEU .
The Committee on Fisheries and the Legal Service of the European Parliament expressed serious doubts as to the choice of the legal basis by the Commission , i.e. Article 203 TFEU , suggesting instead Articles 43 ( 2 ) and 204 TFEU and the Sole Article of the Protocol ( No 34 ) on Special Arrangements for Greenland as the correct legal basis .

Accordingly , the Committee on Fisheries asked the Committee on Legal Affairs for an opinion on the proposed legal basis .
At its meeting of 28 October 2010 , the Committee on Legal Affairs adopted unanimously an opinion entirely supporting the request that Articles 43 ( 2 ) and 204 TFEU and the Sole Article of the Protocol ( No 34 ) on Special Arrangements for Greenland form the legal basis for the proposed legislative act .

At the moment , a special agreement exists between the EU and Greenland by which the European Union maintains its fishing rights in the waters of Greenland in exchange for financial support .
Greenland , a former Danish colony , attained full independence in 1985 , while maintaining ties with the European Union as one of its overseas territories .
In 2007 alone , 82 % of Greenland 's exports were fishery products , and of those , 87 % came to the EU .
On 26 April 2010 , the Committee on Fisheries and the Legal Service of the European Parliament expressed serious doubts about the legal basis chosen by the Commission to draw up the agreement .
I hope that the agreement voted on will produce an extension of the application of internal EU rules relating to fishery products including those from Greenland .
At the same time , existing European rules on animal health and food safety in the fishing industry must always be respected .
I agree with the position set out in this report , taking into account the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission , and because this is , therefore , a straightforward codification of the existing texts , without any change in their substance .
I voted in favour of this resolution on minimum standards on procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing international protection .
Work on the creation of a common European asylum system ( CEAS ) started immediately after the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam in May 1999 , but despite the efforts made over the last ten years to achieve harmonisation in the asylum sector , major discrepancies still remain between national provisions and the way they are applied .
I agree with the opinion that in whichever Member State applicants lodge an asylum request , they must enjoy a high standard of treatment that is equivalent throughout the Union .
Legislative harmonisation alone in this area is therefore insufficient and must be backed up by enhanced practical cooperation among the Member States .
It is clear that in order to achieve these objectives , it is necessary to adopt reforms without delay , so that people seeking asylum in EU Member States are provided with effective protection .
By voting in favour of this resolution , we MEPs are contributing to the creation of a fair and effective European asylum policy .
I think that the proposals are contradictory .
On the one hand , their aim is to achieve greater harmonisation , improve international protection standards and enhance the quality and efficiency of asylum procedures .
On the other hand , they will result in an unjustified administrative burden , the simplified court procedures will make it much more likely for courts to make rash decisions , various groups of people may be treated differently for no good reason , and Member States ' sovereignty may be greatly restricted .
Weighing up the pros and cons of the proposals , as neither is clearly supported by more convincing arguments , I abstained from voting .
The European Union 's key objective in the area of asylum entails establishing a common area of protection and solidarity by 2012 based on a common asylum procedure .
Despite the efforts made over the last ten years to achieve harmonisation in the asylum sector , major discrepancies still remain between national provisions and the way they are applied .
In whichever Member State applicants lodge an asylum request , they must enjoy the same treatment , taking into account common standards applicable throughout the European Union .
The adoption of a sound European legal framework is a sine qua non if the Union wishes to introduce a common European asylum system in an adequate and effective manner .
Thus , only by improving and harmonising the procedures and related guarantees will it be possible to achieve a common asylum system .
Furthermore , a fundamental revision of the Procedures Directive is vital , so as to provide an accessible , fair and effective procedure , as much in the interests of asylum seekers as in those of the Member States .
I would like to stress that the Commission 's new revised proposal for this directive may genuinely help to achieve greater harmonisation , improve international protection standards and enhance the quality and efficiency of asylum procedures .
In spite of the efforts made over the last 10 years to achieve harmonisation in the asylum sector , major discrepancies still remain between national provisions and in the way they are applied .
Such discrepancies are incompatible with a common European asylum system and are an obstacle to its development .
They run counter to one of the cornerstones of the Dublin system , which is based on the presumption that Member States ' asylum systems are comparable .
In whichever Member State applicants lodge an asylum request , they must enjoy the same high level of protection across the whole Union .
While legislative harmonisation will not suffice to reduce these differences and will need to be supplemented by practical cooperation among Member States , adopting a sound European legal framework is an absolute prerequisite for the Union to implement a common European asylum system in an adequate and effective manner , just as it has repeatedly pledged to do so .
The Commission 's proposal will rectify the mistakes of the past , when the previous approach to asylum encouraged a series of shortcomings regarding procedural guarantees for asylum seekers .
in writing . - UKIP MEPs abstained on the amendments to this report .
This was not due to indifference on our part ; rather , it is because this report is a development of the Common Immigration and Asylum Policy under the Lisbon Treaty .
The peoples of Europe do not want the Lisbon Treaty or a Common Immigration and Asylum Policy either , which is why they were denied a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty .
To vote on the amendments would have entailed endorsing existing EU legislation ( which we don 't want either ) and a nit-picking exercise in order to decide which bits were worse than others .
Therefore , UKIP MEPs abstained on the amendments , but voted a resounding ' No ' to the report as a whole .
I voted in favour of this resolution to harmonise the various national systems while better protecting applicants ' rights and improving the quality of procedures .
This resolution provides legal assistance right from the start of the procedure while taking better account of the specificity of vulnerable applicants such as unaccompanied minors .
However , I regret that for the vote in plenary , the European right targeted the strengthening of accelerated procedures based on the notion that asylum seekers are all potential fraudsters .
I regret that these amendments were adopted , because this perspective on asylum is out of all proportion .
in writing . - As a UKIP MEP , I am against any kind of EU interference in the UK system of asylum and in any related directive which would force EU rules on the UK .
I therefore abstained on votes to all amendments because I will not accept even those that might be seen to be helpful ; this is a matter for the UK alone .
I therefore voted against the amended proposal and against the legislative resolution .
Enormous progress has been made towards the creation of a common European asylum system in the last decade .
However , major discrepancies still remain between national provisions and in the way they are applied , which need to be overcome if we want to establish a common area of protection and solidarity by 2012 , based , inter alia , on a common asylum procedure .
The great objective is that , irrespective of the Member State in which applicants lodge an asylum request , they must enjoy a high standard of treatment that is equivalent throughout the Union .
That is why a fundamental revision of the Procedures Directive is important , so as to provide an accessible , fair and effective procedure .
The Commission 's initiative is generally positive , enabling greater consistency and harmonisation , improving protection standards , and enhancing the quality and efficiency of procedures .
I would congratulate the rapporteur on her work and commitment , but I regret that some of her proposals went a little too far , which ended up making agreement with the Council impossible on this initiative that appears so urgently needed so as to increase the efficiency of the asylum process and prevent abuses .
The report by Mrs Guillaume is an important step towards the revision of EU rules on asylum and protection for applicants for 2012 .
In view of the terrible tragedies that have taken place , such as the recent sinking of a Libyan boat off Lampedusa , this revision is vital , particularly considering that an applicant 's chances of obtaining asylum may differ greatly according to the Member State .
With this text , we are calling on the European Commission to include in the proposed revision the right to free legal advice from the start of the procedure ; better consideration of vulnerable applicants , such as unaccompanied minors ; and a framework for the time limit for appeals .
My one regret , however , is that the European right adopted a tightening of accelerated procedures based on the notion that asylum seekers are primarily potential fraudsters , limiting their rights .
However , the adoption of Mrs Guillaume 's report sends a clear signal to the Council and Commission that they need to work to guarantee all asylum seekers in Europe decent , fair conditions and procedures .
I voted in favour of this report because I argue that these measures contribute to the creation of a common European asylum system that is fair and efficient .
These measures have a direct impact on those seeking protection , as well as on the European Union 's ability to develop and create a genuine area of freedom , security and justice .
The European Union and the Member States have been working towards implementing a common European asylum system for a long time .
It is easy to understand the sensitivity and complexity that efforts to this end take on , since this issue gets right to the heart of states ' powers as regards foreigners .
The Commission has , however , been tabling proposals to Parliament and the Council aimed at providing suitable solutions to the problems that have been detected .
The recasting of the Procedures Directive , proposed by the Commission on 21 October 2009 , is part of this improvement process .
Despite the distance already travelled , we are still a long way from the harmonisation that many of us want .
Increasing the harmonisation of procedures and guarantees will make a positive contribution to clarifying the process , so the proposed revision of the directive seems opportune .
Work on the creation of a common European asylum system started immediately after the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam in 1999 .
In December 2005 , with the objective of harmonising the Member States ' legal procedures , Council Directive 2005 / 85 / EC on asylum procedures was adopted , laying down the rules for granting and withdrawing ' refugee status ' .
The recent social and political upheaval in a number of countries , specifically in North Africa and the Middle East , have brought issues relating to asylum applications in the European Union onto the agenda .
In truth , when refugees cross a border , they should not be persecuted or received with mistrust .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this proposal , which has ended up with a Manichaean interpretation of this problem , acknowledging that the right to asylum is a fundamental right and must be treated fairly and equitably by the Member States .
I welcome the rapporteur 's proposals which aim to develop a legal aid system , given that these are vulnerable people who lack effective guarantees ; to improve procedures ; and to improve procedures and give applicants better rights , minors in particular .
The proposal for a directive on minimum standards on procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing international protection follows the same lines as the creation of a common European asylum system .
Nevertheless , it should be understood that the progress of this legal ' harmonisation ' goes hand-in-hand with overall foreign policy followed by the European Union , and its hypocritical positions on immigration and aid for refugees .
The situation in Lampedusa , where there are thousands of refugees without adequate protection , is a clear demonstration of this , not to mention the hundreds or thousands who have been dying in boats crossing the Mediterranean , as has just happened again , disgracefully .
We are extremely concerned with the scale of the current problem , especially given what is happening in the serious armed conflicts , in Libya in particular .
We would also stress the fact that this proposal for a directive includes aspects that will end up restricting the right to asylum and applying conditions to it , above all , limiting each Member State 's sovereign right to make its own choices and decide on its own asylum procedures .
The proposal for a directive being voted on in the European Parliament today on minimum standards on procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing international protection follows the same lines as the creation of a common European asylum system .
Nevertheless , it should be understood that the progress of this legal ' harmonisation ' goes hand-in-hand with overall foreign policy followed by the European Union , and its hypocritical positions on immigration and aid for refugees , such as the situation in Lampedusa , where there are thousands of refugees without adequate protection , not to mention the hundreds or thousands who have been dying in boats crossing the Mediterranean .
We are extremely concerned with the scale of the current problem , especially given what is happening in the serious armed conflicts , in Libya in particular .
We would also stress the fact that this proposal for a directive includes aspects that will end up restricting access to the right to asylum and applying conditions to it , above all , as regards each Member State 's sovereign right to make its own choices and decide on its own asylum procedures .
Hence , our critical position as regards this report .
International protection is supposed to enable people who are truly persecuted in their own country to seek refuge under better circumstances .
However , as it is , and although some amendments have helped to improve it , the report by Mrs Guillaume is a real incentive for people to abuse this process , clogging up the relevant services and depriving those who really need their case to be reviewed quickly .


Minors , whatever their age or true circumstances , benefit from total goodwill that is entirely unjustified ; there are limited opportunities to use the accelerated procedure in order to reject manifestly unfounded applications ; appeals are systematically of a suspensive nature ; the request for a review of negative decisions has become a right ; and the necessary cooperation of the applicant for protection is hardly ever required , even when it is a matter of proving his or her identity and origin , which is nonetheless the minimum requirement for reviewing the case .
Applications for international protection cannot and should not be a means of circumventing restrictive measures against unwanted economic migration .
It is disgraceful that Parliament lends a hand to this kind of circumvention by granting inordinate rights to false asylum seekers .
in writing . - With reference to the Guillaume report , although , in principle , this represents a significant step towards the realisation of a common asylum policy system for Europe , I voted against the group on a number of clauses as I felt that they did not reflect realistically the complexities and problems faced by my country , Malta , which is a regular recipient of migrants .
Having said that , however , when it came to the final vote , I voted in favour of the whole report which ultimately contained a number of very good clauses addressing Member States ' needs and preoccupations .
One example is the call for the immediate mobilisation of financial , administrative and technical support for Member States receiving disproportionately large numbers of asylum applications .
Such an initiative is essential for all Member States , but especially so for countries like Malta - often burdened with responsibilities and complexities , due to the reception of large inflows of migrants , which it cannot shoulder on its own .
On Wednesday , 6 April 2011 , the European Parliament adopted the report on the so-called Asylum Procedures Directive .
This vote represents an important step towards creating a genuine European policy on asylum , which we have long requested .
Furthermore , this adoption is a clear sign that the EU needs a common European asylum system ( CEAS ) by 2012 , especially since recent events in the Southern Mediterranean and the recent migration flows from North Africa have clearly proved the limitations of the current European system .
There is an urgent need to revise the EU directives for a credible and efficient system .
Specifically , it is my firm belief that the provisions relating to the accelerated procedure and the rejection of manifestly unfounded applications should not apply to unaccompanied minors or asylum seekers with special needs , so I voted in favour of those amendments that specified otherwise .
Secondly , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe was totally opposed to adding further grounds for allowing an accelerated review of an application for asylum , given the risks that these provisions present for asylum seekers , and I deeply regret that the corresponding amendments were adopted by such a small majority .
Finally , with regard to the ' safe third country ' concept , I chose to abstain .
We must work harder than ever to establish a genuine common European asylum system ( CEAS ) for 2012 by better protecting applicants ' rights and improving the quality of procedures .
My report goes in that direction , in particular , by including the right to free legal advice from the start of the procedure ; better consideration of vulnerable applicants , such as unaccompanied minors ; and a framework for the time limit for appeals .
I regret that the European right only targeted the tightening of accelerated procedures based on the notion that asylum seekers are almost all potential fraudsters , because this perspective on asylum is out of all proportion .
In my opinion , more robust procedures and decisions and faster examination of cases will mean that there are fewer appeals and unfounded applications will be more easily identified .
in writing . - The Guillaume report covers important areas of law and emphasises the need for human rights to be fully respected in relation to people seeking asylum .
My own country , Scotland , does not as yet have control over immigration . However , the policies which have been implemented by successive UK governments have been quite inhumane .
I am proud to be a member of a party which has actively campaigned against the brutal incarceration of young children seeking asylum .
I voted in favour of this document because I believe that we should seize this opportunity to develop a common European asylum system that is fair and efficient .
Asylum policies have a direct impact on those seeking protection , as well as on the European Union 's ability to develop and create a genuine area of freedom , security and justice .
It is necessary to ensure harmonised , fair and efficient procedures under the common European asylum system .
The proposal referred to Parliament for a directive regarding the possible provision of a unified procedure for the 27 States of the Union in granting the right of asylum is an important step , but the delicacy of the issue requires careful and thorough reflection .
The ultimate goal is to ensure that States draw their laws closer to one another in accordance with the commitments made under the Treaty of Stockholm , simplifying and speeding up the procedures .
Another goal is to provide a high degree of protection for asylum seekers , ensuring a rapid verdict in the first instance , free legal assistance and permission to stay in the country until the final ruling .
Notwithstanding the good intentions , I voted against this draft directive as it is imprecise on some technical and procedural aspects and some of the definitions are ambiguous .
In fact , it is formulated in such a manner that the directive would lend itself to easy abuse on the part of applicants .
For these reasons , I decided not to support this version of the text as I do not agree with it totally .
in writing . - ( FR ) As part of its policy plan on asylum , the European Union aims to create a common European asylum system .
Indeed , freedom of movement within Member States that are party to the Schengen Agreement now requires us to make a concerted effort to understand immigration issues .
The report on the granting and withdrawing of international protection will reform the system that exists through Directive 2005 / 85 / EC .
The demographic pressures on Europe today require us to consider these issues with increased vigilance .
Unfortunately , the report by Mrs Guillaume does not reflect those considerations , which led me , along with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , to oppose it .
Indeed , it leaves too much vagueness and laxity in the procedures , which creates the risk that this historic right will be misused .
For example , the notion of ' family members ' is too broad and risks being abused .
After six months of procedures , it will be up to the Member State in question to prove that the applicant is not being persecuted , making the task much more complicated for the relevant authorities .
Restrictions on the use of accelerated procedures will further increase all these difficulties .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The first days when refugees arrive in Europe are crucial in determining their status and European countries must , by 2012 , improve their asylum procedures at that very first stage , according to the report .
Notably , the adopted report calls on EU countries to enhance the minimum procedural safeguards , particularly as regards the right to free legal assistance , the right to information , and the right to personal interview ; to give special attention to vulnerable applicants , like children ; and the adoption , in codecision with the European Parliament , of a common list of safe third countries .
I voted against the report by Mrs Guillaume because it establishes criteria for the harmonisation of asylum procedures that are unrealistic in relation to those procedures currently in force in our Member States .
We certainly want a common asylum system , but not at the cost of a utopian harmonisation .
Parliament 's vote today clearly shows the unease that is felt in this House , of which half rejected this demagogic approach , preferring a more responsible approach advocating the adoption of asylum systems that are effective and workable in practice .
All UN Member States have an obligation to protect refugees and asylum seekers .
The EU gets away with ignoring this law by requiring Member States with EU borders to hold refugees and asylum seekers in camps to await a decision that is even more uncertain , given that suspicion is the norm , accelerated procedures have been maintained , and the number of officials in charge of these cases has been reduced .
On the other hand , I would note that this text makes some significant improvements , such as the end of the absurd ' safe country of origin ' concept , the ban on detaining minors and the inclusion of persecution on the grounds of sexual orientation .
More than 10 years have already passed since work on the creation of a common European asylum system ( CEAS ) started immediately after the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam in May 1999 , on the basis of the principles approved by the Tampere European Council .
During the first phase of the CEAS ( 1999-2005 ) , the goal was to harmonise Member States ' legal frameworks on the basis of minimum standards .
There is still a long way to go before true harmonisation will have taken place , but we have to be conscious that only by improving and harmonising the procedures and related guarantees will it be possible to achieve a common system .
With this in mind , a fundamental revision of the Procedures Directive is absolutely vital , so as to provide an accessible , fair and effective procedure , as much in the interests of asylum seekers as in those of the Member States .
in writing . - If the aim of the resolution is to create an accessible , honest and efficient procedure for granting asylum on the territory of the European Union , in that case , people looking for protection will be granted standard European Union guarantees and EU Member States will be able to distinguish asylum seekers from other migrants .
I voted ' for ' .
In the efforts to create a common European asylum system , the focus is on the rights of asylum seekers .
However , this ignores the fact that the majority of these people are not genuine asylum seekers but economic migrants , who have no right to asylum under the Geneva Convention and who have taken up the authorities ' time by providing incorrect information and employing a range of delaying tactics , giving rise to costs of billions of euro .
In the other direction , very little progress is being made with regard to repatriation .
In the light of the flood of refugees from the overpopulated regions of the world , most of whom are motivated by economic considerations , who are importing the problems and conflicts of areas all over the world into Europe and who are not required to cooperate in the process , we must oppose unequivocally the introduction of stricter unilateral standards of protection which will attract asylum seekers and economic migrants like a magnet and only exacerbate the problem .
I voted in favour of this proposal because we must make every effort to ensure that we achieve a European asylum system that is even more efficient and has a positive impact on people .
Asylum policies are very important as they have a huge impact on the European Union 's ability to develop and create a common area of freedom , security and justice .
Above all , we must achieve greater consistency between asylum instruments .
Procedures must be harmonised so that they can proceed in a fair and effective manner .
Furthermore , we must enhance the minimum procedural safeguards .
We must ensure that asylum applicants enjoy the right to information , the right to be heard and the right to free legal assistance , and that there are no restrictions on these rights .
All procedural instruments must be non-discriminatory and uniformly applied with due regard for minimum rights guarantees and principles .
Particular attention must be paid to vulnerable asylum applicants .
The interests of children must be adequately ensured and represented by applying the necessary procedures .
I agree with the proposal providing for the opportunity to immediately deport a person who may be a danger to the Member State 's national security or who has been forcibly expelled from a country for reasons of public security under national law .
Such an opportunity is very important and necessary because it provides Member States with increased opportunities to stop terrorist networks from operating and to take appropriate preventive measures .
It was in May 1999 , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , that work on the creation of a common European asylum system ( CEAS ) started , on the basis of the principles approved by the Tampere European Council .
There has been significant progress towards it . The proposal now being tabled of a fundamental revision and recasting of the Procedures Directive represents another step forward .
In fact , the discrepancies still remaining between national provisions and in the way they are applied were totally incompatible with a CEAS , and are the reason for these amendments .
The goal of the CEAS is for an applicant to enjoy a high standard of treatment that is equivalent throughout the Union , irrespective of the Member State in which they lodge an asylum request .
To that end , I agree that there is a need to establish a robust European legal framework that enables the creation of an adequate and effective CEAS .
I voted for this report because I think that only improving and harmonising the procedures and related guarantees will enable the construction of a common system .
I voted in favour of the excellent report by my colleague and friend , Mrs Guillaume , on procedures for granting and withdrawing asylum in Europe .
This text marks a major step forward in establishing a common European asylum system ( CEAS ) by 2012 , thereby putting an end to the intolerable situation whereby , depending on the European country in which an asylum seeker applies for protection , his or her chances of being recognised as a refugee vary between 1 % and 65 % .
Parliament has therefore spoken out in favour of greater justice and greater efficiency in the processing of asylum procedures .
It proposes that each country observe the same enhanced rules on protecting rights and modernising procedures : free legal advice from day one , a framework for the time limit for appeals , special assistance for unaccompanied minors , and a faster examination of cases .
Also , although I regret that the European right , which has a majority in Parliament , has managed to adopt amendments to the text which cast widespread , exaggerated suspicion on the sincerity of asylum seekers , I warmly welcome the adoption of this report .
The ball is now in the court of those Member States that have yet to decide on our proposals .
in writing . - In favour .
I am particularly happy that our centre-right colleagues agreed on the need for special protection , regardless of their general position on asylum .
Lesbian , gay , bisexual and transgender people fleeing countries such as Iraq , Uganda , Honduras or Indonesia must receive particular protection taking into account cultural sensitivity .
This is a major step towards fully complying with our engagements under international asylum law .
The European Parliament is showing that asylum rules need updating to reflect reality : 76 countries criminalise homosexual acts and 7 foresee the death penalty ( maybe 8 soon with Uganda ) .
I regret that other progressive provisions did not pass , but today 's text will ultimately bring more fairness for LGBT asylum seekers .
The text adopted today is the European Parliament 's formal position at first reading .
Asylum rules will effectively be amended once EU governments examine the text and conclude an agreement with the European Parliament .
After years of debate and having signed the Treaty of Lisbon , the Committee has submitted to Parliament the first draft for a common asylum procedure between Member States .
The objective is to establish by 2012 a common area of security and solidarity based on harmonised asylum policies between Member States , despite the persistent differences between national regulations .
In fact , these national differences are inconsistent with a common European asylum system and constitute an obstacle to its realisation .
In particular , the new law states that asylum seekers should be granted an equivalent level of treatment throughout Europe , irrespective of the Member State in which the application is made .
It is important that we work towards a gradual improvement and harmonisation of procedures and effective guarantees of asylum , in order to implement a common European system .
I hope that in the context of this review , we ensure an accessible , equitable and effective procedure , in the interests of both asylum seekers and the need for protection for Member States .
We have expressed such convinced opposition to the Parliamentary directive on the unified asylum procedure because , if implemented , it would , in effect , override the sovereignty of Member States .
We consider it unacceptable to prevent Member States from denying asylum and favourable treatment to unwanted people throughout the European Union when there are European families who do not even enjoy the right to housing .
Asylum seekers are also granted the right to legal advice , aid and representation totally free of charge .
It also specifies that NGOs can play an active role in providing services , giving information on procedures for obtaining protection and offering guidance and advice to asylum seekers which should be supplied at border crossings or in reception centres .
Bear in mind that all these benefits will be paid for by European taxpayers and will be granted not only to refugees but to all asylum seekers and , consequently , to any illegal or clandestine immigrant who requests it .
in writing . - ( DE ) I have voted against the report .
It concerns the implementation of a well-organised , common and rapid asylum procedure in Europe based on uniform legal standards .
However , the amendments tabled by the greens and the socialists will ensure that foreigners can live in the EU with almost no means available for exercising control over them .
As a result , we will be doing a disservice to the genuine asylum seekers who are applying for asylum because their lives are at risk or on political , religious or ethical grounds , as we will be grouping them together with all the other migrants .
That is not my idea of asylum policy .
Asylum policy should be an act of humanity and solidarity .
If we provide these people with a service , then they must offer something in return , for example , by acknowledging and respecting the structures of their host country .
The tourism sector has been increasingly important to European companies and people in recent times .
As such , it is important that statistics for developing more effective tourism policies at European , national , regional and local level be as reliable as possible , since they are instruments for supporting the decision-making process in companies and in the private sector .
I should also stress that it is important that the Commission welcome these suggestions in the terms in which they are proposed .
Tourism statistics play a major role in the development of more effective tourism policies at European , national , regional and local levels .
However , these statistics are not only used to monitor tourism-specific policies , but also play a key role in the context of regional policy and sustainable development .
I think that the European Union tourism sector needs to be strengthened through coordinated action at EU level which will complement Member States ' initiatives .
I welcome the aim to update and optimise the legal framework for European statistics on tourism , which will better address the challenges facing this sector , such as climate change , environmental constraints , global competition , demographic trends and seasonal distribution of tourist movements .
This new common framework for systematically generating European statistics on tourism must be established by the Member States collecting , compiling , processing and transmitting harmonised statistics on supply and demand .
I voted for this report as tourism is an important economic activity in the European Union , contributing to higher employment and economic growth .
It is to Europe that most of the world 's tourists come : some 370 million international tourists visiting annually .
About 7 million overseas tourists visit Ireland every year .
The tourism sector is of great importance to European enterprises and to the economies of Member States .
Currently , 1.8 million enterprises and 9.7 million jobs depend on European tourism .
There are significant growth opportunities in the same sector , in terms of eco-tourism , heritage , sport and gastronomy .
To get the best value from these opportunities , the tourism sector must be properly understood .
To this end , I support this report on statistical information and tourism .
Accurate information on local , national and European tourism will help the EU to develop effective policies and to encourage tourism in Europe .
Since the tourism sector is vital for Ireland and in the context of the country 's geographical location , I especially welcome what the report contains about the special situation of islands and outer regions , and about the discussion of those special cases in the EU Action Framework for European Tourism .
I voted in favour of this report .
Tourism is an important economic activity in the EU with a high potential for contributing to greater employment and economic growth , as well as to playing an important role in socio-economic integration in rural and less-developed areas .
With some 1.8 million businesses , primarily SMEs , the European tourism industry employs approximately 5.2 % of the total workforce ( approximately 9.7 million jobs ) .
I support the Commission 's aim to define a new policy framework for tourism in Europe , drawing on the new competences introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
The tourism sector faces major challenges , such as increasing global competition , demographic trends , climate change and environmental constraints , the seasonal distribution of tourist movements and the increasing use by customers of new information and communication technologies .
I believe that it is necessary to strengthen the EU tourism sector by coordinated action at EU level that complements Member States ' initiatives .
This regulation , whose aim is to establish a common framework for the systematic production of European statistics on tourism by means of the collection , compilation , processing and transmission by the Member States of harmonised European statistics on tourism supply and demand , is very important because , if it is implemented properly , it will be possible to ascertain the true situation as regards tourism in the Member States and it will be easier to adapt to tourists ' changing needs .
Tourism is an important sector of the European economy , with around 1.8 million companies , primarily small and medium-sized enterprises , employing approximately 9.7 million workers .
It is estimated that the tourism industry produces more than 5 % of the EU 's Gross Domestic Product .
With the tabling of Communication COM ( 2010 ) 352 , the Commission aims to define a new policy framework for tourism in Europe , seeking to reinforce the sector through coordinated action at EU level that complements the Member States ' initiatives .
Therefore , in order for the new political framework to be successful , decisions must be taken , founded and based on reliable and comparable statistical data .
This report , which deserved my support , recognises the important role of statistics for developing better tourism policies at European , national , regional and local level , since they represent useful instruments for supporting the decision-making process .
It also supports the establishment of a common legislative framework for the systematic production of European statistics on tourism by means of the collection , compilation , processing and transmission by the Member States of harmonised European statistics on tourism supply and demand .
Statistics plays an important role in the development of more effective tourism policies and in making business decisions .
I support the text because , on the one hand , the changes that have taken place in the tourism industry in recent years have created the need to update the legal framework for European statistics on tourism .
Once adopted , the proposal will improve the timeliness , comparability and completeness of the statistics transmitted , as well as make data processing more efficient .
The Simpson report , and the regulation to which it refers , propose the establishment of a common framework for the collection and distribution of European statistics on tourism through data gathering and processing , to be carried out by individual Member States with harmonised statistics on demand and supply in tourism using aggregated tables which are then transmitted electronically to the European Commission ( Eurostat ) .
Despite the commendable work of the rapporteur , I cannot vote in favour of the report because it does not change the quantity of work and data collection set out in the regulation .
The compilation of tables proposed by the regulation is somewhat complex and the collection of so much information is , in my opinion , an unreasonable burden .
I cannot , therefore , approve the bureaucratic burden and interference which this regulation would produce .
I voted in favour of this report because it is necessary to improve European tourism policies , particularly given the fact that the European tourism sector has recently had to endure a difficult economic situation .
With the change in the legal framework following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union received more competences and the European Commission presented a proposal on the new policy context for tourism .
The aim of this proposal for a regulation is to update and optimise the legal framework for European statistics on tourism , but there is concern that the proposal does not provide for the introduction of tourism satellite accounts ( TSAs ) .
These TSAs are crucial to progressively developing integrated systems of tourism statistics and to better understanding the true value of tourism , as well as its effects on jobs and the economy .
Furthermore , with a view to enhancing the knowledge base for the development and growth of tourism , the Commission should draw up a programme of pilot studies on tourism .
These studies would be carried out by Member States on a voluntary basis in order to develop a system for the compilation of data showing the effects of tourism on the environment
In several Member States , as is the case with mine , Portugal , tourism occupies an important place in the economy that has intrinsic potential for generating new sources of revenue and economic growth .
Tourism represents the third largest European socio-economic activity , generating over 5 % of EU Gross Domestic Product .
European Union remains the world 's number one tourist destination , with 40 % of arrivals worldwide in 2008 .
The EU aims to define a new policy framework for tourism , with the objective of reinforcing the sector so as to address the great challenges , such as climate change , demographic trends and globalisation , through coordinated action at EU level that complements the Member States ' initiatives .
Compiling data on tourism enables better knowledge of the volume represented by this sector , of its characteristics , of the profile of the tourists and of the various travel patterns , which contributes , not just to the proper formulation of policies for the sector , but also to better understanding of its socio-economic implications .
I therefore support the updating and optimisation of the current statistics system so that we can have reliable and comparable statistics .
We cannot deny that over the past decade , tourism has changed radically , thanks , among other things , to technological progress .
It is therefore necessary to update the legislation on the collection of data and statistics .
In this regard , I agree with the Commission 's proposal to introduce a new regulation which repeals some obsolete items .
At the same time , however , I am in favour of the amendments to the regulation of Parliament , especially with regard to , on the one hand , the need to introduce harmonised statistics that reflect the purely social aspects of tourism and , on the other , the position opposing the adoption of actions delegated by the Commission on key issues and for an indefinite period .
Also , I consider it a serious shortcoming that the Commission has failed to take into account the introduction of tourism satellite accounts ( TSAs ) , as this type of data would provide a more complete picture of the impact that tourism has on the labour market and the economy .
Finally , I am very interested in the proposal to introduce the voluntary collection of tourism statistics regarding the habits of people with disabilities or restricted mobility and the subsequent establishment of pilot projects in order to improve such persons ' participation in tourism .
Europe occupies seventh place in the top 10 destinations in a statistical survey covering the 50 most popular countries in the world .
This shows very clearly that Europe has great tourism and cultural potential , still offering opportunities to be utilised , including for European citizens .
I think that one such opportunity is encouraging the participation not only of the elderly , but also of young people , families living in difficult circumstances and people with reduced mobility in the social tourism programmes developed by the Union .
However , adequate statistics are required to do this , compiled using common collection methods , aimed at developing programmes targeted at these groups of tourists in every EU Member State .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the European statistics on tourism report today .
It is a positive step to establish a regulation that will take account of tourism statistics from all Member States .
The importance of tourism in European law was greatly elevated when it was made a competence under the Lisbon Treaty in December 2009 .
Going forward , Member States will have to ensure the accuracy of statistical data transmitted in order to achieve quality results .
While European-level coordination will be very beneficial for the European tourism sector , any pan-European initiatives should seek to complement Member States ' initiatives and tourism strategies .
By providing statistical data , the EU will be in a better position to help the tourism industry , including SMEs , and to improve the overall marketing of Europe as a highly desirable tourist destination .
The distinction between internal and national tourism is drawn in the report .
Internal tourism covers the capacity of tourist accommodation establishments , and national tourism covers participation in tourism , including excursions .
I voted for this report because I believe that tourism statistics contribute to the development of more effective policy and represent a useful tool for supporting the decision-making processes of companies and the private sector .
There is no doubt that this new regulation will improve the timeliness , comparability and completeness of the statistics transmitted , as well as the efficiency of the data processing .
According to the report 's figures , Europe remains the world 's number one tourist destination , and tourism is the third largest socio-economic activity in the EU , with some 1.8 million businesses , primarily small and medium-sized enterprises , 9.7 million jobs and production equivalent to 5 % of EU Gross Domestic Product .
For this very reason , it is an activity that should be properly monitored , regulated and supported , particularly in the specific context of the economic recovery and the need to increase production of saleable goods .
While this is the reality for the whole EU , it is especially important for Portugal , which is a country that has , for a long time , been very invested in tourism , as a particularly dynamic economic activity with vast potential for growth .
In this context , and given the importance that a profound and realistic knowledge of the reality of tourism has for developing appropriate policies , the Commission 's proposal intended to update and optimise the legal framework for European statistics on tourism that we voted on today is important .
This report is on an area that is fundamental to the future of the EU : tourism .
Despite the crisis that has taken hold at global level , according to the World Tourism Organisation ( WTO ) , in 2010 , this sector saw growth of 2 % , despite all the political upheavals in a number of areas of the world .
At European level , as well as growing steadily , tourism encompasses 1.8 million businesses , the large majority of these being small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , providing 9.7 million jobs , ranking as the third largest socio-economic activity in the EU , and generating more than 5 % of its Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) .
Moreover , Europe is the top tourist destination in the world , with 40 % of all tourist arrivals .
This activity is vital to realising the objectives set out in the Europe 2020 strategy .
This regulation updates the one currently in force , particularly with regard to the collection and processing of data on provision and accessibility for people with reduced mobility , which are essential to preparing the new EU tourism strategy .
I welcome the adoption of this proposal , which , as well as creating a programme of pilot studies to be carried out by the Member States , will include data on rural tourism and green tourism , which cover over 50 000 lodgings , the overwhelming majority of which are managed by SMEs .
The usefulness of statistical information depends on its comparability in time and space , which entails the adoption of a common set of definitions and classifications .
In the particular case of tourism , this sector includes concepts and definitions that have long been unclear , which has made it difficult to obtain reliable and credible information .
It is therefore necessary to clarify and harmonise criteria and definitions that enable comparable data to be obtained .
The existence of these statistics is of great importance in determining the direct and indirect impact of tourism on the economy , supporting the planning and development of new tourism options , or adapting existing ones .
The proposal included in the report is aimed at improving the timeliness , comparability and completeness of the statistics transmitted , as well as the efficiency of the data processing , including improved data evaluation .
It is also aimed at adapting the legal framework so as to reflect the latest changes to the sector with the introduction of new variables , such as tourist movements over a single day .
We therefore voted in favour .
We know that it is important to have statistical information , although its usefulness depends on its comparability in time and space , which entails the adoption of a common set of definitions and classifications .
In the particular case of tourism , this sector includes concepts and definitions that have long been unclear , which has made it difficult to obtain reliable and credible information .
It is therefore necessary to clarify and harmonise criteria and definitions that enable comparable data to be obtained .
The existence of these statistics is of great importance in determining the direct and indirect impact of tourism on the economy , supporting the planning and development of new tourism options , or adapting existing ones .
The proposal included in the report is aimed at improving the comparability and completeness of the statistics transmitted , as well as the efficiency of the data processing , including improved data evaluation .
It is also aimed at adapting the legal framework so as to reflect the latest changes to the sector with the introduction of new variables , such as tourist movements over a single day .
We therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - My group supported the report on Statistics on Tourism , which updates and modernises the method for collecting European statistics on tourism , particularly in the light of modern trends such as low-cost flights and short-stay holidays .
Politicians need to acknowledge the great importance of the tourism industry to Europe .
Individual Member States realise that more must be done to help this sector , which contributes greatly to economic growth .
For example , tourism is one of the largest sectors of the UK economy .
It directly supports 1.36 million jobs - and an expected 1.5 million by 2020 - and nearly 3 million if indirect employment is included .
These figures speak for themselves !
The UK is keen to participate actively and positively in discussions on tourism at EU level , supporting fully the need to improve the competitiveness of the European tourism industry and its capacity for sustainable growth .
However , we must ensure that EU-level action does not encroach on the principle of subsidiarity .
Member States are competing with each other , despite being able to share best practice and cooperate on certain issues , such as improving transport links across Europe and other measures enabling easier consumer travel .
Let me end with a simple message - Visit Britain !
The Treaty of Lisbon has increased the EU 's responsibility for tourism .
It goes without saying that statistics provide fundamental information and allow interesting conclusions to be drawn not only at an EU level , but also at a national and regional level .
In my region , which is home to the German-speaking community in Belgium , tourism is not only an important area of competence , but also a crucial economic factor .
For this reason , these statistics represent a significant element of policy making .
However , it is also clear that the different levels - regional , national and cross-border - must work together to define the regions of Europe more accurately as a tourism location , particularly in border areas .
I voted in favour of this document because it is necessary to define a new improved policy framework for tourism in Europe .
Tourism is an important economic activity in the EU with a high potential for contributing to greater employment and economic growth , as well as to playing an important role in socio-economic integration in rural , peripheral and less-developed areas , such as areas rich in industrial heritage .
Statistics in this field are not only used to monitor tourism-specific policies , but also play a role in the wider context of regional policy and sustainable development .
We need to address the main challenges facing the sector such as increasing global competition , demographic trends , climate change and environmental constraints , the seasonal distribution of tourist movements and the increasing use by customers of new information and communication technologies .
There is a need to strengthen the EU tourism sector by coordinated action at EU level that complements Member States ' initiatives .
In order to implement successfully the new policy framework , policy makers at all levels of governance need to take well-informed decisions , based on reliable and comparable statistical data .
Tourism is an important economic activity that has a positive impact on economic growth and employment in Europe , and therefore it is necessary to update and optimise the legal framework for European statistics on tourism , thereby strengthening the tourism sector at EU level .
Consequently , implementing the measures mentioned will increase the competitiveness of European tourism and encourage its harmonious growth .
I think the proposal for a regulation on European statistics on tourism , being voted on in this House , should be considered of particular interest and also very useful .
The tourism industry is , for Europe , a leading sector of great importance within the community because it occupies an important role in the individual economies of Member States .
The tourism industry still has significant potential in terms of employment and it would therefore be useful to adopt measures to facilitate better organisation , which would allow the development of its full potential .
The creation of a common framework for the collection and compilation of comparable and comprehensive statistics on European tourism can only be helpful in improving the situation .
Understanding consumer demand will enable private and public companies to intervene to address the needs of the sector , improving performance and competitiveness .
I support the proposed regulation because I believe that unified European statistics which are transparent , reliable and objective are an effective way to support this large industry which is of considerable importance for my country .
I voted for this report as I think that we must do our utmost to remain the number one tourist destination in the world .
To achieve this , we need to make maximum use of every possible funding option .
The development of a sustainable , responsible , high quality tourism sector requires the legal framework for European statistics in this area to be updated and improved .
If we improve the quality of statistical reporting , based on reliable , comparative data , we will benefit from a solid foundation when it comes to making decisions on devising EU financial policies and instruments .
in writing . - I voted for this report which recognises the major role of statistics in the development of more effective tourism policies at European , national , regional and local levels .
In the same manner , tourism statistics represent a useful tool to support decision making in business and in the private sector .
Therefore , the rapporteur supports the aim of the proposed regulation to establish a common framework for the systematic production of European statistics on tourism by means of the collection , compilation , processing and transmission by the Member States of harmonised European statistics on tourism supply and demand .
Once adopted , the proposal is likely to improve the timeliness , comparability and completeness of the statistics transmitted , as well as the efficiency of the data processing , including better validation of data .
Furthermore , it is necessary to adapt the legal framework to reflect recent trends in the tourism industry by introducing new variables , for instance , concerning same-day visits .
Tourism is undoubtedly one of the economic sectors with the greatest potential for development .
In the last few decades , tourism has grown steadily more important for European businesses and people .
With around 1.8 million businesses , most of them small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , employing about 5.2 % of the total workforce , that is , about 9.7 million jobs , it is estimated that the European tourism industry generates more than 5 % of the EU 's Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) .
Tourism therefore represents the third largest socio-economic activity in the EU .
Moreover , the EU continues to be the world 's top tourist destination , having recorded 370 million tourist arrivals in 2008 , or 40 % of world tourist arrivals .
However , there is still potential for further growth .
in writing . - It goes without saying that tourism possesses a high potential which creates an opportunity to increase employment and economic growth .
Tourism plays an important role in social-economic integration of rural , peripheral and less developed areas which have a rich cultural heritage .
Statistics in the field of tourism are not used only for monitoring of tourism policy but also play an important role in the broader context of regional policy and sustainable development .
I totally agree with the rapporteur .
Meaningful statistics which provide answers to questions concerning the reason for successes and trends in the tourist industry could help to prevent many mistaken investments .
Many cities have been wondering for years why their expectations concerning tourism remained unfulfilled after they were chosen to be the European Capital of Culture .
However , the limited availability and comparability of tourism data is also a problem from the point of view of town planning .
At the end of the day , if there is the potential for an increase in visitor numbers , it is important to organise things in such a way that this does not have a negative impact on the local population .
Too many uncertain factors , differing expectations and intangible attractions , such as specific weather conditions , have turned tourism forecasts into a game of chance .
Flexible working hours and safety have an influence on tourism , in the same way as social changes do .
The decisive factors will probably ultimately be the global economy and the price of oil .
Even the best European tourism statistics cannot change these , which is why I have abstained from voting .
Today , the European Parliament adopted an important document on the legal framework for European statistics on tourism .
The Member States must provide a regular set of data on the capacity and occupancy of accommodation establishments and on tourism demand .
As European travel habits change ( e.g. the increase in short haul flights ) , and the tourism sector switches over to certain innovations ( e.g. online bookings ) , it is necessary to update the legal framework , regulating the collection of statistical information in the field of tourism .
However , in my opinion , a particularly important provision , supported by the European Parliament , concerns the collection of data regarding people with limited mobility , and its impact on the ability of such people to obtain fully-fledged tourism services .
We constantly discuss improving quality of life for disabled people and we must include tourism in this area .
Only then will we be able to implement tourism policy effectively and protect the rights of consumers .
The report by Mr Simpson on European statistics on tourism is a text that will replace the directive on the matter , which is now 15 years ' old .
Moving with the times and redrafting its regulations is a prerogative of the European system , particularly in view of the importance and continuous development of the tourism sector in Europe over the last decade .
That is why I voted in favour of the report .
New requirements in the sector , which needs increasingly detailed , up-to-date and comparable data , make it essential to update tourism statistics .
Access to facilities , services for disabled people and costs for essential goods are key data that require an up-to-date database that users can consult .
Tourism is of huge economic importance in the EU , and mechanisms that contribute to promoting it are desirable and should be encouraged .
Statistics play an important role in developing more effective tourism policy at European , national , regional and local level .
Indeed , they are a useful instrument for supporting the decision-making process in businesses and the private sector .
This regulation is aimed at establishing a common legislative framework for the systematic production of European statistics on tourism by means of the collection , compilation , processing and transmission by the Member States of harmonised European statistics on tourism supply and demand .
This proposal should improve the timeliness , comparability and completeness of the statistics transmitted , as well as the efficiency of the data processing , including improved data evaluation .
This regulation also adapts the legal framework to reflect the latest changes in the tourism industry through the introduction of new variables , such as tourist movements over the course of a single day .
I voted in favour of the report for those reasons .
Tourism is an important economic activity in the EU .
Statistics are helpful for monitoring specific policies for tourism and are useful in the context of regional policies and sustainable development .
Within the EU , the tourism statistics system is governed by Directive 95 / 57 / EC .
However , since the entry into force of this directive , the tourism industry and relative demand have changed significantly .
The Commission has therefore set out a new proposed regulation aimed at establishing a policy framework for tourism by making use of the powers introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
Its goal is to update and streamline the regulatory framework applicable to the European statistics on tourism in order to take into account the latest trends in the area .
In this regard , it is necessary to not only strengthen the tourism sector through coordinated action at EU level , but also to create a common framework for the systematic production of statistics through the collection , compilation , processing and reporting by Member States of harmonised European statistics on supply and demand in the sector .
On the basis of the aforementioned , I hereby give my favourable vote to the proposed regulation .
in writing . - I voted in favour .
Tourism is an important economic activity in the EU , with a high potential for contributing to greater employment and economic growth , as well as for playing an important role in socio-economic integration in rural , peripheral and less-developed areas , such as areas rich in industrial heritage .
Statistics in this field are not only used to monitor tourism-specific policies , but also play a role in the wider context of regional policy and sustainable development .
In the EU , Directive 95 / 57 / EC on the collection of statistical information in the field of tourism organises the system of tourism statistics .
Eurostat publishes these statistics , which are collected and compiled by national statistical authorities .
In order to successfully implement the new policy framework , policy makers at all levels of governance need to take well-informed decisions , based on reliable and comparable statistical data .
I voted in favour of this report because tourism is an important economic activity in the EU , with a high potential for contributing to the creation of jobs and growth .
Tourism plays an essential role in the socio-economic development of rural areas , which are often marginalised and underdeveloped .
In this context , statistics not only monitor specific tourism policies , but are also useful in the broader context of regional policies and sustainable development .
The document also addresses the main challenges that the sector is facing , such as increased global competition , demographic trends , climate change and environmental restrictions , the seasonal distribution of tourist movement and the increasing use of new information and communications technologies by customers .
I voted against the report because the proposed rules would require a monthly collection of data to measure the seasonal influences and the economic and social aspects of the sector , run mostly by small and medium-sized enterprises .
This strategy 's objective is to gain a thorough understanding of the dynamics , characteristics and volume of tourism , but it appears to me to be excessively cumbersome , bureaucratic and costly .
In addition , the Commission asks for delegated powers and , therefore , the ability to modify elements of the proposal .
The tables to be compiled monthly under the proposed regulation are complex and require the collection of an excessive amount of information .
I voted today in favour of the report under discussion concerning European statistics on tourism .
I think that this report is an important one , given the influence of the tourism sector on the European Union 's economy and the proportion of jobs it provides .
1.8 million businesses employ around 10 million people , accounting for approximately 5.2 % of all jobs .
The European Union gives considerable support to the development of tourism in the various regions in order to increase the availability of different types of tourism .
It is therefore necessary that we possess accurate and relevant statistics , both for the private and public sectors .
The European Union is visited by over 370 million foreign tourists a year , a total of 40 % of the tourists in the entire world .
At the same time , this makes it more important that we have timely and impartial statistical data .
Thank you .
Tourism is the third most important socio-economic activity in the EU , which means that its economic dimension , as a generator of jobs , is vital for the Member States .
Moreover , its private aspect not only enhances the image that Europe presents to the world , but also promotes European citizenship .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the EU has assumed new powers on tourism , as confirmed by Article 195 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) .
This new legal framework allows the EU to support , coordinate and supplement action by the Member States , and to reduce the administrative burden .
I am voting in favour of this report for these reasons , as I believe that it is vital to equip all stakeholders in the tourism sector with reliable statistical data so that they can adapt to the challenges that European tourism is facing .
European coordination , with the effective participation of the Member States , is crucial in order to implement this system and for a concrete evaluation of the competitiveness of the tourism industry .
Knowledge of the volume of this sector , its characteristics , tourist profiles , spending in the sector and the benefits and / or problems it brings to national economies should form part of this extended study .
I am voting in favour of this resolution as it looks at important measures relating to the increase in cofinancing rates for action in the areas of international relations , governance , data collection , scientific advice , and the monitoring and implementation of the common fisheries policy .
Since scientific knowledge depends on the sustainable development of activities , the increase in cofinancing rates relating to database collation , management and use becomes an asset .
It is also worth highlighting the focus on the development of aquaculture , with measures for growth , along with tracking and monitoring from an environmental and health standpoint , which will enable its sustainability .
With regard to measures for controlling their waters , carried out by the supervisory authorities of the Member States , these will only be successful if there is investment in technology and control systems that are more effective and less costly .
Action relating to control measures for waters should also be considered for a higher rate of cofinancing , as a way of enabling and implementing greater compliance with the rules .
Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 sets out Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and the Law of the Sea , this being an important EU financial instrument in the area of fisheries .
Several elements of the legislation have evolved since the adoption of this regulation .
The Commission is proposing to amend it , with the aim of ensuring consistency between all the elements of the legislative framework , and also of clarifying the scope of some of the financed measures .
I voted for this report as it proposes making certain amendments to the Commission 's proposal , which will contribute to clearer legislation .
These amendments are based on recent developments in the fisheries sector and future prospects , namely , the possibility of increasing Union cofinancing from 50 % to 60 % , which represents an asset for the development of the fisheries sector in Portugal , and greater importance given to aquaculture , which justifies introducing the possibility of the collection , management and use of environmental data in this area , in addition to socio-economic data .
I supported this report as Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 establishing Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea is an important EU financing instrument where fisheries are concerned .
It is one of the two principal means employed to put the CFP into practice , the other one being the European Fisheries Fund .
Like the rapporteur , I believe that it is increasingly obvious in general that fisheries management has to be based on up-to-date scientific knowledge of stock status .
This is a prerequisite for sustainable fisheries development .
As regards control , there is undoubtedly greater awareness at the present time of its importance for the future and sustainability of the fisheries sector and as a means of fostering a culture of compliance with the rules .
Member States and their control authorities are playing , and must continue to play , a central role in overseeing and enforcing control measures in their territorial waters .
This is a key way to ensure compliance with the rules and respect for stocks .
I voted in favour of the report amending Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 .
In May 2006 , the Council approved this important instrument for financing fishing activity .
Now , however , we need to revise the regulation , to ensure consistency between all the elements of the legislative framework .
Adapting to the times means making use of new technologies that can ensure a better service with less waste of economic resources .
To respond better to real needs , we think it appropriate to clarify certain articles of the regulation and clarify the scope of certain financed measures .
Finally , I agree with the rapporteur on the need for fishery management based on updated and rigorous scientific knowledge of resources and greater control in order to make fishing more sustainable .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that the importance of the aquaculture sector is steadily increasing .
This report is proof of this , highlighting ' a new impetus for the strategy for the sustainable development of European aquaculture ' and offering realistic prospects for this sector 's development .
Environmental and health monitoring and surveillance carried out in the appropriate manner therefore help to make this important sector more sustainable .
I voted in favour of the report on ' Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea ' .
I regret , however , that the proposal to increase cofinancing rates in the area of additional data collection , management and use to 60 % of eligible expenditure has not been adopted .
Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 of 22 May 2006 , which the Commission is proposing to amend , is that regulation establishing Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and in the area of the Law of the Sea , and it provides for funding in the following areas : international relations , governance , data collection and scientific advice , and the monitoring and implementation of the CFP .
This revision does not entail any fundamental change to the objectives , the type of activity financed , or the financial structure and budget .
The rapporteur considers it important , however , to table changes that bring the legislation more into line with recent trends in the sector and its future prospects , particularly with regard to fisheries management supported by scientific knowledge of stock status and to investment in aquaculture .
That is why the proposal to increase cofinancing rates provided for in the context of basic data collection , management and use is being tabled .
I am voting for this from a purely national perspective , in order to support the fishing industry in our country .
This report concerns a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 of 22 May 2006 establishing Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea .
Since 2006 , several aspects of the aforementioned regulation have changed and become outdated , so their amendment is justified .
This proposal is based on the regulation in force and is intended to safeguard coastal activities by financing the sector 's modernisation , not least , equipment and computerisation .
I am voting for this proposal for a regulation because the proposed amendments tabled by the Commission have been taken into account , along with other contributions that significantly improve the previous regulation , particularly in terms of financing for investment - which is crucial in order for us to have accurate and up-to-date scientific data that enable us , fundamentally , to take the measures required by each situation - and of increased cofinancing rates .
We value Parliament 's adoption of the amendments to the Commission 's proposal for a regulation included in the report .
These amendments will enable financing for the Member States to develop diverse technology to be used in the fishing industry , along with equipment and software or IT networks which allow them to compile , manage , validate , analyse and develop sampling methods , and move towards the exchange of fisheries data .
One new possibility for financing relates to studies regarding dependence on imports of fisheries products .
Within the area of aquaculture , it will also be possible to fund the collection , management and use of environmental data , promoting environmental and health monitoring and surveillance in this sector , in order to contribute to its sustainability .
However , we cannot but regret the rejection of the amendments aimed at increasing , albeit modestly , the maximum Community cofinancing rate for the Member States in the area of the collection , management and use of scientific data on stock status , and in the area of monitoring .
This therefore shows the inconsistency of an EU which , on the one hand , has encroached upon the powers of the Member States in this area , but which , on the other , refuses to strengthen the financing resources dedicated to these activities .
This report has amended Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 establishing Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and in the area of the Law of the Sea .
It constitutes an important European Union financial instrument in the area of fisheries . Together with the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , these represent the two main instruments for the application of the CFP .
The Commission also believes that , in some cases , experience has demonstrated the need to ensure that the provisions of the regulation be adapted slightly to better respond to needs .
It therefore offers us a limited scope for this revision , with the objectives and structure of the original regulation essentially being retained .
However , the rapporteur , the Member from the Portuguese Communist Party ( PCP ) , Mr Ferreira , has considered it appropriate to propose certain additional amendments , which although quite specific , could contribute to an improved alignment of this legislation with recent changes in the sector and with its future prospects .
However , I regret that not all of the proposals that he tabled have been adopted , especially the confirmation of the possibility of increasing Community cofinancing rates provided for in the area of collection , management and use of both basic and additional scientific data on fishery stock status , including the proposal to raise the maximum limit from 50 % to 60 % , and in monitoring activity .
in writing . - I was able to support Mr Ferreira 's report .
It is essential that there should be adequate funds for enforcement of the Law of the Sea , and this is one of the few fisheries-related areas where the EU provides some added value .
I voted in favour of this document , because it is being increasingly recognised across the board that fisheries management has to be based on up-to-date accurate scientific knowledge of stock status .
This is a sine qua non of sustainable fisheries development .
I therefore believe that it should be permissible to raise the cofinancing rates laid down in the area of basic data collection , management and use , with a proposed maximum of 75 % .
Given that aquaculture is being viewed as a sector of increasing importance - witness the report recently produced , debated and adopted on ' a new impetus for the strategy for the sustainable development of European aquaculture ' - with realistic prospects for growth , relevant collection , management and user arrangements should apply to environmental data as well as to socio-economic data .
Environmental and health monitoring and surveillance could accordingly be carried out .
This would help make the sector more sustainable .
At present , the sustainability of the fisheries sector is particularly important .
Member States and their control authorities are playing , and must continue to play , a central role in overseeing and enforcing control measures in their waters : this is a key way of ensuring compliance with the rules and respect for stocks .
If this work is to be carried out effectively , Member States have to acquire , or be in a position to develop and modernise , the technologies available .
The investment entailed could make control systems more efficient and cheaper to operate .
The regulation is an important instrument for implementing the common fisheries policy .
The control activities are playing a growing role in supporting sustainability and the continued existence of the fisheries sector .
It is important that the Member States and their supervisory authorities enforce control measures in their waters to ensure that we have fisheries which comply with the rules and respect stocks .
In addition , aquaculture is increasing in importance , which justifies the introduction of options for collecting , managing and using environmental as well as socio-economic data .
I welcome the revision of the regulation , because it will guarantee that the measures referred to will be put in place .
The proposal to amend Council Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 , establishing Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea is an important financial instrument aimed at protecting fisheries .
I voted in favour of the proposal because I believe we need to change the current version of the regulation in order to bring its provisions in line with the Treaty of Lisbon .
The review has allowed us to make improvements to the text , enabling us to respond appropriately and effectively to the needs of the sector .
The growing importance of aquaculture justifies the introduction of provisions regarding the collection , management and use of environmental , socio-economic and health data , in order to contribute to its sustainability .
A fundamental role is given to individual states , which have the duty to ensure compliance with the rules and control of the use of water , taking advantage of new technologies , in light of scientific developments .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The modifications made in this legislation should facilitate moves towards a policy of regionalisation for the CFP which I welcome .
The existing Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 establishes Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and the Law of the Sea , and constitutes an important EU financial instrument in the area of fisheries .
Together with the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) , these represent the two main instruments for the application of the CFP .
This regulation provides for financing in the following areas : international relations , governance , data collection and scientific advice , and the monitoring and implementation of the CFP .
I regret , however , that the proposal to increase the potential level of cofinancing to 60 % of eligible expenditure , particularly for measures relating to the monitoring of fisheries activities and to the collection , management and use of data , has not been adopted , as the adoption of this increase would be beneficial to the fisheries sector in my country .
in writing . - The amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 establishes the second main financial instrument of the common fisheries policy after the European Fisheries Fund .
The so-called ' second instrument ' provides funding for data collection , and control measures , scientific advice , common fisheries policy control systems and enforcement .
It is necessary to clarify the scope of some of the measures financed and to improve the wording of certain articles .
Furthermore , it considers , in the light of experience , that a number of minor adjustments should be made to enable the provisions of the regulation to be geared more effectively to real needs .
The amendments to be tabled to Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 should help to allow the specified cofinancing rates of clearly defined common financing to be raised in the area of the Law of the Sea .
The financial action on the part of the Union concerning implementation of the EU 's common fisheries policy and the Law of the Sea gives us the economic means to implement the common fisheries policy with funding targeted at those areas in need of development and coordination regarding the Law of the Sea .
For this reason , I voted in favour of Mr Ferreira 's report .
The amendment of this regulation will help enforce the common policy and utilise funds for collecting data , international relations , and scientific and technical areas regarding fisheries .
in writing . - I voted in favour .
Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 establishing Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea is an important EU financing tool where fisheries are concerned .
It is one of the two principal means employed - the other being the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) - to translate the CFP into practice .
It provides for funding in the following areas : international relations , governance , data collection , scientific advice , and CFP control systems and enforcement .
In each sphere of activity , this regulation applies in conjunction with other regulations or decisions .
That related legislation has changed in some respects since the adoption of Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 , which consequently needs to be amended in order to bring all elements into a coherent relationship within the legislative framework .
The Commission is also seeking to clarify the scope of some of the measures financed and to improve the wording of certain articles .
Furthermore , it considers , in the light of experience , that a number of minor adjustments should be made to enable the provisions of the regulation to be geared more effectively to real needs .
Regulation ( EC ) No 861 / 2006 establishing Community financial measures for the implementation of the common fisheries policy and in the area of the Law of the Sea is an important EU instrument for funding fisheries .
This document is also one of the two main means used to implement the common fisheries policy .
It provides funding for the following areas : international relations , governance , data collection , scientific consultancy , as well as control and implementation of the common fisheries policy .
The resolution adopted today recognises the importance of fisheries management based on up-to-date and rigorous scientific knowledge of resources .
The document recognises the growing importance of aquaculture , an activity which generates feasible prospects of development of this activity , as well as others related to it , justifying the introduction of the possibility of applying guidelines regarding the collection , management and use of environmental and socio-economic data , thereby enabling environmental and health control in this sector which will contribute to its sustainability .
The document voted on today is aimed at adapting the financial measures for implementing fisheries policy to the evolution of the legislative framework , to changes in current needs , and to legal clarification on actions to be undertaken , particularly those included in Decision 2000 / 439 / EC that have not yet been taken up by the text of Regulation No 861 / 2006 .
With regard to data collection , Parliament 's proposal considers it essential to broaden the scope of implementation so as to include its management and the terms of its use .
It is also vital to facilitate the conclusion of public contracts with international bodies , and to provide for the obligation to possess detailed information in order to carry out joint projects .
It would be desirable to increase the potential level of cofinancing , particularly as regards measures for monitoring fisheries activities , and the collection , management and use of data , to 60 % of eligible expenditure .
Aquaculture is no less important , and data for this should stress both the socio-economic and the environmental fields .
Moreover , it is becoming increasingly necessary to make use of new techniques here , which requires the constant adaptation and modernisation of existing techniques .
I would like to congratulate my colleague in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , Mr Ferreira ( PCP ) , on his report , which was adopted today by a very large majority in the European Parliament .
This report confirms the importance of fisheries management based on up-to-date , accurate scientific knowledge of stock status .
This is a sine qua non of sustainable fisheries development .
Some of Mr Ferreira 's amendments , for example , those enabling an increase in cofinancing rates ( from 50 % to 60 % ) in the area of collection , management and use of scientific data on fish stocks , were , regrettably , not adopted .
This report shows the contribution that the GUE / NGL Group can nevertheless make to debates in the European Parliament , and I know that we can count on Mr Ferreira to continue this fight for sustainable fisheries , giving priority to small-scale fishermen over industrial groups in the sector .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Ferreira to improve the management of financial instruments for fisheries which govern the funding of a range of activities , among which are , typically , fishing controls .
I therefore consider the general agreement on the text between the Council and the European Parliament to be a good compromise in terms of the common fisheries policy and the Law of the Sea .
I am voting for this report .
I believe that the purpose of this report is important , as it aims to extend the transitional arrangements for another 18 months , until 1 January 2013 , so that the new package of technical measures can be designed as part of the continuation of the common fisheries policy .
Since agreement on the draft regulation to simplify and clarify the Community rules on the conservation of fisheries resources was not possible in 2008 , a regulation was adopted establishing a set of transitional measures for the period from 1 January 2010 to 30 June 2011 .
This report , which merited my support , is aimed at extending this transitional period until January 2013 , so that a new set of technical measures can be drawn up as part of the ongoing reform of the common fisheries policy .
It also calls on the Commission to take the initiative during this new extension period for the existing regulation and to proceed , alongside the involved parties , with an assessment of the impact that the measures currently in force have on the ships implementing them and on the ecosystems covered .
The results of this assessment should be considered when drawing up the new draft regulation .
It is equally important that the future Commission proposal on technical measures clearly establish the competences of the Council and Parliament , in line with the ordinary legislative procedure .
I voted for the proposal because the absence of an agreement on the conservation of fisheries resources may produce undesirable consequences .
The proposal to extend the validity of the 2009 Council Regulation on establishing transitional technical measures by 18 months , which means until 31 December 2012 , will enable the Commission to prepare a new package of technical measures which will become part of the reform of the common fisheries policy .
I think that the amendments are acceptable because the common fisheries policy must , on the one hand , conserve fisheries resources and , on the other , be beneficial to ordinary citizens , in this case , Ireland 's small-scale fishers .
This is precisely the reason why I think that a balance needs to be struck between catch limits , technical measures and the fishers ' needs .
I voted in favour of this report because technical measures are very important in that they determine the activities of fishermen and have an impact on the future of fisheries resources .
We all have an interest in reconciling the economic equilibrium of the sector , and therefore in ensuring a decent income for fishermen , with renewable and sustainable fish stocks .
in writing . - I voted for this report to support the fishing industry in Ireland and Europe over the longer term .
Sustainable fishing must be our guiding principal .
I found many very strong arguments in favour of the Gallagher amendments but , in the end , voted with my group to maintain political cohesion within the group .
I voted for the report on fisheries and establishing transitional technical measures .
I regret , however , that the proposed repeal of the Commission 's decision prohibiting fishing for hake or anglerfish using trammel nets along the Portuguese coast , without any scientific studies to substantiate it , has been rejected .
In 2008 , the Commission tabled a draft Council regulation on the conservation of fish stocks through technical measures , which aimed to replace a previous regulation .
As a similar proposal was not adopted for reasons of legal certainty and in order to maintain appropriate conservation and management of marine resources , Regulation ( EC ) No 1288 / 2009 was adopted , establishing transitional measures from 1 January until the end of June 2011 .
In the light of the obligations arising from the Treaty of Lisbon , in 2010 , the Commission withdrew its proposal for a Council regulation on the conservation of fish stocks through technical measures .
The basic principles relating to these technical measures should now be incorporated into a new basic regulation on the reform of the common fisheries policy , and there is expected to be another proposal to this effect in 2011 .
As there is currently no other legislation in force , it is proposed that the validity of this regulation be extended for an additional 18 months , until 1 January 2013 .
Given the arguments of legal certainty and protection that have been made , I believe that this extension is worthy of support .
I hope that this additional time will allow the impact of the measures in force to be assessed .
The fisheries sector is crucial for the European Union , not only because of the food issue , but also because of the environmental issue , as aquatic ecosystems are at risk .
As Parliament is aware of the importance of this sector , it has often discussed this matter .
In 2009 , it adopted Resolution on the need to conserve fish stocks in the Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea .
The regulation in force , which was adopted in 2008 , established a set of transitional measures that were intended to be in force until June 2011 , the provisional date for the entry into force of a new legal framework under the common fisheries policy .
However , the Commission was unable to table a draft regulation . The Commission is therefore seeking the extension of the current regulation until 1 January 2013 , by which time the EU is expected to have legislation for adoption by the Council and Parliament , in line with the ordinary legislative procedure set out in the Treaty of Lisbon .
This legislation will be based on up-to-date scientific studies , so that it does not jeopardise the planet 's marine resources .
In view of this , I agree that the current regulation should remain in force until 1 January 2013 .
The existence of adequate regulation in terms of technical measures is an instrument necessary for the sustainable use and proper conservation of fisheries resources .
This regulation on transitional technical measures resulted from the lack of agreement in 2008 on the draft regulation aimed at simplifying and clarifying Community rules on the conservation of fisheries resources .
It was intended to apply for the period from 1 January 2010 to 30 June 2011 .
It is now proposed that it be extended for an additional period of 18 months , or until 1 January 2013 , with the aim of establishing a new set of technical measures in the context of the ongoing reform of the common fisheries policy , pending a Commission proposal during 2011 .
We believe that this extension should not be made without correcting the shortcomings and problems raised by the current legislation .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur and the majority in Parliament , following the Commission 's position , have prevented that .
This is a case of discrimination without any scientific justification against a section of the small-scale Portuguese fishing fleet , aimed at fishing for sole and hake using trammel nets , which is prohibited under the current rules .
This will have negative economic and social consequences which could and should be avoided .
This regulation on transitional technical measures resulted from the lack of agreement in 2008 on the draft regulation aimed at simplifying and clarifying Community rules on the conservation of fisheries resources .
It was intended to apply for the period from 1 January 2010 to 30 June 2011 .
It is now proposed that it be extended for an additional period of 18 months , or until 1 January 2013 , with the aim of establishing a new set of technical measures in the context of the ongoing reform of the common fisheries policy , pending a Commission proposal during 2011 .
We believe that this extension should not be made without correcting the shortcomings and problems raised by the current legislation .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur and the majority in Parliament , following the Commission 's position , have prevented that .
This is a case of discrimination without any scientific justification against a section of the small-scale Portuguese fishing fleet , aimed at fishing for sole and hake using trammel nets , which is prohibited under the current rules .
This will have negative economic and social consequences which could and should be avoided .
in writing . - ' No more discards ! ' cries the Commission .
' Listen to the industry ' is its pretended watchword .
Then it seeks to reimpose fundamentally flawed regulations for a further 18 months .
No less than 42 % of West of Scotland haddock catches are dumped back into the sea because of these rules .
Today 's vote means that this obscenity will continue for another 18 months .
London Labour backed the Commission : yet another shameful betrayal of our coastal communities !
I voted in favour of this report because , in 2008 , in the absence of agreement on a draft regulation to simplify and clarify the Community rules on the conservation of fisheries resources , a regulation was adopted establishing a package of transitional technical measures intended originally to apply from 1 January 2010 to 30 June 2011 .
The purpose of the present proposal is to extend these transitional arrangements for a further 18 months , i.e. until 1 January 2013 , so that a new package of technical measures can be drawn up - which will be the subject of a proposal submitted by the Commission in 2011 - as part of the ongoing reform of the common fisheries policy .
The Commission must take advantage of this extension of the current regulation 's validity to carry out an evaluation - with stakeholder involvement - of the impact of the current measures on the vessels applying them and on the ecosystems concerned .
It will have to take the results of the evaluation into account in drawing up a new proposal for a regulation which will apply from 1 January 2013 and which , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , will be adopted under the codecision procedure .
Extending the validity of the regulation for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures for a further 18 months opens up the possibility of analysing and evaluating the current impact on the vessels and ecosystems affected by the regulation .
The proposal is therefore very welcome as it will allow the best possible use to be made of the opportunities for improvement that have been identified .
The results of the evaluation can then be incorporated by the Commission into the process of drawing up a new proposal for a regulation for the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution but , in order to support the Scottish fishing industry , I want haddock exempted from the regulation .
In 2008 , the lack of an agreement on a draft regulation on simplifying and clarifying Community rules on the conservation of fish stocks led to the adoption of a regulation establishing a set of transitional measures which were originally envisaged for the period from 1 January 2010 to 30 June 2011 .
With this legislative proposal , we are aiming to extend this transitional system for another 18 months , until 1 January 2013 , in order to establish a new set of technical measures as part of the ongoing reform of the common fisheries policy , pending a Commission proposal during 2011 .
The Commission should thus make use of the new extension period for the current regulation to carry out - with the participation of the involved parties - an assessment of the impact of the measures currently in force on ships that implement them , and on the ecosystems affected .
in writing . - I voted in favour .
In 2008 , in the absence of an agreement on a draft regulation to simplify and clarify the Community rules on the conservation of fisheries resources , a regulation was adopted establishing a package of transitional technical measures originally intended to apply from 1 January 2010 to 30 June 2011 .
The purpose of the present proposal is to extend these transitional arrangements for a further 18 months , i.e. until 1 January 2013 , so that a new package of technical measures can be drawn up - which will be the subject of a proposal submitted by the Commission in 2011 - as part of the ongoing reform of the common fisheries policy .
The lack of agreement in 2008 on draft legislation aimed at simplifying and clarifying the Community rules on the conservation of fishery resources meant that we approved a regulation establishing a set of temporary measures initially foreseen for the period 1 January 2010 to 30 June 2011 .
The legislative proposal voted on today is to extend the term of the transitional arrangements for another eighteen months , that is , until 1 January 2013 , with the aim of setting out a new set of technical measures within the framework of the ongoing reform of the common fisheries policy , on which the Commission will submit a proposal in 2011 .
Parliament has also passed Resolution on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conservation of fishery resources through technical measures in the Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea .
The text stresses the importance of an appropriate division of powers between the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
With today 's vote , Parliament asks that the Commission 's forthcoming proposal on technical measures to establish the essential elements of the rules be the responsibility of the Council and Parliament in accordance with a shared decision .
The proposal brought before Parliament 's plenary sitting today is aimed at extending the transition period established in 2008 for the conservation of fish stocks .
Given that the legislation in question expires on 30 June 2011 , this series of measures should be extended for an additional 18-month period , until January 2013 .
The Commission will therefore have to make use of the new extension period to promote an impact assessment of the existing measures and of those that should be taken into account in developing the new proposal for the period from 1 January 2013 , which is scheduled to be tabled during 2011 .
With regard to the revision of the technical measures covered in the legislation , it is vital to extend the use of trammel nets along the coast to depths of between 200 m and 600 m until 31 December 2012 , which will allow ships to continue to capture stocks of great economic importance to Portuguese national fisheries , such as anglerfish , in a sustainable manner .
I am voting for this report , considering the achievements in the negotiations , particularly with regard to increasing Parliament 's budget by 2.3 % compared to 2011 , to funding for the Konrad Adenauer building in Luxembourg being limited , and to the withdrawal of the unit of assessment for the added value which provided for additional reductions to the value of EUR 13.7 million .
Funding for needs arising from EU enlargement with the accession of Croatia and adjustment to the Treaty of Lisbon will be integrated into a charter or amending budget .
However , I would like to emphasise that , in the light of economic and financial difficulties in the Member States , and the guidelines for the 2012 budget that Parliament has adopted , Parliament has stated the need to maintain budgetary discipline in its own budget , keeping it below the rate of inflation for the 27 Member States , and with the conviction that real savings will ensure that it functions properly and efficiently .
I believe , however , that in the climate of austerity which the EU is experiencing , it is also important for Members to moderate their spending .
We are at the start of the procedure for voting on the 2012 budget .
It is up to Parliament to propose an estimate .
I consider the estimate we voted on today to be balanced , and I therefore supported it .
For the first time , Parliament proposed a budget increase ( 2.3 % ) that is below inflation ( 2.8 % ) .
In these times of fiscal austerity , it seems to me that this is indeed necessary .
Furthermore , I fully support the need to explore new funding opportunities in order to define a long-term budgetary strategy .
I shall await the Commission 's proposals on this matter .
I voted in favour of this report .
I agree that the current financial , economic and social situation of the EU obliges the European Parliament and other EU institutions to respond with the quality and efficiency that is required and to employ strict management procedures so that savings can be achieved .
The overall level of the European Parliament 's Draft Estimates 2012 should increase 2.3 % over the 2011 budget and this does not exceed the current inflation rate of 2.8 % .
In future , Parliament must make greater savings and tighten management and monitoring procedures .
I voted for Mr Fernandes 's report .
This report allows us to examine objectively the European Parliament 's 2012 budget . This will definitely need to be a tight austerity budget .
It is important for us to take inflation into account as well , which means that the 2012 budget actually entails a reduction in the amounts available .
All expenditure items must be justified and authorised .
Variable expenditure items must be processed as part of cost-benefit analyses so that any additional costs can therefore be avoided in the future .
In 2012 , we must improve the situation of young people .
The targets that are set must relate primarily to young people .
I should point out that young people require help in obtaining vocational training and in tackling the school dropout rate .
In this respect , more money must be made available for projects targeted at young people .
They need support to enable them to become integrated into the labour market .
in writing . - I support this report because it gives an adequate budget framework for the important work of the EU institutions during this time of economic crisis for European citizens .
I did not , however , support the Group line on issues such as freezing the allowances of MEPs and provision of business class travel for MEPs .
This , I feel , was appropriate in these times of crisis when ordinary workers are suffering huge pain with cutbacks .
I am voting for the report by Mr Fernandes on Parliament 's budget , and I would congratulate him on the tremendous work that he has done .
I would like to emphasise the efforts made towards restraint and austerity , which correspond to the priorities that he had established .
As Parliament 's powers have increased through the Treaty of Lisbon , it would be reasonable to have higher operating costs .
However , Parliament 's 2012 budget represents a decrease in real terms , with an increase lower than inflation in the EU , and with cuts of EUR 49 million compared to the initial proposal .
The adopted budget has remained below 20 % of heading 5 , which has not happened for several years .
The rapporteur has also had to fight against misinformation and demagoguery .
Some people have , in bad faith , tried to insinuate that it was increasing Members ' salaries .
Parliament is not responsible for this matter : the salary of Members - which stands at 38.5 % of the salary of a judge in court - is set by the Council , and the value of the other grants is set by the Bureau and not by Parliament , and cannot exceed the level of inflation published by Eurostat .
Moreover , the budget line related to grants and payments , including funds for paying Members ' salaries , is only increasing 0.55 % compared with 2011 .
I voted in favour of this report and would highlight that the 2.3 % increase in Parliament 's budget provided for is lower than the inflation forecast of 2.8 % for the EU , which will lead to a 0.5 % cut in real terms for 2012 .
However , I would like to denounce the demagoguery surrounding three proposed amendments aimed at modifying the rules on Members travelling to and from their country of residence and Parliament , and I voted against them .
I do not like to shirk my responsibilities , so I used my vote , although the amendments were so misleading that I would probably be included in the numerous exceptions that they offered .
I also regret the stance of certain fellow Members who , knowing in advance that a particular proposal would not be adopted , placed the burden of doing something ' politically incorrect ' on others , and still others who ' preferred ' not to participate in voting on the three amendments in question , despite participating in all the voting before and after them .
It should also be remembered that , according to the current statute , no one is obliged to travel business class .
Nonetheless , every week , I see my fellow Members , from all the parties , travelling business class , including on the flight to Portugal that followed that vote ; there are a few rare exceptions , not of individual members , but on some sporadic journeys .
in writing . - I supported this report which presents the Parliament 's view on the expenditure required for policy implementation and administration for the financial year 2012 .
The report seeks to ensure that funding is increased at least in line with inflation for critical social policy expenditure at this time of rising unemployment .
The report proposes a maximum budget increase of 2.3 % , keeping the increase below the EU rate of inflation .
This is more than half the original administrative request for an increase of 5.2 % .
I also supported a number of amendments to this report opposing increases in MEP salaries and allowances .
The European Parliament is under an obligation to spend taxpayers ' money in an appropriate and responsible way .
In a time of economic crisis , it is particularly important to make economical use of taxpayers ' money .
Therefore , it is highly regrettable that Parliament is not prepared to commit to saving money , for example , by travelling economy class on flights shorter than four hours .
As Parliament has once again missed the opportunity of demonstrating to the citizens of Europe its clear commitment to making savings , behaving responsibly with taxpayers ' money and giving up its privileges , I have voted against the report .
We obviously share the Committee on Budget 's view that the European Parliament should now ' show its budgetary responsibility and self-restraint ' and we welcome the report 's call for the limited resources to be managed with ' rigour and efficiency ' .
However , as the amendments concerning freezing MEPs ' salaries and allowances next year were rejected - and the result of the vote also meant that the construction of a building for the European Parliament 's administration in Luxembourg was once again being welcomed , which , according to some calculations , will cost EUR 549 million - we were not able to support the resolution as it stands .
We therefore chose to abstain in the final vote .
I voted in favour of the report on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2012 - Section I - Parliament .
I regret , however , that during the current crisis , Parliament has not felt able to lead by example and has rejected the proposals on revising the current system of salaries for Members , as well as proposals for not updating salaries and allowances in 2012 .
In the negotiations on Parliament 's budget for 2012 , we fought to significantly reduce the original proposal of 5.7 % .
The final result was 2.3 % , which represents a real reduction in the budget compared with inflation .
Even though this is a very big step in the right direction , we are nevertheless not entirely satisfied .
We believe that it should have been possible to identify further savings .
For that reason , we also pushed a proposal in the negotiations that has now received broad support from the whole of Parliament .
In this proposal , we call for a more long-term review of Parliament 's expenditure .
For far too long , there has been a tendency within Parliament to always take new decisions with long-term financial consequences without looking at the whole picture .
Parliament cannot simply make decisions every year concerning cost increases without also trying to find a way to finance them by reprioritising and improving efficiency .
Finally , we would also like to emphasise the fact that we are in favour of a review of the costs for MEPs travel allowances and other allowances .
However , it is not possible to decide on changes to these just by reducing the budget appropriations .
It requires an amendment to the Statute for Members . This is something that we will work for and support in a future context .
The 2012 budget is being debated at a time when many Member States are facing an extreme need for budgetary restraint and austerity .
Therefore , the budget for the functioning of Parliament should , as the rapporteur points out : ' respond with the quality and efficiency that is required and [ ... ] employ strict management procedures so that savings should be achieved ' .
The European public would not understand if , when asked to make sacrifices in their countries , the EU did not show restraint and efficiency in managing its own resources .
The public is therefore asking us to manage the resources allocated to us properly , and make savings whenever possible .
The report by my colleague , Mr Fernandes , makes some headway in this direction .
For ethical reasons , especially when we are asking sacrifices of the European people , particularly the Portuguese , I have decided not to vote for any amendment that affects my salary status or the performance of my duties as a Member .
Despite the crisis of capitalism hitting workers and the general population hard , and austerity measures targeting those who have the least , EU budgets have not reflected the need to change the direction of the policies that are responsible for this crisis in the EU .
This report does not refer to the guidelines for the EU general budget .
However , it cannot be separated from the present situation .
In addition to the concerns that we raised during the debate in plenary , we are concerned that the intended framework will increase job insecurity , exacerbating the situation of workers who find themselves without a permanent employment contract after decades of service , as well as the ' transfer ' of many workers to temporary employment agencies .
For this reason , we are voting against the draft amendments , which open the way for insecurity by advocating savings in Parliament .
This report on Parliament 's budget reflects the contradictions affecting most of the political forces represented here .
Although it does not relate to the guidelines for the EU budget , these cannot be considered separately from the basic policies that guide their destiny .
Despite including adjustments to Parliament 's expenditure by reducing the external provision of services and other minor expenses , yet also increasing headings for grants and travel expenses , Section I of the provision for 2012 , concerning Parliament , represents an increase of 2.3 % on the same section of the 2011 budget .
We are concerned that the proposed framework will increase job insecurity , exacerbating the situation of workers who find themselves without a permanent employment contract after decades of service , as well as the ' transfer ' of many workers to temporary employment agencies .
For this reason , we are voting against the draft amendments , which open the way for insecurity by advocating savings in Parliament , and which seek to promote the funding of European parties and European political foundations , although we believe that Members should set an example by changing their financial status , and we voted against a substantial increase in salaries .
For all these reasons , we voted against this report .
in writing . - With regard to the Fernandes report , even though I would , in principle , have voted in favour of Amendments 13 and 15 , I abstained for a technical reason .
This is that , essentially , the salary of an MEP is regulated by the Statute for MEPs , whereby a revision or update of MEPs ' salaries is achieved by amending the Statute for Members and not through a vote in plenary with regard to the EU annual budget of any particular year .
I voted in favour of Amendment 15 not to increase Members ' salaries and allowances because we are in a crisis .
I voted in favour of this report because the current financial , economic and social situation of the EU obliges the institutions to respond with the quality and efficiency that is required and to employ strict management procedures so that savings can be achieved .
Understandably , the institutions should be provided with sufficient resources , but in the current economic context , those resources should be managed with rigour and efficiency .
I also believe that Parliament must make greater savings and tighten management and monitoring procedures .
We must continue to modernise and rationalise the administration , reducing dependence on external services and applying an effective human resources management approach , and all institutions must exploit all possible efforts towards limiting expenditure in preparing their own estimates of expenditure for the Draft Budget 2012 , which would undoubtedly help save taxpayers ' money .
The Member States of the EU are having to make tough decisions these days concerning their own national budgets .
Expenditure is being scrutinised , and we also have to do likewise in the EU .
I am not in favour of increasing the Union 's budget : on the contrary , it should be cut .
In a tough economic climate , it is not right that the European Parliament should be planning to increase its expenditure by 2.3 % next year .
We need to find more areas to make savings in Parliament 's generous annual budget of EUR 1.7 billion .
Plans for the House of European History project now need to be put on ice .
As for the StrasbourgBrussels rally , this costs European taxpayers around EUR 200 million each year .
That is as much as the annual budget for the European Court of Human Rights .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which represents centre and liberal parties in the European Parliament , has so far been the only one of Parliament 's political groups to say that Strasbourg should stop being used .
I urge the other parliamentary groups and , above all , the EU Member States , which will actually decide the matter , to demand the same .
The Danish Liberal Party voted against Amendment 3 in the Fernandes report on the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Parliament for the financial year 2012 .
The Danish Liberal Party is in favour of Parliament reducing travel costs , but it is important for Members to continue to be able to change their tickets at short notice .
The proposal does not take this into account .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament 's provisional budget for 2012 , and I am delighted that it has been kept below inflation , hence sending a message of responsibility to our fellow citizens .
In these times of great budgetary sobriety , it is important that the European Parliament sets an example in its management and achieves savings where it can .
I particularly wished to express my perplexity and my concern about the way in which the House of European History project has so far been handled .
As much as I share the objective of creating a place where the public can learn about the major phases of European integration since the end of the Second World War , I am nonetheless surprised by the relative approximation with which the necessary investments and provisional running costs are quantified and concerned about the opacity of certain decision-making procedures .
I therefore abstained on an amendment tabled by the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group calling for this project to be unconditionally cancelled .
However , I voted in favour of an amendment tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) introducing greater transparency and responsibility in the handling of this issue and demanding appropriate parliamentary control .
in writing . - I voted against this resolution as I cannot support a 2.3 % increase in Parliament 's budget at a time when the Council has made cuts of 4.4 % and the Commission will limit its administrative expenditure rise to 1 % .
The crisis that has devastated the world , and the difficult economic and budgetary conditions in the Member States , are leading Parliament to demonstrate budgetary responsibility and restraint in the 2012 financial year , without jeopardising the ambitious goals that it has set , including legislative excellence .
Parliament 's budget for next year will increase by less than the rate of inflation .
The budget should amount to EUR 1 725 billion , which means a 2.3 % increase in 2012 .
This is lower than the 2.8 % rate of inflation for the 27 EU Member States .
It is this kind of concern that must always be present when discussing EU budgets , so that everyone in the Member States is able to have a say in EU policy and see that their contributions are being properly implemented .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the work that he has carried out .
It concerns a matter that is always pressing but which , in the turbulent times in which we live , has become especially so .
The economic and budgetary conditions that all the Member States are currently experiencing are not unfamiliar to Parliament , and it should show budgetary responsibility and restraint in the 2012 financial year while maintaining the level of quality of its work .
The budget has been cut by 2.3 % in real terms compared to the 2011 budget , and has suffered a total cut of EUR 48.9 million compared with the proposed estimates .
This is particularly a result of cuts in expenditure on buildings .
I would like to highlight the rapporteur 's concern , which reflects the concern of his whole group , for committing to young people .
To this end , the rapporteur proposes lowering the ceiling of heading 5 of the multiannual financial framework for 2012 by EUR 100 million , and raising other headings which favour young people by the same amount .
This is a balanced report which takes due account of the budgetary restrictions needed at a time of crisis , and maintains the conditions for successful and good quality work .
That is why I voted in favour of this report .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that in the current crisis situation , Parliament and the rest of the EU institutions should act with responsibility and self-restraint , using rigorous budgetary management processes to promote the optimisation of resources and to make savings .
I would like to publicly express my appreciation here for the excellent work that has been carried out by the rapporteur , my colleague , Mr Fernandes .
in writing . - I voted against . The reasons are that no real savings have been made on any budget line , that expenditure has often just been postponed to 2013 , that our requested reduction of travelling costs will most probably fail , and that the negotiating procedure for this report was not transparent and aimed to exclude smaller groups with more critical views on the proposed budget increases .
The report adopted today aims at promoting rigorous management of resources , with a view to curbing public spending .
Considering the well-known financial difficulties Member States are having , it is necessary to reduce costs and keep their growth below the current inflation rate .
The reduction in the total amount should therefore be welcomed .
The additional resources required to meet the needs of the Treaty of Lisbon and future enlargement should be identified in budget reconciliation procedures at a later stage .
in writing . - I abstained in the final vote on this report because at a time of austerity across the European Union , it seems ridiculous to support projects such as the European House of History .
This may be a worthy project in its own right , but clearly it would be remiss of Parliament , which represents the people , to agree with this expenditure at this time .
I voted against the estimates for the EP 's 2011 expenditure and income because the resolution contains a number of things which I cannot endorse .
I object to yet another increase in Parliament 's budget .
Parliament is selling this exercise as a budgetary decrease , when , in reality , this is about a decrease in the curve of resources used .
In these times of crisis and cutbacks , a freeze on spending would seem to me to be a more appropriate measure .
The amendments tabled by some Members requiring a degree of frugality ( not flying business class on flights under four hours ; freezing allowances for secretarial expenses etc . ) have all been voted down , which is regrettable .
In addition , I voted in favour of the Museum of European History project being scrapped , not because I find such a project uninteresting or unimportant , but because I do not believe that such a project should be set up by Parliament with funds from its own budget .
Besides , the costs of the project which has been scheduled for Brussels are running totally out of control .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the amendment which explicitly states that a closer eye needs to be kept on the cost centre .
in writing . - Given the tough austerity measures currently being taken across all Member States , I believe that it is inappropriate to provide funding for a European House of History at this time , which is why I voted against this report .
It was essential to take into account the current economic and budgetary difficulties in the vote on the Fernandes report on the estimates of Parliament 's revenue and expenditure for 2012 .
Thus , the initial draft of the report , which made provision for the realisation of a House of European History with exorbitant running costs , was absolutely contrary to my firm belief in budgetary restraint where public money is involved .
It is therefore necessary that all financial guarantees relating to this project are clearly identified before any work can start .
The European institutions must respect real budgetary discipline , especially in the current economic crisis .
Given the difficult economic and budgetary conditions that the Member States are experiencing , Parliament should show budgetary responsibility and restraint in the 2012 financial year without , however , jeopardising its aim of legislative excellence .
The budget in question has been cut by 2.3 % in real terms when compared to the 2011 budget , and has suffered a total cut of EUR 48.9 million when compared with the proposed estimates .
This is particularly due to cuts in spending on buildings , on the cost of the 18 new Members , and on the accession of Croatia .
These two latter points will be the subject of an amending budget later .
Investment in young people is a key priority at present for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
To this end , the rapporteur proposes lowering the ceiling of heading 5 of the multiannual financial framework for 2012 by EUR 100 million , and raising other headings which favour young people by the same amount .
Finally , I would like to emphasise that the elimination of the budget line for the House of European History will not jeopardise its viability since the amount will be transferred to another heading , in line with a transparent process that is approved by the budgetary authority .
Mr Fernandes ' report on the EU Parliament budget for the financial year 2012 involves savings , cautious spending plans and the greatest possible degree of transparency in the use of budget funding , together with support for ongoing environmental policies and the constant provision of information for the citizens of Europe .
However , on the one hand , it is difficult to understand why there was no majority in favour of freezing spending on ' office costs ' for 2012 and , on the other , the spending levels on the House of European History are far too high and should be urgently reviewed in the light of the current structural crisis .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by Mr Fernandes on the estimates of revenue and expenditure for 2012 .
I fully agree with the objectives outlined in the adopted text , which are : a stringent human resources management approach prior to the establishment of new posts , greater security within the European Parliament , a digital strategy with regard to social networks , the creation of a wi-fi service and a property strategy to manage more intelligently any expenditure on buildings belonging to Parliament .
I am voting for this resolution , which seeks to amend Regulation ( EC ) No 1924 / 2006 of Parliament and of the Council on nutrition and health claims made on foods , which have only been authorised by the Commission in line with this regulation .
I am voting for this resolution as it relates to a health claim on the list of permitted claims concerning the use of baby milk in infants of six months or over , since docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) , a type of acid , has been detected as having being added to milk formula .
I support the draft resolution regarding health claims on foods intended for children .
Children 's health needs to be better protected from all the nutritional advice given on foods , which is sometimes misleading , and which lead people to purchase them just because they claim to have beneficial nutritional or physiological effects .
We must give consumers the guarantee that products on the market are safe and their labelling truthful and appropriate , in order to give the consumer the necessary information to make choices with full knowledge of the facts and to create equal conditions of competition in the food industry .
At present , in some Member States , there is a vast range of indicators used in the labelling and advertising of foods that refer to substances whose beneficial effect has not been demonstrated , or on which there is not sufficient scientific consensus .
Therefore , we must ensure that the substances which claim to be beneficial are subjected to scientific tests and studies carried out by the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) .
This resolution concerned the authorisation and refusal of authorisation of certain health claims made on foods and referring to children 's development and health .
I voted against the resolution proposed in plenary as I consider it essential that claims for children between six and 12 months are able to be made and to be validated scientifically by the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) .
I voted against this initiative because , in accordance with the procedure laid down in Regulation ( EC ) No 1924 / 2006 , the health claim that docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) intake contributes to the normal visual development of infants between six and 12 months of age could not be concluded from the experts ' opinion communicated to the Commission .
What is more , a report published in June 2010 in the British Medical Journal found that 10 years after being fed with DHA fortified formula , children were heavier and had higher blood pressure .
There is no clear scientific consensus on the effects of formula fortified with DHA on infants , which runs contrary to Articles 5 and 6 of the regulation in question .
As the claim is incompatible with the purpose and content of the draft regulation , I therefore voted against its adoption .
I agree that the claim that ' the ingestion of docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) contributes to the normal development of the eyes of infants up to 12 months old ' should be added to the EU list of approved health claims , in accordance with the proposed Commission regulation .
Generally accepted scientific knowledge shows that not only DHA in breast milk , but also synthetic DHA added to dairy foods for infants and other foods intended for infants , helps the development of infants ' eyes .
If we reject the inclusion of DHA in the EU list of approved health claims , it might set a dangerous precedent whereby the work of the European Food Safety Authority comes to nothing , simply because any health claims relating to any substances that have gone through the demanding and strict evaluation process of the aforementioned authority could be vetoed for ideologically motivated reasons .
I supported this resolution as I think that health claims can influence the choices made by consumers , which is why these claims must be used responsibly , based on the highest quality scientific evaluations .
It is certainly true that the presence of DHA in breast milk has a positive impact on the visual development of infants up to 12 months .
However , this does not automatically mean that synthesised DHA , included in other forms of milk for infants , has the same effect .
In breast milk , DHA is accompanied by other co-enzymes and co-factors , which jointly produce this effect on visual development .
At the moment , there is no consensus among the scientific community on the positive effects that DHA fortified milk formulae have on infants .
This is why I think that it is premature for us to authorise the use of such a claim until we have tangible scientific proof for this .
This kind of health claim may mislead consumers and have undesirable effects on their children 's health .
in writing . - I condemn today 's vote , which narrowly defeated the objection to a misleading health claim by a major manufacturer of baby milk .
This is a defeat for families with young babies .
I am disappointed that many conservative MEPs stood with big business interests on this issue .
This vote opens the door to further aggressive marketing on food products which is not backed up by sound scientific evidence .
DHA is naturally found in breast milk , and it helps the development of children 's eyes .
But the synthesised DHA added to formula milk is different .
As the scientific evidence is still inconclusive , we cannot allow parents to be misled .
Babies ' health is too important to be left in the hands of a multinational company 's marketing department .
Today 's narrow vote by Parliament not to reject the claim is very disappointing .
We did not want the statement that docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) , a fatty acid found in breast milk , was good for the normal visual development of infants to appear on products for infants .
There is no scientific data to support the opinion given by the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) , on which the European Commission relied to propose the authorisation to display this claim on food intended for infants .
It was therefore necessary to apply the precautionary principle and , hence , not to authorise this claim .
Unfortunately , by just 8 votes , Parliament decided to accept the Commission 's proposal .
This puts the issue of the independence and of the accuracy of the EFSA 's assessments back on the table .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the ' authorisation and refusal of authorisation of certain health claims made on foods and referring to children 's development and health ' , as there is no recognised scientific proof that synthesised docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) added to formula milks and other foods intended for infants , and which is different from the DHA found in breast milk , contributes to the visual development of children .
I therefore believe that until there are conclusive studies , the nutritional claim should not be authorised .
The issue of potentially acceptable claims on the labels or advertising of types of food is very important because it can lead to false expectations or to the adoption of behaviour that has no scientific basis .
In view of this , any claim that is to be added to the list of permitted health claims should be considered in the light of the most recent scientific state of the art , so that it can be properly founded .
The Commission argues that this is true in this case , where it considers it proven that ' docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) intake contributes to the normal visual development of infants up to 12 months of age ' .
This resolution of the European Parliament is about the draft regulation tabled by the Commission on the authorisation and refusal of certain health claims made on foods , relating to reduction of the risk of illness or the health and development of children .
Nutrition for the public in general , and children in particular , has to be worthy of the utmost attention from all the European bodies , as people 's healthy growth and quality of life are at stake .
The promotion of foods using claims may mislead consumers and contravene scientific advice .
Therefore , taking into account the arguments put forward by the rapporteur on this matter , which is as sensitive as it is important , I am voting against this draft regulation , as I believe that it does not adequately protect public health , especially that of children .
This document is opposed to adopting the draft regulation proposed by the Commission on ' on the authorisation and refusal of authorisation of certain health claims made on foods and referring to children 's development and health ' , as it is not compatible with the objectives and content of the regulation on nutrition and health claims made on foods .
It relates principally to problems resulting from the addition , using a number of means , of docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) to breast milk , where it contributes to normal visual development in children aged up to 12 months .
However , the generally accepted scientific evidence show that the effects of this same synthesised DHA added to formula milk and other foods for infants are not clear .
This means that there is no clear scientific consensus on the effect on infants of DHA-enriched formulae in a biological environment other than breast milk , whether it is used in formula milk or other foods for infants .
That is why there is opposition to adopting the Commission 's draft regulation .
Today , unfortunately , we have missed an important opportunity to reiterate that in no way should we discourage breast-feeding , not least using nutritional profiles which are supposed to give reliable information .
In fact , there is no scientific evidence to show that adding docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) to milk substitutes improves visual development .
I support the resolution because I consider it perfectly in keeping with the spirit of the international code on the marketing of milk substitutes issued by the World Health Organisation .
Indeed , this code , among other things , seeks to ensure that no form of advertising or other form of promotion of breast-milk substitutes is allowed .
It is widely recognised that breast-feeding has positive effects on both the child 's health and on that of the mother , reducing the risk of breast cancer .
Moreover , recent research published by UNICEF , as well as by the Italian Society of Prenatal Medicine , emphasises that neonatal deaths could decrease by 22 % if babies were breastfed .
I would have preferred to see all the energy that has been put into promoting artificial milk put towards support of mothers who would be happy to breast-feed their children if they received the necessary support .
Products for children such as formula milk must be able to benefit from claims if they have been scientifically validated by the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) as in the case of docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) , which contributes to the normal visual development of infants from six to 12 months of age .
To prohibit all communication , even on recognised scientific effects , would considerably hinder research and innovation in this sector .
It should also be remembered that , after six months , all women either do not wish , or are unable , to breast feed , and they must be able to benefit from preparations for infants for which health claims have been evaluated scientifically .
It is not about claiming superiority for formula enriched with DHA over breast milk .
It is not about that !
Today , Parliament chose the path of reason by rejecting this resolution in favour of banning this claim and of heaping opprobrium on the work of the EFSA .
in writing . - I am voting for this resolution to reject the health claim that adding the natural fatty acid DHA to baby food contributes to the normal visual development of infants for a number of reasons .
First , there is a difference between synthetic DHA and DHA in breast milk .
Also , authoritative studies show that there is no proven benefit regarding visual development and also , some studies have shown negative effects of DHA fortified formula on some children 's health .
In short , there is need for more research
The delegation of the Dutch Party for Freedom ( PVV ) voted in favour of this resolution , because there are clear doubts about the health claims made for DHA .
However , we would like the procedures for the recognition of health claims to be re-examined .
The PVV strongly supports independent scientific research and , for that very reason , we want a transparent procedure which will not produce disputable outcomes .
I voted in favour of this document on the authorisation and refusal of authorisation of certain health claims made on foods and referring to children 's development and health , because goods in the common market must be safe to consume , comply with standards , and be legal .
Health claims made on foods must be substantiated and scientifically proven , especially when we are talking about children and their health .
It is necessary to ensure that the substances for which a claim is made have been shown to have a beneficial nutritional or physiological effect .
A claim should be scientifically substantiated by taking into account the totality of the scientific data available , and by weighing up the evidence .
Health claims should only be authorised for use in the Community after a scientific assessment of the highest possible standard , and nutrition and health claims must not be misleading .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which challenges an authorised claim about baby food .
The authorised claim is about DHA , a fatty acid found naturally in breast milk , which , in breast milk , is known to be important in the development of babies ' vision .
However , the synthesised DHA which is added to formula milk is different .
Formula milk producer Mead Johnson has applied to the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) and the Standing Committee on Food Chain and Animal Health ( SCFCAH ) for permission to use the health claim ' Docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) intake contributes to the normal visual development of infants up to 12 months of age ' .
The claim has been authorised , based on evidence supplied by Mead Johnson .
However , an independent review of all the available evidence on DHA in formula milk in 2008 found that adding DHA to formula milk ' had no proven benefit regarding vision , cognition or physical growth ' .
Furthermore , no studies were submitted to EFSA that showed the effect of giving a baby follow-on formula supplemented with DHA after feeding the baby non-supplemented infant formula from birth .
As this claim would only be allowed on follow-on formulas , this is crucial .
Public health and food security seem to me to be the cornerstones on which human society develops .
When these requirements are met and guaranteed , health risks decrease and population growth takes place under controlled conditions which offer security .
These were the criteria behind the EU regulation of 20 December 2006 regarding nutrition and health claims on foods .
The principles still stated in this regulation today ensure a close relationship between experimented and verified scientific data and the authorisation of the use of certain foods .
The draft Commission regulation which we are discussing today does not provide all the necessary guarantees , nor the normal principle of caution in the absence of necessary scientific requirements , to ensure that nutrition and health claims are not misleading .
This should incline us to deny approval .
DHA in breast milk carries out the function that scientific evidence has shown , but the synthetic version is not yet compatible with the aims and the substance of Regulation ( EC ) No 1924 / 2006 .
We cannot play around with health issues , especially when they concern children .
For this reason , I share the opinion of the rapporteur .
I voted against the resolution rejecting the indication of the presence of DHA in milk substitutes for babies because I think it is right to advertise the reasons for which DHA is added .
I want to mention here that DHA is an omega 3 fatty acid which is present in breast milk and has a positive effect on children 's eyesight .
I would point out that the EFSA , the European Food Safety Authority , expressed a favourable opinion to extensively indicating the presence of this substance .
I have not appreciated the many e-mails received indicating the belief that we want to favour artificial milk over breast milk .
We must always provide adequate information on substances added to food products , especially when they are for children .
This lunchtime , the European Parliament sent out a signal of unutterable weakness by rejecting a resolution that refused to add a health claim on foods intended for infants under 12 months with 328 votes for and 323 against , but with an absolute majority of 369 votes being required .
Yet this was a textbook case : to oppose the opinion given by the European Food Safety Authority ( EFSA ) .
In this case , the EFSA gave its authorisation to manufacturers of foodstuffs intended for newly-born infants to claim that the synthesised version of docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) , a fatty acid naturally present in breast milk ' contributes to the normal visual development of infants up to 12 months of age ' .
This has not been scientifically proven , as confirmed by a letter sent this morning to the Members of the European Parliament by the World Health Organisation .
I very much regret this slap in the face for a considerable number of European stakeholders : the European Large Families Confederation , the European Consumers ' Association , and the Standing Committee of European Doctors , which were simply asking for infants not to be considered ordinary consumers .
I regret that Parliament simply forgot to make commonsense and ethics a priority of European food safety policies .
I voted against the draft regulation aiming to authorise the health claim that docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) intake contributes to the normal visual development of infants up to 12 months of age .
While a majority of Members voted in favour of this rejection , there were 40 votes too few to reach the qualified majority required to validate the rejection .
However , Regulation ( EC ) No 1924 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council prescribes that nutrition and health claims must not be misleading and must be based on scientific evidence .
Further , even if generally accepted scientific evidence shows that DHA in breast milk contributes to the visual development of infants , there is currently no scientific consensus on a possible causal relationship between the intake of formula supplemented with synthesised DHA and better visual development of infants .
It seems to me that , in the absence of a scientific consensus , there is a need for more research into the possible effects , both beneficial and harmful , of DHA supplementation before the use of DHA in follow-on formulae and foods for infants can be claimed in the EU to be beneficial .
Parliament failed , today , to take advantage of the opportunity to prohibit the forthcoming use of this claim pending more convincing scientific evidence .
I regret that .
The supervision of health claims was introduced so that consumers would not be misled by false information .
However , it should also serve to make consumers more aware .
I have therefore voted in favour of the Commission proposal to include the health claim for DHA on powdered milk for children , as this provides positive information for mothers who , for serious health reasons , are unable to breast-feed their babies .
It is necessary to give these women positive information on powdered milk at the point when they are deciding which product to purchase .
We will not undermine the importance of breast-feeding for the development of the child in this way , as every mother is fully informed about this by the paediatrician .
in writing . - In favour , since the consensus resolution considers that the draft Commission regulation on the authorisation and refusal of authorisation of certain health claims made on foods and referring to children 's development and health is not compatible with the aim and content of Regulation ( EC ) No 1924 / 2006 , and opposes the adoption of the draft Commission regulation .
Docosahexaenoic acid , known as DHA , is a substance found in breast milk , and numerous scientific studies show that it plays a positive role in the development of eyesight in newborn children .
I believe that specific information on products fortified with this ingredient , such as artificial milk , will allow the consumer to make a more informed choice when shopping .
I do not consider well founded the fears of those who argue that , by advertising this fortification , mothers would abandon breast-feeding in favour of this type of product .
Breast milk contains substances and active ingredients which are fundamental and irreplaceable for babies , but unfortunately , not all women can breast-feed .
So I voted against this resolution because by preventing access to proper information , we are taking away one more aid for mothers , who , unable to breast-feed their babies , are obliged to resort to the use of these products .
in writing . - I supported this resolution as I believe that the health claims relating to DHA have not been scientifically supported and feel strongly that consumers should not be misinformed .
It is obvious that breast milk is the best food for newborn children .
Not all mothers , however , are able to breast-feed their children , for reasons of health , for example .
There is therefore a need for milk formula .
In such a case , of course , it is to be hoped that the substitute is as much like breast milk as possible , as far as its composition is concerned .
This motion for a resolution questioned the importance of the ingredient known as DHA for children and their development .
DHA seeks to replace the fatty acids in breast milk , which have been found to help the child 's eyes develop and which at least some manufacturers of the substitute have added to their products .
This motion aimed , in particular , to deny the fact that the consumer would be informed about DHA , on the product label , for example .
Although , in general , I would like to urge caution in the use of different marketing materials , I feel that , following the large number of scientific tests carried out , it must now be possible to inform the consumer accordingly .
Politicians should also have faith in the decisions of the safety authorities .
In this case , the European Food Safety Authority ( ESFA ) has stated , with reference to scientific evidence , that the product is safe .
For these reasons , I voted against the motion for a resolution entitled ' Authorisation and refusal of authorisation of certain health claims made on foods and referring to children 's development and health ' .
in writing . - In light of the fact that the World Health Organisation maintains that ' no solid evidence exists to be able to say that adding DHA to infant formula will have important clinical benefits ' , I chose to vote against allowing companies to make unsubstantiated claims about the health benefits of DHA .
There is a danger that these potentially misleading claims could result in an increase in formula milk being given to children who could lose out on vital nutrients , such as DHA , that are found naturally in breast milk .
The European Parliament today rejected the motion for a resolution tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety calling for more research to be carried out before it can be claimed that docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) is a substance with beneficial properties for infants .
I regret that the resolution was not adopted without all the necessary scientific checks having been made , even though the systematic review of evidence regarding DHA and neurological development in infants published by the Cochrane Library in 2008 found that feeding term infants with milk formula enriched with DHA and other similar long-chain fatty acids has no proven benefit in terms of vision , cognition or physical growth .
Despite the doubts expressed by the Members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , the majority in Parliament has de facto authorised the European Food Safety Authority to declare that ' docosahexaenoic acid contributes to the normal visual development of infants up to 12 months of age ' .
However , the case of the controversial Mediator drug , in particular , should lead European institutions to exercise a modicum of prudence .
I am voting for this report since , in the face of an increasingly globalised world , the EU as a whole needs to opt for productive investment options , and I agree with the position stated in this report that the Commission and the Council should open negotiations to begin investing in third countries such as Canada , India and China .
In view of this , I believe that it is vital that Parliament ensure the responsible conduct of European investors abroad , while protecting the rights of the EU to regulate in accordance with our public interest .
The future European policy must promote sustainable investments which will respect the environment , especially in the mining industries , and encourage suitable working conditions in the businesses targeted by international investments .
I think that any investment agreement should be accompanied by a set of social and environmental regulations , both when negotiating a chapter as part of a free trade agreement and in the case of standalone investment agreements .
The European policy must protect biodiversity and support technology transfer and infrastructure improvement .
I voted for this report as I believe that the European Union needs a coherent investment policy which will make a positive contribution to economic growth , sustainable development and employment .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides for exclusive EU competence in the area of foreign direct investment ( FDI ) .
This development , which has significant consequences , throws up a double challenge both for managing more than 1 200 bilateral investment treaties ( BIT ) already concluded by the Member States and to define a future European investment policy which meets the expectations of investors and beneficiary states while , at the same time , respecting the objectives of the EU 's external action .
When concluding BITs , the aim is to ensure that investors from developed countries have legal and financial protection .
I agree that when developing future EU investment policy , investor protection must remain the first priority of investment agreements .
The EU 's future policy must also promote investment which is sustainable , respects the environment ( particularly in the area of extractive industries ) and encourages good quality working conditions in the enterprises targeted by the investment .
Hence , the recent reform of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 's guidelines to promote responsible behaviour on the part of international enterprises should be promoted by the EU .
I voted in favour of this report .
We are all aware that , according to the Treaty of Lisbon , foreign investments are the exclusive competence of the EU .
Based on these new powers , both the Commission and Member States can devise , together with Parliament , a policy for promoting high quality investments , with a positive impact on economic growth and employment .
The crisis has led , as was only natural , to a reduction in the volume of foreign direct investments , which had reached EUR 1 500 billion in 2007 .
I also welcome the proposal to introduce the term ' EU investor ' and I believe that the protection of all EU investors should be the top priority of investment agreements .
I share the rapporteur 's view that not all kinds of investments require the same high level of protection and that , for example , short-term speculative investments do not deserve the same level of protection as long-lasting investments .
Consequently , the scope of future European agreements must be limited to foreign direct investments ( FDI ) only .
This is the reason why I supported this report , which is among the areas coming under the exclusive competence of the European Parliament .
Parliament wished to clarify the rules that the EU will have to introduce when negotiating future investment agreements .
In addition to investor protection , the Commission must include in all future agreements specific clauses laying down the right of the third party and of the EU to regulate in the technological areas associated with protection of national security , the environment , public health , workers ' and consumers ' rights and industrial policy .
This is a powerful signal , which has been conveyed to the Council and to the Commission on the eve of the opening of investment negotiations with countries such as Canada , India and , in the very near future , China .
European investors must adopt responsible behaviour abroad , while protecting the right of the European Union to regulate investments in the public interest .
I voted for this report because I believe that the proposed investment policy will meet the expectations of both investors and the states involved , thus contributing to making the EU and its companies more competitive .
A coordinated European international investment policy could have an important impact on job creation not only in the EU , but also in developing countries .
According to Articles 206 and 207 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , foreign direct investment ( FDI ) is an exclusive competence of the EU .
In addition to managing the bilateral investment treaties that have been concluded , it is up to the Union to set out a policy for future European investment that meets the expectations of investors and recipient countries , and which respects its objectives for external action at the same time .
Protecting investors should remain the top priority in investment agreements .
However , the Commission is called on to table a clear definition of the investments that should be protected .
Future agreements should be based on best practice drawn from the experiences of the Member States , and they should take account of the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
This report addresses the problems of future European international investment policy .
Since the founding of the EU , many bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) have been signed by the Member States : around 3 000 since 1959 .
With the entry into force of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , this matter has come under exclusive EU competence , and is currently part of the preparation for a future European investment policy , which must be thoroughly debated .
This matter is of the utmost importance , as we are at a turning point and are facing two challenges : providing the EU with the necessary tools to allow companies abroad to fulfil their investment programmes and , at the same time , ensuring that Europe remains a leader in global investment .
We are living through times when business is very aggressive , so our criteria for choosing trade partners need to have been well thought out .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur of this text with regard to respect for Parliament 's prerogatives , and that negotiation processes should be sent in time so as to prevent unnecessary delays or serious disruption of EU relations with those countries .
Foreign direct investment ( FDI ) is defined as ' a long-lasting investment , representing at least 10 % of the affiliated company 's equity capital / shares and providing the investor with managerial control over the affiliated company 's operations ' .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , FDI came under sole EU competence , the main roles of which are managing current bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) and setting out a European investment policy ' which meets the expectations of investors and beneficiary states ' .
The implementation of a common investment policy is being advocated on the basis of these new responsibilities .
It is disputable , at the very least , that FDI brings the much-vaunted gains for the ' beneficiary ' countries .
This is particularly the case if it is carried out under the jurisdiction of the EU , in defence of the interests that it usually defends .
The example of Portugal is particularly revealing .
Since it is true that one of the serious problems that the Portuguese economy is facing is the continued fall in investment , as is reflected in low rates of economic growth and rising unemployment , there has been a great deal of FDI in the Portuguese economy over the years .
Nevertheless , the reality is that a growing share of the wealth generated in Portugal is being transferred abroad .
In the definition given by the Court of Justice of the EU , foreign direct investment ( FDI ) means ' a long-lasting investment , representing at least 10 % of the affiliated company 's equity capital / shares and providing the investor with managerial control over the affiliated company 's operations ' .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , FDI came under sole EU competence , the main roles of which are managing current bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) and setting out a European investment policy ' which meets the expectations of investors and beneficiary states ' .
Due to these new responsibilities , the rapporteur advocates the implementation of a common investment policy .
However , our position is different .
In most cases , FDI does not solve the problem of development in the countries where it is carried out .
We are all well aware of what multinationals do .
They stay whilst they obtain massive profits and grants .
Then , at the slightest sign of trouble , they look elsewhere and pay no heed to the unemployment and obstacle to development that they create .
Portugal , unfortunately , knows this situation only too well .
Since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Commission has had exclusive competence to sign and negotiate agreements on foreign direct investment .
The report by Mr Arif is paved with good intentions , as is the road to hell .
He is particularly concerned about the capacity of sovereign funds to do harm , speculative forms of investment , which must not be encouraged , the exclusion of sensitive sectors , social and environmental clauses , compliance with the principle of reciprocity , and the regulatory powers of Member States , all of which are issues he wants to see at the centre of future European policy .
I think he is right , especially on the latter point .
The financial interests of foreign investors absolutely must not be allowed to take precedence over the power of Member States to adopt binding social , environmental and fiscal standards .
Yet that is what the Multilateral Agreement on Investments , which was fortunately never adopted in the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , was proposing .
Yet the Commission supported this villainy !
It is therefore an understatement to say that I have absolutely no confidence in this institution to defend , comply with or enforce the principles set out in the report .
To give it today the exclusive power to negotiate ' bilateral investment agreements ' in the name of , and on behalf of , the 27 Member States is criminal .
I voted in favour of this report because it is necessary to build an integrated and coherent investment policy which promotes high quality investments and makes a positive contribution to worldwide economic progress and sustainable development .
I believe that a common policy on investment will meet the expectations of both investors and the states concerned and help increase the competitiveness of the EU and its businesses and increase employment .
Investment risk is generally higher in developing and less developed countries .
Strong , effective investor protection in the form of investment treaties is key to protecting European investors and can improve governance and ensure stability .
For investment agreements to further benefit these countries , they should also be based on investor obligations in terms of compliance with human rights and anti-corruption standards as part of a broader partnership between the EU and developing countries for the purpose of reducing poverty .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for this report as I think that we need to guarantee external competitiveness and uniform treatment for all EU investors .
We must also have maximum influence in international investment negotiations .
They must cover every type of investment .
The EU must ensure that no EU investor will be treated worse than under the bilateral investment agreements signed between Member States .
Liberalisation of investments and protection are becoming the fundamental instruments of a common international investment policy .
However , Member States will continue to apply policies promoting investments which will supplement and be compatible with the common international investment policy .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which calls for better definition of investor protection standards and greater transparency in the arbitration system , the right to appeal against decisions by international arbitrators and the possibility to consult trades unions and civil society organisations .
Until now , investment agreements were so focused on investor protection that companies could sometimes operate in developing countries without respect for environmental or social considerations .
Such behaviour will no longer be tolerated .
This is why the report calls for new rules and for corporate social responsibility to be a core element of any future agreement .
The world has changed .
The EU will increasingly receive foreign investment and we cannot push investor protection to the detriment of the general interest .
The report calls for a real balance between public and private interests .
It aims at effective protection of European investors from illegitimate expropriations or disguised legislation intended to cut them out of certain markets .
It also guarantees that public authorities will always be able to regulate in favour of the general interest .
I call for root and branch reform of the dispute settlement mechanism , which so far enabled private companies to take legal action against countries and sometimes attack their social and environmental law .
While Member States and their citizens are being asked to tighten their belts , this text urges the latter to ensure that the interests of foreign private investors are protected .
It does not even provide for the obligation of protecting public services against all private investment .
It has no regard for the goods belonging to all mankind , such as water .
I am voting against the report .
Foreign direct investment ( FDI ) is under exclusive EU competence , as set out in Articles 206 and 207 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The bilateral investment treaties that have been concluded need to be managed , and the Union should establish a European policy for future investment that meets the expectations of investors and beneficiary countries .
It is important to protect investors , but the Commission is called on to submit a clear definition of the investments that should be protected .
Future agreements should be based on the best practice of the past , and they should also take account of the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
in writing . - As I understood , this report deals with international investment treaties .
The main objectives of these treaties are to increase foreign investors ' access to markets and to provide a high level of protection for investments and investors against arbitrary actions by governments of states receiving the investment .
Before the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , there was a division of tasks in which the Commission negotiated market access of foreign direct investment ( FDI ) while the Member States signed investment protection agreements with third states .
With the Lisbon Treaty , foreign direct investment has become an exclusive competence of the EU and an integral part of the EU 's external trade policy .
It is good that this report sends a strong signal to the Commission and the Council , which are about to start investment negotiations with third countries like Canada , India and , soon to come , China .
Therefore , it is crucial for the Parliament to ensure responsible behaviour by European investors abroad while , at the same time , protecting the EU 's right to regulate in the public interest .
I voted in favour of this resolution on international investment policy .
As foreign direct investment ( FDI ) was brought under exclusive EU competence , every effort must be made to build a coherent and integrated investment policy that respects human rights and the principles of the rule of law .
A common policy on investment will promote high quality investments , sustainable economic , social and environmentally friendly development , and will have a positive impact on economic progress worldwide .
I believe that such a policy on investment will help Europe remain the principal actor in the field of foreign direct investment , and this will help revitalise economic growth , increase the competitiveness of businesses and promote job creation .
I believe that the Commission must draw up the EU 's investment strategy as a matter of urgency , because both foreign investment in the EU and EU investment abroad have a positive impact on growth and employment in the EU and other countries , including developing countries .
Every effort must be made to ensure a high level of investor protection , which is an anchor of stability and good governance .
Furthermore , legal certainty must be ensured for small and medium-sized enterprises , creating favourable conditions for them to invest in foreign markets .
Investment agreements should be concluded in full compliance with anti-corruption standards and while making a commitment to respecting human rights .
Under Articles 206 and 207 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , foreign direct investment ( FDI ) is an exclusive EU competence .
This development , which has serious consequences , represents a two-pronged challenge , namely , managing more than 1 200 bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) and defining a European policy for future investment that meets the expectations of investors and beneficiary states , while also respecting the EU 's external action objectives .
Consistent , sound and effective investment policy requires a clear definition of FDI , and a clear definition of its scope and application .
I voted in favour of this report and would like to emphasise the call by Parliament to the Commission that it makes provision for the establishment of a clear definition of the investments to be protected , including both FDIs and portfolio investments , stipulating that investments of a speculative nature , as defined by the Commission , should not be protected .
I voted in favour of the excellent report by my colleague and friend , Mr Arif , on the EU 's foreign direct investment ( FDI ) policy .
With this document , Parliament formulates two , in my opinion , major requirements when defining how to frame future international investment protection agreements that are binding on Europe .
The first requirement is that all these agreements include clauses compelling European investors to behave responsibly abroad in economic , social and environmental matters .
The second requirement is that all these agreements leave scope for the governments of the countries receiving this investment to legislate for the common good .
In the past , some private investment protection clauses enabled the adoption , by the third country , of social or environmental legislation to be regarded as indirect expropriation , resulting in compensation .
We need to put an end to these abuses .
While this Parliament has , for the first time , a say on such matters , the Arif report has fired a warning shot across the bows of the Council and the Commission as they prepare to open negotiations with India , Canada and , soon , with China .
According to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , foreign direct investment comes within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Union .
This represents a challenge to be overcome at all costs , especially as regards the establishment of a European investment policy which will meet the needs of European investors and recipient countries and is able , at the same time , to comply with the objectives of EU foreign action .
The numerous investment agreements signed by the EU , whether bilateral or multilateral , must guarantee the protection of investors in all the appropriate sectors .
Future EU policy should promote sustainable and environmentally friendly investments which promote good working conditions in businesses affected by foreign investment .
All investment agreements must be accompanied by a set of appropriate environmental and social rules as a form of additional guarantee .
in writing . - Abstention .
According to Articles 206 and 207 TFEU , foreign direct investment ( FDI ) is an exclusive competence of the EU .
This development , which has significant consequences , throws up a double challenge , both for managing the more than 1 200 bilateral investment treaties ( BIT ) already concluded by the Member States ( MS ) and defining a future European investment policy which meets the expectations of investors and beneficiary states , while , at the same time , respecting the EU 's external action objectives .
Specifying this future policy , which will be integrated into the common trade policy , firstly involves an analysis of investment policies conducted so far .
These are critical times , in which the EU is being called upon to deal with an economic and social crisis .
At this stage , the EU needs to concentrate its energies on growth and on generating investments and jobs .
The extension of the competences of the EU to the foreign direct investment sector in the Treaty of Lisbon will allow us to lay the foundations for a single European policy in this sector .
We must give European undertakings the tools needed to make safe and quality investments abroad .
Protection for our undertakings abroad must be our priority .
As the EU is the most ' open ' market in the world , we need to adopt a framework to protect our businesses and the relevant conditions that will bring about a balance with our basic trading partners , so that European undertakings enjoy similar competitive conditions .
I voted in favour of this particular report because I consider that it is a move in the right direction in terms of achieving this ultimate aim .
The Treaty of Lisbon has introduced far-reaching changes to the area of common trade policy .
Firstly , under the provisions of the Treaty , common trade policy has been extended by , among other things , matters relating to foreign direct investments .
Secondly , the decision-making procedure has changed - the Council now makes decisions by qualified majority , while Parliament has gained the right of codecision .
This means that the assent of our Chamber will be necessary both in the case of the ratification of trade agreements and on questions of investment ( concerning foreign direct investments ) .
The Union must create , as part of its common trade policy , a European investment policy which meets the expectations of investors and beneficiary states .
Investment policy must also take account of the priorities of European Union foreign policy .
In this context , there is also the question of regulation at international level , with particular reference to negotiations at the WTO .
The new powers given to the Union by the Treaty of Lisbon also indirectly affect the competences of the European Parliament , placing it on a par with the Council in the decision-making process in the area of foreign direct investments .
The new consistent and integrated EU investment policy should have a beneficial influence on global economic progress and development .
As one of the most important economic blocs , the EU has a strong negotiating position which , thanks to a common policy in the area of direct investments , can contribute to a growth in the competitiveness of the EU and its businesses and increase employment .
in writing . - I believe that the EU 's right to regulate in the public interest needs to be protected and also that we need to ensure the responsible behaviour of European investors outwith the EU , which is why I supported this report .
The Treaty of Lisbon has brought foreign direct investment ( FDI ) under exclusive EU competence .
This represents a two-pronged challenge : firstly , with regard to managing the Member States ' current bilateral investment treaties ( BITs ) and , secondly , defining a European investment policy that meets the expectations of investors , the beneficiary states , and the interests of the EU .
An integrated , coherent policy that promotes high quality investments , and which makes a positive contribution to economic progress and sustainable growth worldwide , is vital .
To that end , we should move towards a clear definition of the investments to be protected , with the exception of those of a speculative nature , which should not be protected .
It would be useful to introduce the term ' EU investor ' and advisable to thoroughly define ' foreign investor ' .
By identifying best practices drawn from Member States ' experiences , and by respecting basic standards such as non-discrimination , fair and equal treatment , and protection from direct and indirect expropriation , we will have the foundations for a coherent European policy on this issue .
These measures and a definition of the sharing of responsibilities between the EU and the Member States will contribute to creating the conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) to invest abroad .
The report gives priority to protection for all EU investors .
It also highlights the fact that new investments promoted by the EU must be viable and environmentally friendly and must encourage a high standard of working conditions .
Finally , it creates a list of countries which will be privileged partners .
I believe that all this will help to create a robust international investment policy in the European Union .
That is why I voted for the report by Mr Arif .
The Treaty of Lisbon brought foreign direct investment ( FDI ) under exclusive EU competence .
I was keen to support this report , which outlines the new international investment policy and reinforces the position of the EU as the largest recipient of FDI .
This report sends out a powerful message : Europe must be a key player in the investments of tomorrow .
The emergence of new economies has upset the balance between countries and their capacity to invest .
European enterprises must position themselves in the new markets and the EU must help them to grow by offering them legal certainty and by reinforcing their integration into the global economy .
FDI is an essential part of the activities of European countries , but are they always a driver of growth ?
I do not think so .
FDI is only effective if it is framed by adequate policies , which put in place clear regulations .
The report thus guarantees an economic and legal environment for enterprises , especially our small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) which , as a force for growth and jobs , are fundamental to our economic fabric .
We need to be vigilant in order not to leave them at the mercy of the aggressive behaviour of foreign investors .
I am voting for this report because of the proposals of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament for better supervision of pre-accession funds , given the experience in 2009 ; because of EU actions against tobacco as part of a global partnership ; and because of the movement of other goods into or out of the EU , which costs taxpayers money , and deprives the EU budget of funds and actions for dealing with this problem .
Finally , it will be important to monitor the work carried out by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) over the year , and not only in the debate on the annual report .
I agreed with this report , which calls for measures to be taken and resources to be provided to ensure that EU funds are not subject to corruption and also to ensure one-stop transparency of the beneficiaries of EU funds .
EU taxpayers ' money must be used appropriately and effectively .
The Member States must have effective control mechanisms and adequate fraud detection capability .
All money paid as a result of irregularities must be returned to the EU budget .
I wholeheartedly voted for the report and the proposals drafted by our fellow Member .
Apart from criticism and ambiguity in the Commission 's assessment , I support the rapporteur 's idea that we can only draw conclusions with regard to the situation on the Union 's financial interests and the results of the fight against fraud if we include the data from the annual report from the Court of Auditors of the European Union for 2009 and from the OLAF report .
Article 325 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union obliges the European Commission and Member States to protect EU financial interests and fight against fraud in the areas in which the responsibility is shared between the Union and Member States .
I believe that , in general , the European Commission 's report entitled ' The protection of Community financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual Report 2009 ' does not give information on the estimated level of fraud and irregularities in individual Member States , but concentrates rather on the level of reporting .
The results , in my view , cannot be regarded as empirical evidence of the level of fraud and irregularities , precisely because you cannot glean from it a comprehensive view of the actual situation in terms of fraud and irregularities in the Member States .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur , who believes that the most appropriate approach is to base conclusions on the situation regarding the protection of EU financial interests and combating fraud as in the annual report of the Court of Auditors on the implementation of the budget , which represents the most reliable source of information , while the reports of the Commission and the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) chiefly provide information on specific cases .
Article 325 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) imposes on the European Commission and the Member States the obligation of protecting the EU 's financial interests and of fighting fraud .
The Commission should continue its efforts to ensure compliance by Member States in their reporting obligations with a view to providing reliable and comparable data and making a distinction between irregularities and fraud .
This will enable European institutions to take action .
However , it will only be possible if the information is transparent .
If so , we will be able to make proper use of EU funds , thereby gaining credibility and the trust of European citizens .
Given the level of fraud compared to the number of irregularities in the own resources sector for the Member States of Austria , Spain , Italy , Romania and Slovakia , where fraud accounts for more than half the total amount of irregularities in each Member State , not to mention the deficiencies in national customs supervision , I think that customs supervision systems need to be strengthened .
At the same time , the European Commission must exercise its responsibility in ensuring compliance by Member States with their reporting obligations with a view to providing reliable , comparable data on irregularities and fraud .
Fraud , according to the rapporteur 's very apt definition , ' is an example of purposeful wrongdoing and is a criminal offence ' , and an irregularity ' is a failure to comply with a rule ' .
This is the defining framework under which we should have zero tolerance for fraud and make it our goal , as he said with regard to the 2008 report , to achieve zero financial irregularities in the EU .
As I pointed out in a question at the end of last year , following an investigation by the Financial Times , there are serious doubts as to the aim and effectiveness of the Cohesion Fund .
These doubts cannot simply remain confined to the newspapers .
At the same time , this report too ' deplores the fact that large amounts of EU funds are still wrongly spent and calls on the Commission to take appropriate action with a view to ensuring prompt recovery of those funds ' .
This misuse of EU funds makes better administration necessary , as well as monitoring of how funds are spent .
There must also be provision for effectively penalising Member States that do not make good use of the funds that they have received .
That is the only way that we can move towards the target of zero fraud in the EU .
This motion for a resolution refers to the Commission report to Parliament and the Council on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual Report 2009 ( COM ( 2010 ) 382 ) , and is in line with Article 325 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , which requires the Commission and all the Member States to safeguard the financial interests of the EU , and paragraph 2 of which requires the Commission to submit a detailed annual report to Parliament and the Council .
Despite the improvements of recent years , it is vital that efforts to prevent any kind of fraud continue , even if it is also being combated by bodies of the Member States .
I agree with the proposals tabled by the rapporteur , which should be complemented by the recommendations suggested during the debate , especially the need to clarify the terms ' fraud ' and ' irregularities ' , since this represents conscious behaviour that is harmful to the interests of the EU ; there should also be a better system for managing irregularities .
I hope that , through the incorporation of the suggestions made , the 2010 report will be better than that for 2009 .
The report presents a summary of the available statistics on irregularities reported by the Member States in various areas , including agricultural policy , cohesion policy , pre-accession funds and the recovery of the EU 's traditional own resources .
Innumerable irregularities were found in the areas mentioned in various Member States during 2009 .
Many of these irregularities are detected and / or reported belatedly , jeopardising the protection and proper usage of the public purse .
We support the criticisms and observations made by the rapporteur as regards the need to implement an effective recovery system .
Frankly , at present , the overall recovery rate is low .
However , we would stress that the fight against fraud and corruption should be carried out at a level that is as close as possible to where these phenomena take place , for various reasons , particularly reasons of effectiveness .
It is therefore necessary to step up the fight against fraud and corruption in every Member State , as common legislation at EU level alone is not a panacea for this phenomenon .
This is a report on the EU 's financial interests which presents a summary of the available statistics on irregularities reported by the Member States in various areas , including agricultural policy , cohesion policy , pre-accession funds and the recovery of the EU 's traditional own resources .
Innumerable irregularities were found in those areas in various Member States during 2009 .
Many of these irregularities are detected and / or reported belatedly , jeopardising the protection and proper usage of taxpayers ' money .
We support the criticisms made by the rapporteur as regards the need to implement an effective recovery system .
At present , the overall recovery rate is far from the desirable level .
However , we would like to stress that , more importantly than having common legislation at EU level for combating corruption and fraud , each Member State needs to put the fight against fraud and corruption into practice .
In any event , we would warn against confusion between control and excessive bureaucracy , which undermines the rights of those who seek support , especially small social organisations , and small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
I commend the work done by the rapporteur .
Fraudulent irregularities within the EU emerge from the work , including an overview of OLAF .
The Commission 's work , however , is not exhaustive because it does not report the fraud data of individual Member States as underlined by the rapporteur .
For this reason , I approve this proposal .
in writing . - Fraud within the EU strikes at the very integrity of the system .
It is vital that the EU and its Member States continue the important work in this area and I was able to support this report .
I voted in favour of this report because the Member States must act primarily as protectors of taxpayers ' money in their efforts to combat fraud .
We must strengthen the applied reporting methodology and fraud detection capability in the Member States .
The Commission 's ' Protection of the European Union 's financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual Report 2009 ' does not provide information on the estimated level of irregularities and fraud in individual Member States , and it is therefore not possible to have an overview of the actual level of irregularities and fraud in the Member States and to identify and discipline those with the highest level of irregularities and fraud .
The Commission 's report fails to consider fraud in detail and deals with irregularities very broadly .
Unfortunately , large amounts of EU funds are still wrongly spent and therefore the Commission must take appropriate action with a view to ensuring prompt recovery of those funds .
Errors should not be tolerated and the Commission , in cooperation with the Member States , must draw up an appropriate report in line with the Treaty , to provide Parliament with a reasonable assurance that this objective has been attained and that action to combat fraud is being carried out properly .
This report provides a statistical summary about irregularities reported by the Member States in those areas where they implement the budget ( agricultural policy , cohesion policy and pre-accession funds , i.e. around 80 % of the budget ) and about the collection of the EU 's traditional own resources .
I think that the protection of the EU 's financial interests and the fight against fraud are especially important areas , and responsibility for them comes under the remit of both the European Union and Member States .
The report also gives an estimate of the irregularities which have occurred regarding expenditure managed directly by the Commission , as well as an overview of the operational activities of the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which strongly criticises the Commission for providing too little information on fraud and irregularities .
This is considered a result of bad reporting by Member States .
The fraud rates in France and Spain are , for example , considered ' suspiciously low ' .
In future , we want to see a clear division between irregularities and fraud , given that fraud is a criminal offence , whereas an irregularity is a failure to comply with a rule .
The report also asks for a breakdown of estimated fraud and irregularities for each Member State so that disciplinary action can be taken against individual countries .
Large amounts of EU funding is still spent incorrectly , says the resolution .
Parliament calls on the Commission to take action to ensure prompt recovery of those funds , especially in Italy .
In agriculture and cohesion policy in particular , the rate of recovery of outstanding amounts is ' catastrophic ' .
I share the view of the rapporteur that the Commission failed to provide much-needed information in its report on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud , even regarding the estimated level of fraud and irregularities in individual EU Member States , in connection with the management of EU funds .
In view of what may , without exaggeration , be termed the gigantic scale of corruption in some Member States , including the Czech Republic , this is a very serious shortcoming .
If we look at fraud and so-called irregularities at Union level , there is usually ' only ' a specific segment of corruption and fraud in general at the level of individual Member States , but it is nevertheless a very substantial segment .
In my view , there is an urgent need to consider whether the work currently carried out by the European Anti-Fraud Office is sufficiently effective , and whether that work should not undergo structural and methodology-related changes , including a more aggressive approach .
' Protection of the Communities ' financial interests ' groups together the fight against fraud and irregularities .
It is important to make a distinction between irregularity , or failure to comply with a rule , and fraud , or purposeful wrongdoing , which is a criminal offence .
In other words , the Committee 's report does not fully make this distinction and deals extensively with irregularities while failing to explore cases of fraud in any great detail .
Three areas , representing around 80 % of the EU budget , are singled out : agricultural policy , cohesion policy and pre-accession funds .
The implementation of these policies and of expenditure depends on Member States , which are responsible for the national tools for the fight against irregularities and fraud .
The commitment of administrations is too heterogeneous and the high level of outstanding irregularities in some Member States is not acceptable .
Improvements are also expected in public procurement procedures , especially in terms of ensuring transparency and combating fraud .
This report highlights the number of irregularities and fraud cases in the spending of EU funds in each Member State .
The increase in the number of reported cases was caused by the introduction of new communication technologies .
I believe that everything must be done to place responsibility on and penalise the Member States with regard to fraud and irregularities .
The necessary information on each Member State must be made available so as to increase the effectiveness of control and monitoring systems , and to ensure that we have a true picture of the situation .
The Member States should introduce the Irregularity Management System in order to develop improvements in fulfilling their reporting obligations to the European institutions .
Agriculture , cohesion policy and pre-accession funds are areas where rates of irregularity and fraud are particularly pronounced .
It is therefore necessary to take measures to increase monitoring , detection and correction .
We have to concern ourselves with creating a transparent and effective system for managing and spending EU funds .
in writing . - I know that the annual report examines how well EU finances are defended against fraud by the Commission and by Member States , as required in Article 325 TFEU .
There are areas where Member States implement the budget ( agriculture , cohesion , pre-accession funds ) and for collection of the EU 's own resources through customs and duties .
It is important to conclude the agreement on the fight against tobacco smuggling between the EU and tobacco manufacturers .
Anyone who is involved in shoplifting will be caught and punished .
In contrast , it is possible to divert millions of euro from the EU funding pot without running almost any risk at all .
It is not only that the likelihood of being discovered is small .
Even when it is finally possible to prove that a fraud has been committed , the Member States are not interested in instituting legal proceedings and recovering the money .
The generous subsidy system continues to lay itself open to fraud and irregularities .
There are many cases of fraud , in particular , in the eastern and southern Member States .
Pre-accession assistance funding has proved to be especially susceptible .
In the case of Turkey , the pre-accession assistance is not only benefiting a non-European country , but is also , in some cases , disappearing into the pockets of corrupt officials .
In order to prevent taxpayers suffering further harm , we must clear the decks .
This report only represents one step in this direction .
Ultimately , it is unlikely to be able to guarantee that European taxpayers ' money will not be siphoned off to another EU state or even to regions outside the EU .
I have voted accordingly .
This report on the fight against community fraud goes in the right direction , focusing on the need to demand greater clarity , and reiterating the absolute necessity to never lower our guard .
Italy is , unfortunately , among the countries most affected .
The vast majority of these episodes takes place in Southern Italy and relate to the theft or misuse of funds intended for development in these areas .
The purpose of these funds is to encourage the growth and development of deprived areas .
However , if these episodes of fraud occur precisely where there is greater need for investment , then you can well understand how the resulting damage will be doubled .
Therefore , more and more attention is needed in this area , in the form of continuous monitoring and timely information , which would immediately bring potential abuse to our attention .
This report highlights these issues , which is why I have decided to vote in favour .
On 5 April , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests and the fight against fraud .
It is the European Commission 's and the Member States ' duty to protect the EU 's financial interests by fighting deceit , fraud and corruption .
The document which has been adopted contains statistics on this problem , many of which are alarming .
There is a lack of appropriate data , supervision systems do not always work properly and many governments do not seem willing to cooperate .
Fraud and corruption act principally against the interests of the taxpayer , and I think every effort should be made to achieve their complete elimination .
I support the opinions of the European Parliament and its requirement for the Member States to exercise real control over the spending of funds from the EU budget and also to provide full and reliable information in this area .
Equally important is the introduction of open and transparent public procurement systems and improved supervision of simplified customs procedures throughout the Union .
These measures will not only be helpful in detecting and combating cases of corruption now , but will also significantly reduce their occurrence in the future .
I voted in favour of the report on the protection of EU financial interests and the fight against fraud because it is a topic of interest for all Member States , which we must all confront in order to better coordinate our efforts against speculation or inappropriate management of national and / or EU resources .
The text lists a series of statistics on fraud , irregularities and inconsistencies found in various Member Countries and EU institutions themselves .
The data serve as a warning to those who protect the financial interests of the Union and who try to give detailed and reliable information in order to give an exhaustive picture of the international situation concerning irregularities and fraud with a view to protecting public interests .
This Commission report on the protection of the Communities ' financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual Report 2009 , submitted in line with Article 325 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) , does not , in general , provide any information about the estimated level of irregularity and fraud in each Member State , but rather focuses on the level of communication .
It is therefore impossible to have a clear idea of the true scale of irregularities and fraud in the Member States , or to identify and discipline those with the highest levels of irregularities and fraud .
I agree with the rapporteur that the most appropriate approach is to base conclusions with regard to the situation on the protection of EU financial interests and the fight against fraud on the Annual Report by the Court of Auditors for the year 2009 , which he finds to be the most reliable source of information , with the Commission 's and the European Anti-Fraud Office 's reports serving mainly as auxiliary information on reporting tendencies and as case studies .
I voted for this report for these reasons .
in writing . - In favour .
Article 325 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union imposes on the European Commission and the Member States the obligation of protecting the EU 's financial interest and fighting against fraud in areas in which the responsibility is shared between the European Union and the Member States .
Pursuant to Article 325 ( 5 ) , the Commission , in cooperation with Member States , each year submits to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on the measures taken for the implementation of that article .
The report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the Protection of the European Union 's financial interests - Fight against fraud - Annual report 2009 ( COM ( 2010 ) 382 ) provides a summary of statistics on irregularities reported by the Member States in those areas where Member States implement the budget ( agricultural policy , cohesion policy and pre-accession funds , i.e. around 80 % of the budget ) and for the collection of EU 's traditional own resources .
It also gives an estimate of irregularities in the field of expenditure managed directly by the Commission and an overview of the operational activities of the European Anti-Fraud Office .
I voted in favour of this report because too often , we lack reliable information on irregularities and fraud related to EU spending in Member States .
Too often , there is no real check on the collection of customs duties and the recovery of money spent incorrectly .
It is important now to take concrete steps to clearly distinguish between irregularities and fraud , as fraud is a criminal offence , while irregularities are the failure to comply with a rule and could easily be unintentional .
We must have a breakdown of these for each Member State so that disciplinary action can be taken against individual countries .
The European Anti-Fraud Office conducts several hundred investigations annually into matters concerning evasion of payments to the EU and misuse of the EU 's financial resources .
Concealing the scale of the fraud will not do any good .
Quite the opposite , when this happens , we are not aware of the dangers and , as a result , we do not guard against them .
I am worried by the current situation of the low recovery rate of money which has been wrongly spent .
Money recovered from the beneficiaries in the years 2007-2009 represents only 10 % of total recoveries .
This is not acceptable .
We must introduce an effective system for recovery and carefully monitor progress made in this area .
Control of fraud must not be restricted only to European institutions , but should be ensured in individual Member States .
It is they which should design and periodically evaluate systems of public procurement to enable the prevention of corruption .
Furthermore , the Member States should maintain transparency and responsibility in the area of public procurements .
Efforts should also be made , both in the Union and in the Member States , to ensure that procedures are simple and that they curb excessive bureaucracy .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as the fight against fraud is not only in the EU 's financial interest but is also crucial to protecting consumers .
This report , which has been approved by all the European political groups , highlights the estimated scale of irregularities and cases of fraud in each Member State relating to the spending of EU funds .
According to the Commission , the increase in the number of reported cases was caused by the introduction of new communication technologies .
I am voting for this report , and I believe that the Commission should do more to place responsibility on and discipline the Member States with regard to fraud and irregularities .
The necessary information on each Member State must be made available so as to increase the effectiveness of control and monitoring systems , and to ensure that we have a true picture of the situation .
At the same time , the Member States should introduce the Irregularity Management System in order to make improvements in fulfilling its reporting obligations to the European institutions .
Agriculture , cohesion policy and pre-accession funds are areas where rates of irregularity and fraud are particularly pronounced , and it is therefore necessary to take measures to increase monitoring , detection and correction .
It is crucial that all the European entities , but particularly those of the Member States , work together in order to create a climate of transparency and rigour in the spending of European funds .
I voted in favour of the report on fraud linked to European expenditure in the Member States .
This report criticises the increase in suspicions of fraud , both in number and volume , compared with the total number of irregularities found in certain Member States ( Poland , Romania and Bulgaria ) , and calls on the Commission , the relevant Union agencies and Member States to take measures to ensure that European funds are not subject to corruption and to adopt dissuasive sanctions where corruption and fraud are found .
This would seem to be a minimum requirement .
Through this report , Parliament also draws attention to France and Spain , ' expressing its concern ' at the suspiciously low suspected fraud rates in these countries , and calls on the Commission to provide information on the fraud detection capability in these countries .
The fight against corruption is fundamental .
However , it must not obscure the complexity of procedures .
Genuine simplification should allow greater access to funds both for the local communities and small organisations that need them .
It would , without doubt , facilitate the management of funds and ensure better parliamentary control .
An effective solution must be found as quickly as possible for the problem of the high error rate in the allocation of EU funding .
We must immediately put in place strict measures to prevent public funding from being obtained fraudulently .
The EU and the Member States must work together to ensure that EU funding brings the maximum benefit to the citizens of Europe , because ultimately , this is in the interests of both sides .
The report states that the Integrated Administration and Control System is being undermined by inaccurate data , incomplete cross-checks and a lack of follow-up .
These problems must be resolved .
Clear provisions and complete transparency with regard to participation and allocation of funding , combined with strict rules governing controls , are the best means of ensuring that fraudulent practice is stopped before it can even start .
I voted in favour of the text presented by Mrs Ivan on the protection of EU financial interests and combating fraud in areas where responsibility is shared between the Union and Member States .
I think , especially in light of recent events , that it is important to pay attention to this problem and ensure a continued commitment to enable homogeneous and uniform opposition to fraud throughout the EU .
in writing . - We in UKIP are opposed in principle to European political parties .
The only authentic way of representing the opinion and views of the electors of the Member States is a national political party .
Nonetheless , it would be wrong if only the parties of the European superstate were eligible to benefit from taxpayers ' money , if that is what is on offer .
That is why UKIP reserves the right to participate in a European political party .
It would be wholly wrong if many millions of Britons and other peoples in the continent 's nation states who oppose the European project should have their voice stifled by the political establishment .
I am voting for this report as it is a big step in the creation of a common legal basis for regulating their funding .
This report is a step in the right direction , as it does not recognise a European statute for the parties ' human resources , and it differentiates between the conditions for establishing a party and its funding .
The inclusion of references to political foundations is also positive .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the application of the regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding .
This is an important document contributing to European political party development in order to activate public interest in EU affairs .
So that EU citizens support and trust these parties , it is necessary to strengthen a single and transparent framework for the funding of political parties at European level .
By adopting this resolution , the European Parliament is openly supporting transparent funding , which is a fundamental element of democratic values and good governance .
It is very important for European political parties that promote democracy in the Union to be awarded a common and uniform legal status .
The adoption of a European statute based on EU law , which would help harmonise fiscal aspects of the EU 's political parties , seems more important than ever for the parties in order to achieve their respective goals .
I agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that this document will help make the EU 's political party system work more effectively .
The European Union comprises a tableau of different nations , cultures , opinions and beliefs which , in the current social and political climate , must be represented uniformly and supported equally in legislative forums , whether national or European .
The concept of representativity forms the basis for building Europe and it will have to be maintained and supported because this is the only way in which the project of a united Europe can have any meaning .
I think that relaxing the funding regime for political parties at European level may help strengthen and promote in the future the principle of representative democracy and , consequently , the interests of all European citizens , who contribute to the Union budget .
In the process of moving from the concept of a European ' polis ' to the sense of a European political identity , we must strive towards simplifying direct contact between European citizens and political parties .
Mrs Giannakou emphasises in her report that this cannot be achieved without reviewing the status and funding of European parties .
The focus must be placed , as is well set out in the report , on cutting the red tape to do with the procedures for granting funding , combined , however , with the introduction of harsh penalties in the event of irregularities or non-compliance with existing regulations .
This is why I voted in favour of this report .
I supported the report presented by Mrs Giannakou , which proposes , in particular , that political parties and European foundations have a legal personality of their own , with the establishment of a common legal and fiscal status based in EU law .
It calls on the European Commission to make specific proposals in this regard .
In addition , it confirms that a political party at EU level may receive funding only if it is represented in the European Parliament by at least one of its members .
I voted in favour of this important report .
The Treaty of Lisbon envisages an important role for political parties in establishing a common European civic space , and therefore it is very important for them to have a uniform legal status and to ensure that funding is as transparent as possible and accountable to society .
At present , many political parties operating in Europe are relatively closed , and there is little change in their leadership , which consequently weakens the role these political organisations play in ensuring the involvement of citizens in the adoption of political decisions .
By reforming the regulation of party activities , the European Union could use this opportunity to promote the revitalisation of European political parties .
I believe that when establishing new unified rules on party activities and funding , we should include democracy criteria regarding the formation of parties ' internal structures and specific democratic safeguards .
Should political organisations fail to implement these , they would be deprived of some of their opportunities , such as being awarded public funding .
I agree with the rapporteur that European political parties are basic instruments of parliamentary democracy , even if , at this stage , they are only umbrella organisations of the affiliated national parties .
I also support the idea that only those parties represented by at least one MEP are eligible for funding .
I believe that the idea of asking the Commission to propose a draft statute for European political parties , in accordance with the TFEU , is correct .
I advocate , along with the rapporteur , that we need changes to the financial regulations governing the funding of European parties and political foundations , and that funding must be allocated in full at the start of the year .
It is a sentiment shared by all European citizens and , at this level , whether you are pro-Europe or against the integration of Europe changes nothing .
There is an urgent need to re-appropriate European issues .
Political parties at European level have considerable scope for action .
They must devise fresh perspectives and give fresh impetus to the instruments of a democratic Europe .
We must therefore relax the conditions under which political parties at European level exist in order to release energies .
We need to give a clear status to these new spaces for debate and , finally , a genuine perspective to the activity of political parties at European level in the forthcoming elections .
I rejected this report for a number of reasons .
Many of the proposals on the direct funding and status of European political parties conflict with the national parties .
MEPs are elected by the various countries via national parties .
After their election , thanks to their national parties , they can form European groups , but while pursuing their party interests domestically .
This report does not support this idea .
The development of European political parties is vital for generating public interest in EU affairs .
Dealing with the issue of regulating European parties is a deeper concern , linked to how to create a transnational civic space composed of free and equal citizens , and what a ' collective founding ' , in the form of a ' civic contract ' among diverse peoples , might entail for the future of integration .
Devising a reform package for European political parties as a means of mobilising the democratic energies of individual and organised citizens is not an easy task , not least due to the EU 's systemic complexity .
Strengthening European political parties is a means of enhancing participatory governance in the EU and , ultimately , of strengthening democracy .
The EU 's future rests on European political parties , complicated as it sounds .
Creating a safe and transparent environment for the operation and funding of European political parties marks a first step .
We need a European space where political parties actively put citizens at the heart of the European Union 's concerns and help them in their everyday life , at a time when it is noticeable that European citizens are detached from the Union .
European political parties , which play an important role in shaping democracy in the EU , should be given a common and uniform legal statute .
European political parties should be bodies with legal personality , in order to be capable of overcoming the difference between European political parties and European authorities , from the perspective of taxation procedures .
As far as the establishment of European parties is concerned , it is right and proper that the statute of European parties regards European , national and regional elected representatives as being equal , as long as the regional representatives are elected members of regional parliaments .
In addition to this , every European political party should have at least one representative who is a Member of the European Parliament .
In the end , that is also a condition for a European political party to qualify for funding from the European Parliament .
in writing . - UKIP is , in principle , against European political parties .
They are a waste of hard-pressed taxpayers ' money .
There is no need for them , and the authentic way of representing the opinion of the peoples of the Member States remains the national political party .
Nonetheless , it must be clearly understood that UKIP reserves the right to participate in a European political party so that it , too , might benefit from those taxpayers ' money , the better to represent the many millions of Britons and other people across the continent who oppose the European Union and all its works and whose voice is stifled by the ruling political class .
in writing . - I strongly support this report as another step in the building of real European political parties which can act on a pan-European basis .
The only way to overcome the democratic deficit whereby the citizens of Europe do not feel part of the European project is to build real European politics .
Crucial to this are pan-European political parties .
I abstained , despite the fact that the report proposes a solution to the problem caused by the fact that European political parties operate as NGOs based in Belgium .
European parties , with their own ideological and political attributes , must acquire a clear legal personality .
Under certain conditions , they may help to galvanise the citizens into action and seek decisions for the benefit of the people , not the financial strong .
However , I have reservations about certain points in the report , in so far as they might be used as restrictions on the free and independent organisation and action of European parties .
Their internal operation and organisation and their political action must depend on their own political choices , without external restrictions .
The rules governing the political and legal recognition of parties and their necessary funding must facilitate their action , so that they can freely create alternative policies , which is the very essence of democracy .
They must also ensure that they act , without any influence from restrictive political frameworks and strong economic interests , as spokesmen for the people of Europe .
The EU operates as a representative democracy , in line with the Treaty of Lisbon .
At European level , political parties have a vital role in creating European political awareness and expressing the will of the EU public .
However , European political parties are only umbrella organisations for national parties , and will not ultimately be in direct contact with voters in the Member States .
Strengthening European political parties also involves their adoption of a political , legal and fiscal statute , including autonomous legal personality founded directly on EU law .
Better regulation of European political parties , and their associated political foundations , will also bring benefits in terms of transparency .
Transparent funding is a key element of supporting democratic values and promoting good governance , with the expectation that this can also help to reinforce public confidence in political parties .
Political parties at European level are a nonsense .
A ' political space at EU level ' , which many defend , does not exist .
Ideas can be expressed and real and political debates can be had only within an entity in which citizens share the same values , the same language and the same culture , namely the nation .
This report argues that political parties at European level must be the place for ' expressing the will of the citizens of the Union ' .
This is an unrealistic objective .
The record of abstention beaten at every single European election should serve to remind us that the supranational level is not that of a fair and effective democracy .
The huge European subsidies granted to these parties is a scandal .
The growing sense of estrangement and lack of interest on the part of the citizens are palpable , but the European Parliament and , more generally , the European institutions , are determined to create a European political space from scratch .
I voted in favour of this report as it advocates safe and transparent standards for the functioning and funding of European political parties within the EU .
The future European statute of political parties will be an important step towards greater public participation , a more representative democracy , and a Europe that is closer to its people .
With regard to the report on regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding , we chose to vote against the paragraph in the text that proposes that the European political parties should be allowed to participate in referendum campaigns in the Member States if the referendums have EU relevance .
The European political parties , which are , to a large extent , financed by EU funds , are currently only permitted to campaign in European Parliament elections .
We believe that the current rules are reasonable .
National elections or referendums should be decided without the involvement of parties that are financed via the EU 's budget or other external funding .
Our democracy is based on representativeness , which is put into practice through political parties .
These are , for that very reason , democratic instruments representing the legitimate interests of the public , both closely , such as through local government , and at a more distant level , through their representation in the European institutions .
It is no coincidence that the Members of the European Parliament are organised into political parties , and thus seek to represent the interests of the public in line with an agenda of priorities defined by their political orientation .
As the rapporteur says , ' creating a safe and transparent environment for the function and the funding of European political parties is an act deeply democratic ' , so I believe that the initiative to establish a clear regulatory framework on their recognition and funding is a positive step .
Political parties and their associated political foundations are vital instruments in a parliamentary democracy .
They contribute towards giving shape to the political will of the people .
They are also crucial in training and selecting their candidates .
The Treaty of Lisbon provides for this role to be carried out by the political parties and their respective foundations , with a view to creating a European polis , a political space at EU level , and a European democracy , of which the European Citizens ' Initiative is a key constitutive element .
European political parties and political foundations have become indispensable actors in the political life of the EU , particularly as they shape and make known the positions of the different ' political families ' .
I agree with the criteria for accessing funding , in particular , the percentage of revenue and the representativeness of the respective political party .
There are a number of considerations set out in the report that have caused us to disagree with it .
The participation of political parties at European level in referendum campaigns in the Member States is one such consideration , even if the subject of the referendum is directly linked to issues concerning the EU .
We also disagree with the proposal made that European political parties should begin a process of examining the conditions for the direct recruitment of individual citizens as members .
These considerations add up to a position of principle that is unfavourable to the creation of political parties with European scope .
This process is inseparable from the neoliberal , federalist and militaristic nature and objectives of the current integration process , in which , moreover , it has an instrumental role .
We voted against this report because of our opposition to the creation of Europe-wide political parties , and of our position on the capitalist integration of the EU .
The same goes for the proposals being made on the respective political foundations .
However , in the specific case of this report , there are also other reasons for our vote against .
For example , we believe that it is wrong for political parties at European level to participate in referendum campaigns in the Member States , even if the subject of the referendum is directly linked to issues concerning the EU .
We also disagree with the proposal made that European political parties should begin a process of examining the conditions for the direct recruitment of individual citizens as members .
To give political parties at European level a legal status and a legal personality based solely on EU law is to transform them into a supranational entity on top of the domestic laws governing the political parties of which they are composed .
It is to create , artificially and dogmatically , a twenty-eighth political space that is only virtual .
I am also against tightening the rules governing the creation of these parties , with a corresponding easing of the financial conditions to which they are subject , and against any link between the recognition of the ' European ' status of a party and its access to public funding .
They are trying , by any means at their disposal , to reduce the club so that the privileged few who are members can more easily enjoy its financial and political advantages .
Finally , the right of political parties at European level to participate in referendum campaigns on European affairs is , in my view , ambiguous .
Some of my fellow MEPs approved , thinking of possible referenda on the entry of Turkey into the EU , which will , in any case , not be staged .
I , personally , imagined unacceptable interference in referenda on accession or on the adoption of the euro by a country , referenda associated with the right of each nation , and each nation alone , to self-determination .
I voted against this report .
This report had my full backing as it goes some way to encouraging the emergence of a European democracy based on parties with a properly clarified legal status and legal personality .
This has the undoubted advantage of reinforcing their legitimacy in the eyes of citizens who still feel that the EU is too far removed .
It is also about promoting transparency of operation , which I regard as essential for an assumed democracy .
Finally , their funding will be more transparent , which can only increase their legitimacy , and I welcome this .
I agreed with this report because creating a safe and transparent environment for the functioning and funding of European political parties is a deeply democratic act .
We need a space , a European space , in which political parties would unite the EU 's citizens and help them in their everyday lives .
The fact that specific rules will be adopted , enabling this objective to be achieved , has two consequences .
On the one hand , up-to-date and public information will be provided quickly on the formation of European political parties and their situation in Europe .
Citizens will be aware that when participating in the work of a European political party , they must follow European Union law and that political parties have rights and obligations .
On the other hand , the European statute of European political parties paves the way for the creation of a transnational party system .
It is a crucial first step towards more participation , more democracy and finally , more Europe .
It is important to develop the European political parties .
An age-old concern of the European Parliament has been the fact that the public has shown little interest in EU affairs .
This has been evident in the poor turnout in parliamentary elections .
In the last European elections , a mere 40.3 % of Finns who were entitled to vote actually went and voted .
There has been a substantial increase in the funding for European political parties and foundations in recent years .
This current year , the parties will be receiving financial support worth a total of EUR 17.4 million , and the foundations will get EUR 11.4 million .
Now we need to take special care that this money , which comes from European taxpayers , is spent openly and as sensibly as possible .
Neither in the future should there any longer be any increase in financial support .
' Political parties at a European level contribute to forming European political awareness and to expressing the will of citizens of the Union ' .
With these words , Article 10 ( 4 ) of the Treaty on European Union sets out the role that European political parties must have .
Although this role is given to them by the Treaty of Lisbon , they cannot always fulfil it in the optimum manner .
I believe that the European political parties can and should contribute more effectively to the political and social life of Europe in order to increase public interest in the internal affairs of the Union .
In light of these considerations , it is vital that European political parties be given recognised legal status , and single , uniform tax policies which allow true convergence of organisation .
Indeed , I believe that the statute on political parties at a European level could pave the way not only towards the involvement of the population , but also to the creation of a truly transnational party system which would be vital to guaranteeing greater democracy in Europe .
For 7 years now , the major European political groupings have established themselves as European parties , joined together within the groups represented in this House .
However , the visibility and activity of these trans-European parties is seriously constrained by the pervasiveness of national allegiances .
Without calling into question the latter , which are essential for the democratic aspirations of the Union , we must endeavour to foster the emergence of a European supranational debate as the only means that will enable Europe to move forward .
The report by Mrs Giannakou specifically aims to promote the establishment of political parties at European level , and it therefore had my backing .
It calls on the Commission to implement legislation creating a status for such bodies , facilitating their funding and enabling them to integrate better into the daily political life of citizens .
This regulation would create a privileged space to ensure that trans-European interests see the light of day , while offering prudential rules guaranteeing an open and transparent debate .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which I see as a major step towards creating a legal statute governing political parties at the European level .
As the political parties are represented at European level , the institutions expect them to inform public opinion on European issues .
I voted in favour of the report establishing a common legal and fiscal status for the European political parties .
This has been made possible by the Treaty of Lisbon , which grants the EU a legal personality .
This status is necessary for convergence in relation to the budget and the organisation of the political parties at European level and their foundations .
Foundations affiliated to political parties contribute to debates on political issues of general interest .
The financial rules are clarified in order to have reliable and transparent information on their funding and functioning .
One important rule is the condition on funding that requires the party to be represented by at least one Member in the European Parliament .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that , if it can be said that there is no democracy in our countries without political parties , it should also be said that there will not be true European democracy without European political parties .
As I would argue that the funding of national parties by businesses and their lobbies should be completely banned , with public funding guaranteed by the state , I also believe that European parties should be funded from the EU budget and barred from receiving ' donations ' from legal persons .
Advocating secure and transparent standards for the functioning and funding of European political parties in the EU is of the utmost importance .
The future European statute of political parties will have a big role in making this a reality , as it will generate greater public participation , a more representative democracy and a Europe that is closer to its people .
in writing . - I am convinced that creating a safe and transparent environment for the function and the funding of European political parties is a deeply democratic act .
We need a space , a European space , of acting political parties that bring citizens into the core of the Union and help them in their everyday life .
The adoption of specific rules makes this target possible and it is twofold : on the one hand , it provides current , quick and public information on the formation of the European political parties and their common European status .
Citizens are aware that participating in a European political party signifies that they are participating in a body covered by the law of the European Union and that political parties have rights and obligations .
On the other hand , the European statute of European political parties paves the way for the creation of a transnational party system .
I voted ' for ' .
At Wednesday 's sitting , the European Parliament adopted the Giannakou report on the status and rules regarding the funding of political parties at European level .
In my opinion , European political party development is a crucial tool , thanks to which we can raise the interest of public opinion in European Union affairs , which , in my opinion , will result in greater turnouts at European Parliament elections .
In addition , political parties are a platform for dialogue with the citizens , which takes place through numerous seminars and political discussions .
By introducing the possibility of funding European political parties , the Maastricht Treaty and the Treaty of Nice enabled them to operate independently of parliamentary groups .
However , despite this undeniable step towards improving the status of European parties , their main sources of funding are still individual membership subscriptions and , to a small extent , donations .
I would like to express the hope that the document which has been adopted will lead to a significant improvement in the position of political parties at European level .
I voted in favour of this important resolution , because political parties at European level are an important factor for integration within the Union , which aims to create a European polis , a political space at EU level , and a European democracy .
European political parties have to cooperate closely with their members in national and regional parties , and therefore they should enjoy favourable working conditions and should be allocated funding .
It is necessary to ensure maximum transparency and financial controls for European political parties financed by the general budget of the European Union .
Above all , the Financial Regulation must be supplemented with provisions purely intended to regulate the funding of European parties and foundations .
Furthermore , it would be advisable to make an exception , whereby the funding would be made available to these parties at the beginning of the financial year at 100 % , not 80 % , and the independent resources that the parties are required to demonstrate would be reduced to 10 % .
To ensure that funding allocated is used transparently and as intended , the regulation must provide for penalties for violating funding procedures .
Given the fact that European political parties play a political role at EU level , I agree with the proposal to give them the right to participate in referendum campaigns , which are directly related to EU issues , and to allow them to use the money they are allocated to finance these campaigns .
Only strong and effectively functioning European political parties can help to connect EU institutions with citizens more strongly , and therefore the Commission should propose a draft statute for European political parties as a matter of urgency .
European Parliament elections should become more democratic .
EU citizens should be given the opportunity to vote not only for national , but for European lists .
European political parties and political foundations are gaining increasing importance in the political life of the European Union .
However , it is still difficult for them to acquire more popularity and support because they are merely umbrella organisations for national parties and not directly in touch with the electorate in the Member States .
We must improve the conditions in which European political parties operate , because this would equate to an improvement in the EU 's representative government and the strengthening of democracy .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that it is an important step - probably the first one - towards strengthening political parties at European level .
I agree with the rapporteur that we need to establish a legal framework for the activities of European political parties as a matter of urgency .
The funding of European political parties ' work must be transparent .
To ensure this , it should be made possible to carry out checks on funding .
The democratic system on which the EU is based focuses on the citizen as a reference point around which all decisions are made .
The citizen is represented by the political parties which , in order to act as guarantors of the will of their constituents , must adopt common rules of transparency and uniformity .
That is why I voted in favour of implementing the regulations on the statute and the financing of political parties at a European level .
An EU regulation of this scale offers the opportunity to obtain extensive information on European political parties , guarantees against internal corruption and stimulates citizens ' interest , facilitating their participation in EU politics .
This report is based on the assumption that the development of European political parties is critical to the mobilisation of the public interest in EU matters .
Underlying the debate on the European parties ' statute is a deep concern about co-constituting a transnational civic space composed of free and equal citizens , and what collective funding , in the form of a ' civic contract ' among diverse peoples , might entail for the future of integration .
Designing a reform package for European political parties as a means of mobilising the democratic energies of individual and organised citizens is a difficult but noble task , particularly due to the EU 's systemic complexity .
However , this disadvantage can be converted into an advantage if the ' constructive mission ' of the European political parties is clarified , along with the way in which clear and serious dialogue on their political development can contribute to the emergence of a more pluralistic democracy .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that creating a safe and transparent environment for the functioning and funding of European political parties promotes the quality of European democracy .
I voted in favour of this report as I believe that , if it can be said that there is no democracy in our countries without political parties , it should also be said that there will not be true European democracy without European political parties .
As I would argue that the funding of national parties by businesses and their lobbies should be completely banned , with public funding guaranteed by the state , I also believe that European parties should be funded from the EU budget and barred from receiving ' donations ' from legal persons .
The deepening of representative democracy and the creation of a political space at EU level undoubtedly strengthen the role of the European political parties and their respective foundations .
The adoption of a common and uniform legal status for all European political parties and the foundations that are associated with them , founded directly on EU law , represents a very important first step in this direction .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this report , as it stresses the importance of the European political parties as indispensable actors in the political life of the EU , putting forward concrete proposals with a view to creating a safe and transparent regulatory environment for the functioning and funding of European political parties .
The European political parties contribute to creating European political awareness and expressing the will of citizens .
At a time when we are striving to increase the participation of citizens in the EU 's activities and to strengthen its democratic character , we ought to take steps to improve the regulatory environment of the European political parties .
I am supporting the report by my fellow Member Mrs Giannakou .
The European political parties must be permitted - and even encouraged - to participate in European referendum campaigns .
I also think that it is essential for them to offer the option of participating individually and directly to citizens who wish to do so .
Furthermore , the financial rules applying to the political parties must be modified .
We must encourage self-financing by increasing the current donation limit per year and per person .
Other rules must also be relaxed - I am thinking , in particular , of authorisation for the carrying-over of funds to the following financial year .
While making such modifications , however , we must also retain all the current transparency requirements and bring in sanctions - primarily financial ones - something which is currently lacking in the Financial Regulation .
in writing . - In favour .
European political party development is critical for the activation of public interest in EU affairs .
By transcending the centrality of the oft-raised questions ' who governs and how ' , it calls attention to the question ' who is governed ' .
Underlying discourses on European party regulation is a deeper concern of how to co-constitute a transnational civic space composed of free and equal citizens , and what a collective founding , in the form of a ' civic contract ' among diverse peoples , might entail for the future of integration .
Designing a reform package for European political parties as a means of mobilising the democratic energies of individual and organised citizens is not an easy task , not least due to the EU 's systemic complexity .
But this may be turned into an advantage , should one clarify the ' constitutive mission ' of European political parties and how an informed and principled dialogue on their political development can facilitate the emergence of a plural demos , whose members can direct their democratic claims to , and via , the central institutions .
Strengthening European political parties is a means of enhancing participatory governance in the EU and , finally , strengthening democracy .
It is not an easy task to work out a package of reforms for Europe-wide political parties that will allow them to mobilise the democratic impulses of individuals and citizen organisations .
However , the creation of a secure and transparent framework for the operations and financing of Europe-wide political parties constitutes a profoundly democratic act .
We must foster the creation of a European space for political parties ' activities which puts citizens at the heart of the European Union and helps them in their daily lives .
The approval of specific rules can achieve this goal and has a double advantage .
On the one hand , it provides updated , rapid and public information on the formation of political parties at European level and their common European status .
In this way , citizens know that participation in a political party at European level is covered by EU law and that political parties not only have rights but also duties .
On the other hand , the European statute of political parties at the European level opens the way for the creation of a transnational party system .
The approval of this resolution is a first , indispensable step towards the greater participation of citizens in Europe .
Obviously , I share the view that political parties and political foundations related thereto are essential tools of a parliamentary democracy .
Indeed , they ensure that members of parliament are accountable , they help shape the political will of the citizens , they draw up political programmes , they select and train candidates , they maintain a dialogue with citizens and enable citizens to express their opinions .
On top of that , the Treaty of Lisbon expressly provides for this role to be played by political parties and their affiliate foundations .
They are an important part of the political space at EU level and of the European democracy , of which the European Citizens ' Initiative is an essential part .
However , I voted against this report in the final vote , in order to show my total disagreement with the rejection of Amendment 10 .
In terms of the funding and donations scheme , this amendment stripped legal entities and businesses of the right to make annual donations of up to EUR 25 000 .
The fact that the European Parliament is allowing this unfortunate practice to continue will open the door to companies and lobbying organisations exerting a strong influence over political parties and European foundations by granting them financial support .
I do not want that , hence my protest vote .
I am voting for this report as it promotes better conditions for governing the Single Market and involving partners in it .
However , it is important to put people at the heart of these policies and to give Parliament greater political importance in matters related to the Single Market .
I supported the report by our colleague , Mrs Kalniete , as well as the two reports by Mr Busoi and Mr Correia de Campos .
These three reports were drawn up following the proposal for a Single Market Act published by the European Commission .
The objective of Michel Barnier , Commissioner for the Internal Market , is to relaunch the Single Market but , above all , to bring it closer to the citizen .
This is an objective which I fully support .
The Single Market Act must be seen as an opportunity to demonstrate to citizens that European integration , and the Single Market in particular , is being carried out in their interest , not against them .
Guaranteeing access to a basic banking service - or , more generally , safeguarding the quality and accessibility of services that are essential for our fellow citizens - is a step in this direction .
One of the main challenges in relaunching the Single Market is ensuring effective political leadership , commitment and coordination , and therefore , comprehensive guidance from the highest political level is crucial for the relaunch of the Single Market .
The European Commission must play a greater coordinating role , and the President of the Commission should be given the mandate to coordinate and supervise the relaunch of the Single Market , in close cooperation with the President of the European Council and the competent authorities in the Member States .
I agreed with this report because I believe that it is necessary to improve political coordination at all levels in order to properly implement Single Market priorities aimed at boosting economic growth , competitiveness , the social market economy and sustainability in the Union .
I supported the rapporteur 's proposals and the approach adopted in the Commission communication ' Towards a Single Market Act ' , as well as the idea that an annual Single Market Forum is required .
Local and regional authorities should have greater involvement in creating the Single Market , while dialogue with social partners and civil society will help restore confidence in the Single Market .
I , too , believe that the use of regulations instead of directives would create a clearer regulatory environment and reduce implementation costs .
I also believe that it is useful to carry out an assessment of the state of the Single Market at every spring session of the European Council .
We also need a legislative proposal from the Commission on resolving disputes using alternative mechanisms by the end of this year .
I voted in favour of this report because , in my opinion , in order to successfully revitalise the EU Single Market , it is especially important to provide for and strategically plan not just specific measures to achieve the objective , but also effective ways of using those measures .
One of the most important measures which has been stressed over and over by many representatives of the people and interest groups , as well as Professor Monti himself , is ensuring political leadership in this project which is particularly important for the whole of the EU .
This would allow the importance of the completion of the internal market to be stressed throughout the European Union .
Another measure that is equally important , in my opinion , is the strengthening of dialogue with social partners and civil society .
When drawing up Single Market legislation , which could have an impact on the labour market , social partners should always be actively involved in preparatory work .
It is also particularly important to involve and strengthen partnership with local and regional authorities in the process of establishing the Single Market because in practice , it is precisely at this level that most legislation must be applied .
Finally , I completely agree that simply adopting measures is not enough if we want to bring Europe closer to its citizens .
It is very important to constantly inform European citizens about the achievements of the internal market and the benefits it provides so that they know what rights and opportunities they are offered by the European Union and one of its cornerstones - the common internal market .
I voted in favour of this report .
Governance and partnership are two key issues in reviving the Single Market .
Parliament 's role in drafting legislation on the Single Market , in particular , can be further strengthened .
The Treaty of Lisbon has already made a great contribution in this direction , but it is not enough .
I think , in particular , of those files on which Parliament has expressed a position which is strong and clear but divergent from that of the Council and governments of the Member States .
Take , for example , the age-old question of the indication of origin of products , the ' Made In ' label , particularly in the textile sector regulations which I have been following personally .
Although Parliament has the power to block the adoption of an act if it does not agree with the Council , sometimes this is not enough .
We need a change in mentality and attitude from everyone involved .
The strengthening of European economic governance , coordination for the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy and the relaunch of the Single Market are key to revitalising the European economy .
The Single Market should be competitive , making a positive contribution to the daily lives of workers , students , pensioners and the public in general , along with businesses , especially small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) .
One of the main challenges to relaunching the Single Market is ensuring political leadership , commitment and coordination .
I believe that there can only be good governance of the Single Market if there is good quality and up-to-date information on how it functions .
This requires the use of suitable instruments for monitoring and evaluating Single Market policies in order to link the different stages of the policy cycle , from conception to implementation .
It is also important for the Member States to become engaged in the assessment and monitoring of Single Market rules .
The Commission 's report on the Single Market Act follows on from Mr Monti 's report on ' A new strategy for the Single Market ' .
That is the context of this report .
The objectives are clear : strengthening free competition , and speeding up the process of liberalisation and privatisation of various sectors of economic activity and social life .
The report 's rhetoric seeks to obscure its real intentions , and the claim that it is seeking to strengthen ' a highly competitive social market economy , aiming at full employment and social progress and a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment ' is symptomatic .
It is full of contradictions and demagoguery , also mentioning that ' companies , especially [ small and medium-sized enterprises ] ( SMEs ) , and Europeans ' will be ' at the heart of the Single Market ' .
Indeed , they are sure to be at the heart of the negative consequences , which have become so evident during the recent decades of the Single Market .
The conclusions of the Council of 25 March , and the ' Euro Plus Pact ' , adopted there , are illustrative of the war being openly waged against workers , young people and pensioners , and , in the end , against the general public .
This report is part of the package relating to the Commission communication on the Single Market Act , the proposal of which follows on from Mr Monti 's report on ' A new strategy for the Single Market ' .
It is thus aimed at strengthening free competition and speeding up the process of liberalisation and privatisation , although the whole document is phrased in a way that seeks to obscure its real intentions , stating , for example , that the intention is to strengthen ' a highly competitive social market economy , aiming at full employment and social progress , and a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment ' , and adding that it therefore aims to place companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and Europeans at the heart of the Single Market .
In fact , however , you only have to read the conclusions of the Council on 25 March , and particularly the ' Euro Plus Pact ' , to see clearly what is intended : war against the world of work , collective bargaining , trade unions , retirees and their right to pensions .
The key objectives are to speed up the process of concentration and accumulation of capital to the benefit of monopolist groups , ending any attempt to protect SMEs , workers and public services .
Hence , our vote against .
The report presented to us by our fellow Member from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) ( PPE ) has some findings which are certainly shared by our group , such as the need for greater involvement of the regions and for more transparency .
However , this is not enough to gain my vote in favour since I do not agree with the majority of points it makes .
For example , I do not agree with the conviction that the Commission should play an even more important role , nor with the overly frequent references to the issue of infringement proceedings , nor with the mandate given to the President of the Commission to coordinate the revitalisation of the Single Market .
Of all the reports on the Single Market that have been adopted today , and against which I voted , only the Kalniete report stands out somewhat from the pack .
It has the courage to talk of something other than further integration and consolidation of the Single Market , which has gone on for 25 years without Europeans seeing tangible benefits from it .
It talks , for example , of listening to citizens and proposes that , each year , we identify the principal sources of discontent and frustrations among citizens and take them into account .
That would be a novelty !
' No to the liberalisation of public services ' is what those citizens would say who are exasperated by delays in postal services , soaring energy prices , the deterioration of rail services , and so forth .
And it would be stopped !
People are sick of unfair competition ; they have had enough relocations and imports that are killing off our jobs .
We would protect our markets and our industries by sending the WTO packing !
Abandon the ' Euro Plus Pact ' , for which our wages and our purchasing power are less important than the survival of a currency which has only brought us trouble !
And it would be done !
Yet , considering how long demonstrators have been marching outside your windows saying such things , who have you been listening to , apart from the lobbyists and the wheeler-dealers ?
This report is of great importance , because it concerns the question of how the internal market , which is one of the EU 's main priorities , can bring increased benefits for European citizens and businesses by ensuring that those involved work more efficiently together .
In addition to dialogue and partnership between the stakeholders , such as the national parliaments , the local and regional authorities and the social partners , and increased coordination , there is a need for the existing regulations to be simplified and implemented more efficiently by the Member States .
In the context of this report , I welcome the recognition of the important role played by EURES ( the European Job Mobility Portal ) , in particular , with regard to making the free movement of employees easier , because this contact point is of major significance , especially in border regions .
The measures for small and medium-sized enterprises , which are to be provided with clear information about the internal market , are also extremely important .
in writing . - The Kalniete report rightly emphasises the importance of authorities below the Member State government level in implementing rules relating to the Single Market .
I fully support this sentiment and consider that , when Scotland wins back her independence , it will be appropriate for those levels of government below the Scottish national government to be fully involved in implementing Single Market rules .
I voted for this report because it proposes adopting a directive that would involve national governments and regional authorities more in the drawing up of a new directive , through consultation with employers , unions and other associations .
It calls on the Commission to indicate the implementation timetable for the Single Market Act and to publish regular updates of tangible progress in order to make the EU public more aware of the Act 's implementation and highlight its benefits .
It is proposed that partnership with local and regional authorities needs to be broadened from cohesion policy to Single Market policies .
Single market rules are very often implemented and enforced by Member States ' authorities at regional or local levels .
The experience with the implementation of the Services Directive has clearly shown that involvement of regional and local authorities can be extremely important for ensuring that Single Market legislation is properly implemented and applied .
The dialogue and partnership element of Single Market governance should be strengthened through stronger involvement by national parliaments .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon offers a window of opportunity for the national parliaments to engage with Single Market rules throughout the legislative cycle and participate in joint activities with the European Parliament .
This could speed up the adoption of subsequent transposition measures at Member State level .
A constant exchange of information with national parliaments on the progress of transpositions could also facilitate the transposition process .
All measures aimed at the development and integration of Member States are worthy of attention .
There is no doubt that the current system of economic cooperation - the European Union Single Market - makes life easier for all citizens , among other things , by lifting trade barriers and enabling the free flow of people .
However , new proposals need to be introduced successively to prevent stagnation occurring within the system .
Let us consider whether political leadership would not be a good idea for revitalising the Single Market .
The President of the Council of the European Union , working together with the President of the European Commission , would be authorised to coordinate and supervise this process of revitalisation while maintaining , however , the involvement of the Member States .
Partnership as a factor in managing the Single Market should be based on dialogue with the parliaments of Member States , and also on cooperation with local and regional authorities .
Working together would help in implementing directives properly and would produce the expected results .
I support the final form of the report on governance and partnership in the Single Market , and especially its key priorities .
In my opinion , regular assessment of the situation on the internal market will improve the way it functions .
A better functioning internal market is also promised from the more broadly conceived , more interactive and more transparent public consultations of the draft legislation .
If we can persuade Member States to publish comparison tables for legislation relating to the Single Market , there is a chance that we will be able to reduce the deficit in the implementation of directives relating to the Single Market to 0.5 % in the case of legislation not yet adopted , and to 0.5 % in the case of legislation incorrectly implemented .
However , the fundamental precondition for success is for the Commission to take a more active approach towards enforcing the transposition of EU law than is currently the case , for example , with the directive on services on the internal market .
This directive is one of the cornerstones of a functioning internal market .
Unfortunately , however , many states have implemented it late and often incorrectly , in a bid to apply the principles of economic nationalism , and the Commission turns a blind eye to this .
I have voted for the adoption of this report .
The report I have supported embodies many of the principles which I personally consider foundational for the European Union .
I refer , in general terms , to the type of dialogue that must be established as soon as possible between citizens and institutions at different levels .
This dialogue takes on specific and diverse connotations in relation to the life of all of us Europeans , but it becomes much more relevant when one considers the creation of a Single Market aimed at revitalising the entire European economy and improving communications between legislative bodies and the direct beneficiaries .
I think the priorities in our pursuit of shared growth should be to proceed in this direction , while looking at new methods of governance and monitoring various kinds of procedures while , at the same time , streamlining our citizens ' access to public administration .
Last October , the Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services , Michel Barnier , presented his ' Single Market Act ' , a collection of 50 proposals for boosting growth in the European Union .
The European Parliament was then invited to give its view on the various parts of this paper .
Part 3 of the Act calls on the Member States and the institutions to implement the measures necessary to bring the citizens and the Single Market closer together .
In particular , this rapprochement will be achieved by launching a mutual evaluation system for the 2006 Services Directive and by increasing consultation and dialogue with civil society , both when preparing and implementing texts and in resolving problems .
I voted for Parliament 's resolution because it welcomes the commitments made by the Commission and highlights the importance of improving the clarity of European texts or of using its power to impose sanctions in order to oblige the Member States to respect their commitments .
in writing . - I voted for this report which states that one of the key challenges in relaunching the Single Market is ensuring political leadership , commitment and coordination .
The 50 proposals for relaunching the Single Market encompass numerous portfolios , crucially involving the competences of several commissioners in the Commission , and touch upon the jurisdiction of various committees in the European Parliament .
In the Council , the Single Market Act is furthermore split into different Council configurations whose role and effectiveness vary a great deal .
National institutions also differ a lot in the ways that they are configured and in their organisational cultures .
in writing . - ( RO ) Member States must adopt a firm joint stance in order to improve the functioning of the European Single Market and prevent the return of economic protectionism , which would result in fragmentation of the internal market and affect competitiveness .
The aim of the European Single Market Act is to develop administrative cooperation between Member States , also by means of expanding the role of regional authorities with a view to establishing coordination at their level .
Unfortunately , it is relatively difficult to register such programmes at regional level as a result of the economic disparities between EU regions .
In order to revitalise the less developed regions , we need to focus on human capital .
The region 's prosperity is determined firstly by the productivity of its inhabitants and their skills , in addition to the level of capital investment and their innovative capacity .
However , there are major differences even between regions in the same Member State .
I think that adapting the European Single Market to the needs of European citizens is achieved primarily through improving worker mobility .
The free movement of labour can make a significant contribution to narrowing the disparities between regions .
Another key aspect is the provision of ongoing education and training for workers .
Specialist workers and those who have retrained for another career can meet the market 's specific needs much more easily , thanks to their high level of mobility .
in writing . - ( FR ) The economic and financial crisis has demonstrated the failure of euro-liberalism , the dogmatic framework of the Single Market .
Far from changing course , EU leaders are rushing headlong down the same path and consolidating the mechanisms which inherently underpin unbridled liberalisation .
The ' governance ' proposed on the pretext of improving coordination aims to bypass and punish national parliaments opposed to this dogma being applied .
This report is harmful for the European economy and shows contempt for popular sovereignty .
I shall vote against it .
The Single Market has always been one of the pillars of Europe 's economic development .
I believe that one of the key challenges in relaunching the Single Market is ensuring political leadership , commitment and coordination .
These 50 proposals to relaunch the Single Market encompass numerous portfolios , crucially involving the competences of several commissioners in the European Commission and touch upon the jurisdictions of various committees in the European Parliament .
However , it is important for the Member States to establish their own priorities and develop their own agenda in line with the priorities of the Single Market .
It is important for us to strengthen the internal market , in particular , during an economic crisis , when the impact of the crisis is being felt .
We need to return to a secure labour market .
This can be guaranteed primarily with the support of small and medium-sized businesses , which are one of the main engines within the national economies .
As the rapporteur has spoken out in favour of increased supervision and assessment of internal market policies , I have not voted for the report .
It is not clear how this can be achieved and what consequences it would have for the individual states .
I have voted against the report on governance and partnership in the Single Market because I find it too unbalanced .
Some outstanding issues are not assessed with due attention .
We should not believe that the great Single Market is the solution to all of Europe 's problems , as it appears to be in some parts of this report .
I believe that some features and peculiarities of the various Member States should be taken into account .
Not all countries are the same and a measure that may be useful in one country might possibly cause serious damage in another Member State .
In addition , the system of penalties for offences should be carefully considered , since it runs the risk of exacerbating already difficult situations with still more damaging measures .
We still have to remember all the problems which the infamous Services Directive has caused and continues to cause , at least in Italy , for example , among itinerant tradespeople and seaside businesses .
I would not like these problems to recur with increasing frequency .
I voted in favour of this resolution because the establishment and operation of governance and partnership processes is one of the main factors ensuring the effective functioning of the market .
Attention is drawn to the fact that partnership needs to be broadened from cohesion policy to Single Market policies .
I believe that national parliaments and regional authorities must be more involved in drawing up the directive .
This is very important for ensuring that EU legislation is properly implemented and applied in the Member States .
Moreover , this would facilitate the transposition process .
In order to take account of the needs and interests of society , there should be consultation with employers , unions and other associations .
It is noted that a governance framework is established through interaction between the state , civil society and the private sector , and it is therefore particularly important for the governance of the Single Market to be based on the principles of transparency and accountability .
For governance structures to function effectively , the Member States must regularly supply the Commission with clear and precise information in relation to the implementation of directives .
I agree with the proposal to reduce the transposition deficit of Single Market directives to 0.5 % for outstanding legislation and 0.5 % for incorrectly transposed legislation by the end of 2012 .
I voted in favour of this report as I agree with the key points on governance and partnership of the Single Market that are set out in it .
In particular , I agree with the need to strengthen political leadership and partnership .
Indeed , one of the key challenges in relaunching the Single Market is ensuring political leadership , commitment and coordination .
The 50 proposals for relaunching the Single Market encompass numerous portfolios , crucially involving the competences of several commissioners in the Commission and touch upon the jurisdictions of various committees in the European Parliament .
Moreover , in the Council , the Single Market Act is shared between various parts of the institution , whose roles and effectiveness vary widely .
Strengthening political dialogue , commitment and coordination is essential to ensuring the relaunch of the Single Market .
In order to ensure leadership , I also agree with the rapporteur , who suggests that the President of the Council be mandated to coordinate and oversee this process , in close cooperation with the President of the Commission , setting the spring session of the European Council as the time for the annual evaluation of the Single Market .
A competitive European Single Market without obstacles should be finalized in order to bring concrete advantages for employees , students , pensioners and citizens in general , and for businesses , particularly SMEs .
Good governance and legal certainty are crucial to achieving the Single Market 's economic and social objectives , including the free movement of workers , promotion of a high level of employment , the guarantee of adequate social protection , the fight against social exclusion , a high level of education and vocational training , and the portability of pensions .
The European executive must continue to promote a one-stop shop , integrating all existing services into one single access point and providing citizens and businesses with information and support concerning their rights in the Single Market , as well as practical information on national rules and procedures .
I call on Member States to increase public awareness of the one-stop shop and its constituent services .
The European Commission has to incorporate fundamental rights into all Single Market legislation .
Implementation of the fundamental economic freedoms of the Single Market must not affect collective bargaining rights and the right to strike as defined by national legislation .
The full realisation of a competitive Single Market , without barriers , and with definite advantages for the daily lives of workers , students , pensioners and the public in general , along with businesses , is essential to relaunching the European economy and stimulating growth , competitiveness and sustainability in the EU .
All stakeholders - the public , the European institutions , the Member States - should therefore make an effort to ensure the relaunch of the Single Market , and coordinate their respective activities closely and effectively , particularly in order to improve the transposition , implementation and application of the respective rules , to develop a clearer regulatory framework , to ensure greater involvement by the regional and local authorities in this process , to promote open , transparent and regular dialogue with their social partners and civil society , to strengthen administrative cooperation between the Member States , and to develop tools that enable the functioning of the Internal Market to be monitored properly .
Following the Monti report on relaunching the Single Market , the Commission has submitted the paper ' Towards a Single Market Act ' , drawn up under the leadership of Commissioner Barnier , for public consultation .
On the basis of the contributions received and the priorities set , the Commission will propose a definitive version of this Act , which will contain a dozen priority measures for completing the Single Market .
That is why it is important for Parliament to look at its priorities and to send a clear message to the Commission beforehand .
This ' governance and partnership ' resolution , which I supported , calls for stronger political leadership , an improvement in the implementation of legislation relating to the Single Market , and the introduction of tools for good governance ( reducing the transposition deficit , alleviating administrative burdens , partnership with local authorities , stronger involvement of national Parliaments , dialogue with civil society , and so on ) .
One priority that has been identified is an alternative method of conflict resolution .
On this point , I am disappointed that we neglected collective redress .
This omission is a missed opportunity for the European Parliament to affirm its commitment to introduce such an instrument quickly .
in writing . - In favour .
The rapporteur has suggested that one of the key challenges in relaunching the Single Market is ensuring political leadership , commitment and coordination .
The 50 proposals for relaunching the Single Market encompass numerous portfolios , crucially involving the competences of several commissioners in the Commission and touch upon jurisdiction of various committees in the European Parliament .
In the Council , the Single Market Act is furthermore split into different Council configurations whose role and effectiveness vary a great deal .
National institutions also differ a lot in the ways that they are configured and in their organisational cultures .
I voted in favour of this resolution because I believe that the improvement of the single market , through the active support of Member States and all stakeholders , is essential for the European Union .
The active participation of stakeholders can be achieved only with a change in the current single market policy that provides leadership and a commitment to its improvement .
I am in full agreement with the rapporteur when she considers that merely enhancing the role of the Council , as the institution leading the implementation of the single market , is not enough .
We need a more targeted approach to the choice of legislative instruments , which , in addition to the Institution , would give the President of the European Council the mandate to coordinate the relaunch of the single market , in close cooperation with the President of the Commission .
In fact , we must ensure top-level political guidance and invite Member States to set their own priorities and develop their own agenda in accordance with the priorities of the single market in order to take true ownership of its implementation .
in writing . - I supported the twelve measures contained in the Single Market Act , in particular , focusing on the digital agenda and innovative procurement .
I hope to see this translated into effective legislative measures by the Commission .
The implementation of the Single Market is now emerging as one of the measures for overcoming the economic and financial crisis , and thus promoting increased competitiveness and full EU integration .
It is imperative to create a European space where the potential of small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) can create added economic value , as suggested in the Commission communication - The Single Market Act .
I believe it is essential to support Europe 's SMEs , along with the full liberalisation of the free movement of people , goods and services , so as to maximise the gains of the Single Market .
The rapporteur sets out five priorities that the EU should focus on , of which I would highlight the following : the creation of a European patent and a unified system for resolving disputes , which is essential for innovation and creativity ; new instruments for funding innovation for SMEs ; the development of e-commerce by increasing the confidence of companies and the public with measures against piracy and counterfeiting ; better access to capital markets ; and the elimination and harmonisation of administrative and tax barriers in cross-border activities , the review of public contracts and public and private partnerships , and encouragement of cross-border contracts .
A more competitive Single Market provides a perfect opportunity to stimulate economic growth in European countries affected by the crisis .
The economic and social objectives of the Single Market - the free movement of workers , combating social exclusion and pension portability - are something worth fighting for .
However , for a true Single Market to become a reality , there needs to be good governance and legal clarity .
The Single Market 's management structures must be as simple as possible , because otherwise , the effectiveness and transparency of the Single Market will suffer .
I agree with the rapporteur that we must choose more appropriate legislative measures .
More efforts should also be made to improve administrative cooperation between the Member States .
This would help solve urgent problems implementing specific directives and also establish mutual trust between the Member States ' institutions and a more effective Single Market in the long term .
I feel it is important for the relaunch of the Single Market to promote job creation and to create a business friendly environment .
A successful Single Market should encourage entrepreneurship and remove obstacles hindering the establishment of new SMEs .
This is particularly true for Lithuania , where there are approximately 31 SMEs per 1 000 inhabitants , which is clearly lower than the average in the EU 27 ( 40 ) .
I am very pleased at the adoption of three resolutions on relaunching the Single Market which strengthen governance and the role of businesses and growth , as well as that of citizens , in this policy .
More than 20 years after the signing of the Single European Act , the freedom of movement of individuals , goods and capital throughout Europe is testament to the success of an ambitious policy serving citizens and growth , a policy from which everyone can draw benefits every day .
However , it would not have been enough for us just to take stock , as Europeans are expecting specific proposals from us to respond to future challenges .
In stating our priorities , we have drawn up a collection of balanced measures embodying a clear political , economic and social model .
In relation to this particular resolution on governance and partnership , I wished to vote in favour of a report which gives the project a political dimension .
In order to make sure that people are better informed , the supervision of the relaunch will , from now on , be undertaken by the President of the Commission .
In this way , the Single Market is represented by a European body , which will allow European citizens to be federated around a single project and will strengthen European membership .
The practical findings of recent decades are being used to revitalise the internal market and form the basis for the incorporation of important corrective measures .
In order to prevent future delays in the implementation of national measures , the instruments provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon will be used and the national parliaments will be included in the entire legislative process at a European level .
However , the second proposal , in particular , is the essential one .
Its aim is to guarantee the proper implementation of the measures at a regional and local level , where they will have the greatest impact on the citizens , and to ensure that the intention behind the preparation and adoption of the directive at a European level is made clear to the European citizens .
I voted in favour of Mrs Kalniete 's report .
It is important to focus on the revitalisation of the Single Market , focusing on activities with a high potential for growth and job creation that will provide concrete and immediately visible results for European citizens .
I also think it is right to focus on streamlining legislation to make the EU 's internal market more accessible to small and medium-sized enterprises and , above all , establish renewed EU action for the liberalisation of regulated professions and for the mutual recognition of qualifications .
I am voting for this report because , amongst other progressive measures , it introduces a link between the Single Market Act and the Europe 2020 strategy , it mentions the need to protect the rights of workers , it focuses on job creation , and it allows the portability of pensioners ' rights .
Despite all this , the social dimension of this report still lags behind what was hoped for .
I supported the report by our fellow Member , Mr Correia de Campos , as well as the two reports by Mrs Kalniete and Mr Busoi .
These three reports were drawn up following the proposal for a Single Market Act published by the European Commission .
The objective of Michel Barnier , Commissioner for the Internal Market , is to relaunch the Single Market , but , above all , to bring it closer to the citizen .
This is an objective which I fully support .
The Single Market Act must be seen as an opportunity to demonstrate to citizens that European integration , and the Single Market in particular , is being carried out in their interest , not against them .
Guaranteeing access to a basic banking service - or , more generally , safeguarding the quality and accessibility of services that are essential for our fellow citizens - is a step in this direction .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted in favour of this report .
The fragmentation of the internal market is reducing EU citizens ' confidence in it because they are unable to take advantage of their freedoms .
The Commission 's communication presents a toolbox , which should help to achieve a Single Market that is integrated and functions without obstacles , and which could boost Europe 's economic recovery and its competitiveness .
I would like to highlight one particularly important aspect - the importance of the creation of a single energy market .
A single energy market is especially important for EU competitiveness both within the EU and externally .
The creation of such a market would help reduce external dependence and make energy prices more affordable , fair and competitive for our citizens and businesses .
Legislative and non-legislative initiatives on energy should aim at safeguarding the supply of energy through a diversified energy network , new infrastructures of renewable energy and coordinated research and development on new energy sources .
Such initiatives should be taken on a basis of close coordination between the Commission , the Member States and the relevant sectors of the industry .
A real deepening of the Single Market benefiting citizens , business and European competitiveness must be strengthened by creating infrastructure projects that have added value for the whole of Europe , and which are funded and managed at EU level in order to ensure our energy independence and security .
I voted for this report because we need to make progress .
There are really too many obstacles hampering citizens wishing to study , work or go and shop in another Member State .
It is also still just as difficult for small and medium-sized businesses .
European citizens also need more information , not to mention simpler , more comprehensible and more clearly communicated legislation .
Europe is not just a market ; it is also a community of citizens - that is a statement that we often hear .
What is the reality , though ?
Few citizens believe in it .
Hence , this report on a Single Market for Europeans , adopted today in response to the Single Market Act put forward by the Commission last October .
Alongside the reports dealing with businesses , growth and the governance of the Single Market , this report addresses the expectations of citizens , consumers and users of public services .
Among the ideas mentioned are greater transparency of banking charges , but also real recognition of professional qualifications and portability of pension rights .
The negotiations allowed us to include a reference to the horizontal social clause which was established by the Treaty of Lisbon and which now has to be transposed concretely into legislation .
Finally , the report once again takes up the concept , advocated by Commissioner Barnier , of a ' toolbox ' for services of general interest - in particular , social services of general interest - which are currently a major concern of citizens and service providers in the national territories .
Although it is non-legislative , this report has the merit of including citizens in the well-known necessity of completing the Single Market .
In 2010 , the Commission adopted a proposal to renew the confidence of European citizens in the Single Market with the objective of reinforcing a ' highly competitive social market economy , aiming for full employment and social progress ' .
In my view , efforts to implement the Single Market have focused on the market itself and its organisation , while ignoring the concerns and rights of citizens , workers and consumers .
Particularly essential is the establishment of a single energy market , which should be in a position to encourage European competitiveness by reducing energy prices and dependence on foreign sources .
Legislative initiatives on energy should be implemented in close coordination between the Commission , Member States and the relevant sectors of industry .
Another fundamental issue is transparency in bank charges , costs and the real conditions for mortgage loans , in order to protect consumers and investors and ensure access to credit for individuals and small businesses .
Finally , I believe that any true widening of the Single Market for citizens , businesses and Europe 's competitiveness will be founded on the ability to develop EU-funded infrastructure projects .
I therefore encourage the Commission to present legislative proposals in this area .
I share the view that a functioning Single Market is the key driver which will enable the European Union to reach its full potential in terms of competitiveness , smart , inclusive and sustainable growth , and the creation of more and better jobs .
The Single Market strategy should strengthen social welfare and workers ' rights and ensure fair working conditions for all citizens .
I voted in favour of the legislative initiative .
I think that the European Commission must take measures to increase citizens ' mobility .
I welcome the idea of drafting a green paper on the recognition of professional qualifications and of creating a ' mobility scoreboard ' for measuring this indicator within the EU .
I voted in favour of this report because , in my opinion , in order to restore European citizens ' confidence in the Single Market and support for the idea of the European Union , it is necessary to take further action to strengthen citizens ' social rights and their implementation .
Areas mentioned in the report requiring further action , both at national and EU levels , include the creation of new jobs , taking account of demographic and labour market changes in the Member States , as well as workers ' rights and ensuring fair working conditions , which is particularly important , while also promoting movement of workers between the Member States .
The report also stresses the need to strengthen the rights of citizens as consumers and as public service users , and the need to organise appropriate information campaigns , during which they would be informed about their rights and freedoms .
Attention is also drawn to the reform of the framework for recognising professional qualifications and the need to guarantee the portability of pension rights , while also encouraging the Member States to coordinate their pension policies more effectively .
The communication proposal for restoring European citizens ' trust in the Single Market , drafted by the Commission , is slightly unclear when examining it in correlation with the EU 2020 strategy .
Many of the proposals featuring in it overlap with various other initiatives .
In these circumstances , more consistency , greater effectiveness and better governance are required for a renewed Single Market to foster , within the EU , economic growth , employment and competitiveness , as well as respect for the rights of citizens and consumers .
The Council and Member States have to support together the European and national commitment to deepening and strengthening the Single Market .
Efforts to achieve the Single Market have been concentrated on its organisation and too little on the concerns and rights of citizens , workers and consumers , which might explain European citizens ' reluctance and lack of enthusiasm towards the internal market .
Citizens need to feature at the heart of the Single Market .
This point is clearly stated in the document 's introduction .
On the other hand , the proposals to attain this objective are too weak to achieve it .
The Grech report , adopted by Parliament in May 2010 , recommended a holistic approach to relaunching and strengthening the internal market , encompassing key sectors such as industry , energy and infrastructure .
The completion of the Single Market represents a valuable tool with which to relaunch the European economy , particularly as regards job creation .
The reports on this subject , which we have approved here today , represent , in my opinion , an important step towards an integrated and functional Single Market .
The Commission has made 50 proposals to allow us to work and trade together in a better way .
I voted in favour of this report which aims to ensure effective economic freedom , while protecting the right to work , the full implementation of the principle of equal pay and free movement of workers ( which also includes full recognition of professions within the Member States ) .
I therefore agree with the priorities identified by the rapporteur , such as strengthening the supervision of the European market , the establishment of an action plan to combat piracy and counterfeiting and the development of a communications policy which will highlight the activities carried out by the EU .
in writing . - This report is part of a package of three reports with which the Parliament has answered to the broad Commission communication on the Single Market Act ( SMA ) containing 50 legislative and non-legislative proposals and divided in three different chapters , one focusing on Citizens , one on Business and one on Governance .
The objective of the SMA , was supposed to give implementation to the Monti report which had as main concern to re-launch the Single Market .
I voted for this report but abstained on some amendments as they were part of the negotiated package on the compromise amendments .
I hope this report puts the citizens at the heart of the Single Market and strengthens its social dimension .
We voted in favour of the report on a Single Market for Europeans .
The report contains many important proposals for the development of the Single Market .
A particular priority for us is to ensure that labour market rights are respected in connection with revitalising a more competitively oriented Single Market .
However , the report also contains proposals to call on the Commission to identify and eliminate the tax obstacles faced by European citizens and to further develop immigration policy in respect of migrants and seasonal workers .
In our opinion , both of these are national matters .
A number of amendments to the report were also tabled , the spirit of which we support , but we do not believe that this report warrants this type of amendment .
I agree with this report .
The creation of a Single Market has always been one of the main objectives of the process of European integration and , today more than ever , we feel the need to strengthen it through concrete measures which aim to address three crucial aspects .
We must strengthen the single European market in order to make it highly efficient and competitive and we must renew it within the framework of EU policies in order to combat the effects of the financial crisis .
I thoroughly agree with the proposals made by the European Parliament on strengthening consumer and business confidence .
What emerges as a top priority for the realisation of this project is the adoption of urgent measures to facilitate the mobility of citizens which would make the market more open to European workers and promote full employment .
We can no longer consider developing a Single Market without greater citizen involvement .
For example , improving access to banking services and mortgages for the protection of investors , consumers and financial institutions , or resolving the outstanding issues concerning the free movement of workers , such as the mutual recognition of professional qualifications .
I voted for Mr Campos 's resolution as I feel that the final text he has proposed is balanced .
Furthermore , I welcomed the fact that the proposals from both the Grech and Monti reports were mentioned again by the rapporteur .
Restoring European citizens ' confidence in the proper functioning of the Single Market ought to be the European Commission 's prime concern .
In any case , dividing the proposals into three different chapters does not provide a complete overview of the Single Market Act .
Indeed , this criticism was included in Mr Campos 's final report .
In addition , as shadow rapporteur for my political group for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the report ' A Single Market for Europeans ' , I tabled an amendment which requested that Member States still applying restrictions on their labour markets to workers from the new Member States lift these barriers for the sake of the obvious economic benefits , especially during an economic crisis .
I am pleased that this amendment enjoyed the support of most of my fellow Members .
Too often , the European Union is distant from its citizens , its policies seem far removed , and the European project lacks meaning in the eyes of Europeans .
If the Single Market is only to be a conduit for rampant liberalisation , deregulating public services , social systems and workers ' rights by submitting them to fierce competition , this is a cause for concern , even though it has and may have several positive specific consequences for consumers and in the everyday lives of our fellow citizens .
With Mr Correia de Campos 's report , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament have fought for better regulation when it comes to strengthening the Single Market , and for this strengthening to serve the general interest of Europeans and not just that of businesses .
Such interests include consumers ' rights , the protection of workers ' rights against the tendency towards social dumping , with an explicit recognition of collective labour agreements in all the Member States of the Union , the call for a recognised framework for public services , and universal access to these services .
The integration of the Single Market must now go hand in hand with the advances of a social Europe , which is needed more than ever at a time when the recession continues to affect Europeans .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the ' Single market for Europeans ' report .
It is the duty of the European institutions to facilitate a highly developed , highly competitive social market economy that will seek to create full employment and stimulate social progress .
I believe that the Single Market is one of the key drivers for European growth .
Market fatigue is a cause for concern and this must be examined in detail .
Most importantly , this report reaffirms citizens ' fundamental social rights in the field of collective action , labour law , employment protection and industrial restructuring in line with primary European law .
I am in favour of the short-term strategies suggested in this report , including the enhancement of European market surveillance , the creation of a single integrated mortgage market and the removal of tax obstacles and double taxation .
Implementing a sound e-commerce policy will increase citizens ' and consumers ' confidence when shopping online .
I would like to also welcome the proposal to create an action plan to reduce illegal counterfeiting of goods .
This will contribute to a rapid return to growth in the goods sector .
I voted in favour of this report as it contributes to the idea of a Single Market that is friendlier and more attractive to the European public .
It should be stressed that the text includes measures safeguarding respect for social values and rights in EU legislation , so that these can never be subsumed by the market approach .
This is one of three reports being debated and voted on today relating to the Internal Market and the consolidation of the Single Market .
Although the rapporteur also tries here to gloss over the consequences of his support for liberalisation by advocating the social clause in all legislation on the Single Market , in line with Article 9 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , the truth is that he is not unaware that neither the Commission nor the Council comply with it .
Many Member States do not comply with it either , as is the case with Portugal .
There is more and more praise for free competition , and more professions of faith in the market , liberalisation and privatisation , one example of which is the insistence on implementing the Services Directive .
The link with the conclusions of the Council on 25 March and , above all , with the newly renamed ' Euro Plus Pact ' , is clear .
Germany originally thought this up and dubbed it the ' Competitiveness Pact ' , and it declares war on workers , on their social rights and on the people in general , whilst denouncing the dependence of countries that have weaker economies and where civilisation is truly moving backward .
We therefore voted against , as we did the two other reports .
This is another report on the Internal Market , and it is part of the package relating to the Commission communication on the Single Market Act , the proposal of which follows on from Mr Monti 's report on ' A new strategy for the Single Market ' .
Although the rapporteur also tries here to hide his true support for liberalisation by advocating the social clause in all legislation on the Single Market , in line with Article 9 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( TFEU ) and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , the truth is that he is not unaware that neither the Commission nor the Council comply with it .
Many Member States do not comply with it either , as is the case with Portugal .
In this way , the intention is to strengthen free competition and speed up the process of liberalisation and privatisation , which again the report does not hide , by insisting on the implementation of the Services Directive .
Thus , it appears to be in line with the conclusions of the Council on 25 March , and particularly the ' Euro Plus Pact ' , which declares war on the world of work and social rights by insisting on speeding up liberalisation .
The key objectives are to speed up the process of concentration and accumulation of capital to the benefit of monopolist groups , ending any attempt to protect SMEs , workers and public services .
Hence , our vote against .
In his report , our Portuguese fellow Member has included recommendations we support such as the need to move to a Single Market that favours consumer rights issues and especially making customs checks of goods from third countries a priority .
In addition to these positive aspects , however , there are points of significant divergence on how Member States should comply with the directives and too many references are made to social forms of entrepreneurship .
I will , therefore , abstain from voting .
This report concerns the 19 initiatives proposed by the Commission which will put European citizens at the heart of the internal market and , at the same time , will work towards a sustainable social market economy .
I particularly welcome this report , among other things , because it will benefit European citizens , especially those who live in border regions .
The proposed measures will make the everyday lives of citizens and businesses in border regions easier .
The report supports the initiative to recognise professional qualifications and the ' Youth on the Move ' initiative .
In addition , tax obstacles will be identified and eliminated and decisive measures will be taken to prevent double taxation .
Furthermore , the report calls for fair working conditions for all Europeans and also full portability of pension rights .
These measures will make citizens the centre point of the internal market .
Their specific needs will be matched by specific measures .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which rightly highlights the need to ' respect the principles of subsidiarity and Member State sovereignty ' .
It is just a pity that not all Member States are prepared to recognise where sovereignty lies .
In 1953 , the Lord President of Scotland 's highest civil court confirmed that , unlike in other parts of the UK , in Scottish constitutional law , sovereignty lies with the people .
How unfortunate therefore it is that all the unionist parties blocked attempts by the Scottish Government to promote this principle by way of a referendum on Scottish independence .
I voted in favour of this document because there is a need to enhance European market surveillance , provide better access to basic banking services , establish a single integrated mortgage market and remove tax obstacles and double taxation .
The rapid and effective implementation of an e-commerce policy is also required in order to increase citizens ' and consumers ' trust while shopping online .
Furthermore , there is a need for an action plan against counterfeiting and piracy as a major preventive tool , to guarantee that goods circulating in the Single Market are safe to consume , of the appropriate standard and legal .
The Commission and the Member States should develop an effective communication policy on the Single Market Act , based on a policy audit of its tangibility to citizens .
We also require a system of benchmarks , based on the horizontal social clause , to assess the relevance of all Single Market measures based on their social impact , tangibility and feasibility , to be used as a basis for future policy .
Our citizens must be at the heart of the Single Market project .
There is no doubt that the Single Market , which we are talking about today , is one of the greatest achievements of economic integration in the Union , but it should be remembered that our responsibility is not to encourage stagnation , but the relentless pursuit of perfection .
A coherent whole depends on the constituent parts , which , just like the pieces of a puzzle , form a construction which is robust , strong , and stable .
The constituent parts in the Single Market are the people , whose rights and responsibilities should always be our priority .
Our objective is healthy and continuous development which will activate economic growth , and such growth is possible only thanks to improvements in economic and social issues and better governance .
We should give thought to whether policies ought not to be truly citizen-centred .
Development and valorisation of human capital is essential , and a real deepening of the market should bring benefits for every European - employee , consumer and entrepreneur .
The report on the Single Market for Europeans contains many positive proposals , such as support for the mobility of citizens or elimination of the dual taxation of European citizens , but it also contains many proposals which bear the stamp of over-regulation and which would ultimately put a brake on the Single Market and cause it to stagnate .
Personally , I do not support the proposals for a more regulated and controlled Single Market for retail finance , nor do I support the proposal for an automatic extension of the measure to regulate roaming , as this regulatory measure was only temporary and should have brought about the realignment of roaming prices .
Where there is a failure of market mechanisms , the regulation of final retail prices should be the instrument of last resort , as in the case of the Roaming Regulation .
The calls of politicians for an automatic extension of this regulation is more of a politically populist gesture than a rationally justified step reflecting the changes that have taken place in the EU in the field of telecommunications since 2007 .
The proposal to launch a ' European cross-border business of the year ' television competition is , in my opinion , a senseless waste of European resources .
I have therefore decided to abstain from the vote on this report .
I voted in favour of this report because I am firmly convinced that the existence of a Single Market would constitute the most significant manifestation of a strong and cohesive Europe .
Promoting social enterprises , ensuring the free mobility of European citizens and promoting up-to-date banking services for everyone are but a few of the focal points on which we must concentrate our ideas , resources and projects .
With reference to the first point , in particular , I wholeheartedly welcome the call for the Commission to publish a Green Paper on the recognition of professional qualifications across the various EU Member States .
This would be an important step towards making the role of education and training more tangible in an increasingly open European context .
Last October , the Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services , Michel Barnier , presented his ' Single Market Act ' , a collection of 50 proposals for boosting growth in the European Union .
The European Parliament was then invited to give its view on the various parts of this paper .
Part 2 of the Act lays the foundation for reconciling Europeans with the Single Market .
Jacques Delors once said : ' One cannot fall in love with a Single Market ' .
That is certainly true , but we can nevertheless try to make it useful for citizens .
For this reason , I supported the European Parliament resolution , which welcomes the balance given to the relation between workers ' freedoms and the demands of a social economy .
This part of the Act thus reserves an important place for those elements that are essential for Europeans , such as public services , communication infrastructure , solidarity and employment , as well as consumer protection .
This balance reflects the full awareness of the Commission that the market cannot act against the citizens , but must act to serve them , in the short as well as the long term .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
Efforts to achieve the Single Market have been concentrated on the market and its organisation and very little on concerns and rights of citizens , workers and consumers , which can explain the Europeans ' reluctance and fatigue regarding the Internal Market .
Citizens need to be placed at the heart of the Single Market .
This is clearly stated in the introduction of the document ; however , the proposals to implement that goal are too weak to achieve it .
While admitting that Europeans overwhelmingly reject the Single Market , this report reaffirms a central place for it in the Community system .
The stated desire to strengthen social legislation and to consider citizens ' concerns , while certainly a positive thing , is inapplicable to the principle of the Single Market , given the free and non-distorted competition we see currently .
This report is contradictory and misleading .
I shall vote against it .
The Single Market has always been one of the pillars of Europe 's economic development .
Efforts to stimulate the Single Market should focus on the concerns and rights of the public and companies , providing them with tangible benefits .
There also needs to be a reference to social rights in legislation relating to the Single Market , and measures need to be proposed to encourage mobility for the public and ensure the portability of their pension rights .
This is the only way that we will be successful in terms of a complete and functioning Single Market .
More than half a century ago , the countries of Europe united in order to establish a Single Market .
We believe we established it a quarter of a century ago .
Today , however , there are still many issues that we have to address in order for the Single Market to function effectively and for the European Union to be competitive .
I believe that of all the measures discussed and mentioned in the document we have adopted , two aspects are particularly important : lifelong learning and reducing unemployment for young people and the establishment and functioning of a single energy market .
On the subject of young people , it is precisely this section of society that will live in the Europe we are creating .
It is therefore important to create every opportunity for young people to properly adapt and engage in the creation of their future .
An energy market is a new area of EU policy .
Smart energy networks will undoubtedly play a major role in the economy of the future , and therefore we must not delay and devote sufficient attention and resources to establishing and improving them .
I agree with this resolution because most attention should be paid to basic social rights and to ensuring consumer rights and the free movement of workers , goods and businesses .
The Single Market must create conditions for sustainable growth and higher employment and citizens must be at its heart .
Consequently , it is very important to avoid distortions of competition .
The Single Market will remain competitive if all social rights are respected .
We must guarantee and constantly strengthen social welfare and workers ' rights , and provide decent working conditions .
I agree with the proposal making it impossible to work in the territory of a Member State without complying with its provisions on wages and working conditions .
The principle of equal pay for work of equal value must be implemented fully .
Barriers to the free movement of workers must be removed .
We must open the labour markets in the Member States to all European workers , but the regulation of these markets must be implemented in compliance with those Member States ' labour market rules , including the Scandinavian collective agreement model .
It is very important to give the Member States the right to decide for themselves whether they should grant non-EU citizens the right to reside in their territory .
For the Single Market to be socially oriented , industry must be restructured in a sustainable manner , and there must be constant consultation with social partners .
It is very important to ensure that the public sector has opportunities to involve businesses more effectively in its work , so that citizens can receive high quality , innovative public services , and universal access to these can be guaranteed .
I voted in favour of the report on the Single Market for Europeans because I believe that Europe should adopt a common regulatory framework which meets the needs of citizens and redresses the imbalances and divergences of the internal market .
Following the economic crisis , Europe needs a market where workers and consumers are at the centre of policies .
The text on the Single Market for Europeans calls for greater coordination between European institutions , Member States and businesses in order to strengthen policy , planned by the European Parliament , and to ensure it meets all the needs of the European market .
I voted in favour because I agree with the main priorities submitted to the Commission by Parliament .
The most important of these proposals is the call for measures to be taken to increase the mobility of European citizens , in particular , by publishing a Green Paper on mutual recognition of professional qualifications , including an assessment of the existing framework and , if appropriate , to propose a legislative initiative to reform this framework in 2012 , at the same time assessing the feasibility and the added value of EU-wide professional identity cards and a ' European skills passport ' in 2011 .
This is a positive measure which is grounded in the current situation , and which is aimed at increasing mobility within the EU .
I would also stress the call for the Commission to table a legislative proposal on guaranteeing access to certain basic banking services by June 2011 and to improve the transparency and comparability of bank charges by the end of 2011 , as well as the call to table a legislative proposal to remove obstacles encountered by mobile workers in order to ensure the full portability of pension rights .
The Single Market for Europeans is primarily about jobs and creating other new ones , which will help develop an environment in which businesses and citizens can fully exercise their rights , A more ambitious approach is needed on the proposal relating to the Posting of Workers Directive , aiming at a revision of the directive which will ensure , along with the economic freedoms , protection of the most advanced labour law and industrial relations standards and practices , as well as respect for the rights of collective representation and bargaining , collective action , including the right to strike , and the full implementation of the principle of equal pay for work of equal value .
It is vital to develop a European transport network through a common framework of European funding , boosting competitiveness and integration , and facilitating citizens ' and workers ' mobility through the provision of affordable services .
I think that providing workers with training and qualifications is of paramount importance , as they are vital to job creation , social integration and the success of the Single Market .
I call on Member States to eliminate barriers hampering the mobility of workers from new Member States , bearing in mind the positive impact of worker mobility in the context of the financial and economic crisis .
The full realisation of a competitive Single Market , without barriers , is essential to relaunching the European economy and stimulating growth , competitiveness and sustainability in the EU .
Efforts to relaunch and strengthen the Single Market should also focus on the concerns and rights of the public , consumers , users of public services and companies , providing them with tangible benefits with the aim of completely restoring their confidence in the European project and giving them proper information about the opportunities offered by the Internal Market .
In this context , measures should be adopted that can increase the mobility of Europeans and ensure the protection of consumers , along with strengthening social wellbeing and safeguarding workers ' rights .
I voted for the Correia De Campos report , which relates to 19 initiatives on citizens and the Single Market contained in the Single Market Act proposed by Commissioner Barnier .
I supported this report , which reminds us how essential it is to put citizens at the heart of the Single Market once again .
Too often , up to now , efforts to complete the famous ' great market ' have been concentrated on the Single Market and its organisation .
We should carry out this exercise once more in the light of the concerns and rights of citizens , workers and consumers .
I call on the Commission to support the key priorities contained in this resolution .
In particular , I would like to mention here three urgent objectives so as to make the Single Market more attractive in the eyes of our fellow citizens : improving mobility ( whether , for example , in terms of recognising professional qualifications or in terms of the transferable nature of pension rights for mobile workers ) , extending the ' roaming ' regulation - in particular , proposing a limit on the retail price of roaming data transfer - and finally , the accessibility of basic banking services and the transparency and comparability of banking charges across Europe .
in writing . - In favour .
On 11 November 2010 , the Commission adopted a communication proposal to renew Europeans ' trust in the Single Market .
This Single Market Act will be under discussion until 28 February 2011 .
The overall approach proposed by the Commission is a continuation of the report by Mario Monti to the President of the European Commission , ' A new strategy for the Single Market ' .
Its purpose , in accordance with Article 3 of the Treaty on European Union , is to strengthen ' a highly competitive social market economy , aiming at full employment and social progress , and a high level of protection and improvement of the quality of the environment ' by placing companies , especially SMEs , and Europeans at the heart of the Single Market .
The Commission communication ' Towards a Single Market Act for a highly competitive social market economy ' contains 50 proposals for improving our work , business and exchanges with one another ' , and Chapter II in particular , ' Restoring confidence by putting Europeans at the heart of the Single Market ' , contains 19 initiatives on the social dimension of the Single Market .
The full implementation of the Single Market is the decisive step for the European Union to fully achieve its potential in terms of intelligent , inclusive and sustainable growth .
This requires harmonisation of national legislation to encourage the free movement of people , goods , services and capital .
A prosperous and dynamic internal market depends on our capacity to put forward policies which can support growth , employment and innovation .
With today 's vote , Parliament is once again demonstrating that the public must be central to the renewal of the Single Market , since they are the key actors capable of activating virtuous circles of growth and innovation .
The completion of the Single Market policy is closely linked to integration with other policy areas such as competition , industry , energy and transport .
It is important that we have entered into such a wide-ranging discussion on the common , single European market , which has been operating for 20 years , but has not fully achieved its potential .
In spite of all the legislation , recommendations and mutual assurances , we cannot say we have fully put the Single Market into effect , yet without a Single Market , Europe will not be united at all .
Creating the Single Market is something which has the potential to strengthen the idea of the Union .
Why is it still not possible to create a market without barriers , despite the universal agreement of Member States that precisely this course of policy should be followed ?
Strongly-rooted national particularisms - and they are too strongly rooted - stand in the way of building the Single Market .
We must lift protectionist barriers to be able to revitalise the Single Market .
I agree with the view that the structures and processes of managing the Single Market are too complicated .
This results mainly from the fact that there are too many differences within the Union .
Strengthening the single currency and adopting it throughout the Union is necessary for the creation of a new quality in the Single Market .
The Single Market cannot exist just for large firms , but should also be for small and medium-sized enterprises , and especially for consumers .
Transparency and harmonisation are our goal .
Creating a truly Single Market is our priority , which is why the European Council and the European Parliament should assess the state of the Single Market every year , as this will allow us to monitor the extent to which we have succeeded in achieving the goals we have set .
This report seeks to strengthen measures to put citizens at the heart of the Single Market project , focusing on 19 initiatives targeted at the needs of European citizens .
I believe that it is essential to restore the confidence of the European public in the European project , and in order to do this , efforts must be concentrated on the concerns and rights of citizens , consumers , users of public services , and companies .
It is necessary to create a holistic approach to the Single Market which is able to respond to the democratic deficit being felt by both the European public and by public and private bodies .
Encouraging mobility through the elimination of administrative and tax barriers and the harmonisation of qualifications , investment in cross-border projects in several areas , the coordination of customs activities and monitoring of national markets , and the expansion of the Roaming Regulation , are examples of the measures that I believe are key to forging closer relations between the public and the European project .
However , it is worth emphasising once again that the social aspect of the Single Market should be complemented by political governance and by partnership between the EU and the national bodies , and by the economic dimension , which will facilitate economic growth and make Europe more competitive .
I am very pleased at the adoption of three resolutions on relaunching the Single Market which strengthen governance and the role of businesses and growth , as well as that of citizens , in this policy .
More than 20 years after the signing of the Single European Act , the freedom of movement of individuals , goods and capital throughout Europe is testament to the success of an ambitious policy serving citizens and growth , a policy from which everyone can draw benefits every day .
However , it would not have been enough for us just to take stock , as Europeans are expecting specific proposals from us to respond to future challenges .
In stating our priorities , we have drawn up a collection of balanced measures embodying a clear political , economic and social model .
This particular resolution on a Single Market for Europeans puts the citizen at the heart of our concerns .
By encouraging mobility and exchanges , regardless of place of origin , age or profession , this report marks a step towards a European labour market .
The social protection measures addressed in the resolution are , furthermore , vital for regulating this market and for supporting the model of a social economy based on solidarity .
I am voting for this report because it focuses on the need to support projects that bring added value to Europe , on the need for a new industrial policy , and on regional development , by investing in clusters by region .
I am also voting for it because it promotes a Single Market for energy , by reducing energy dependence , and by creating more competitive infrastructure and prices for end consumers .
I voted in favour of this resolution on a Single Market for Enterprises and Growth .
The Single Market is the cornerstone for businesses and consumers alike , and particular attention should be paid to small and medium-sized enterprises , which have the highest potential for further development and increased employment .
I support the rapporteur 's opinion that stimulating e-commerce and the creation of a digital Single Market represent another important aspect of the Single Market .
This is a very complex process , bearing in mind the differences in tax systems , contract law and requirements for conducting a business across the EU Member States , but efforts must continue in this area .
There is also a need to coordinate fiscal policy , because the introduction of a common consolidated corporate tax base would make the Single Market a better business environment for European enterprises .
In order to achieve the EU 2020 strategy goals , the Single Market must provide the conditions necessary for smart , sustainable and inclusive growth .
The European Union 's economic governance needs to be improved in order to create the economic conditions required for businesses to take advantage of the opportunities provided by the Single Market , allowing them to grow and become more competitive .
The removal of barriers to mobility and the harmonisation of institutional regulations , with the aim of fostering integration , economic growth and European solidarity , are major benefits for the Single Market .
I voted for this report to encourage confidence in the Single Market at every level and to remove the current barriers preventing businesses from accessing the market .
A Single Market based on free and fair competition is the European Union 's crucial economic reform objective and offers Europe a key competitive edge in a globalised economy .
A Single Market that functions smoothly and is based on free and fair competition is the principal objective of EU economic reform .
Currently , the internal market remains fragmented , and lingering administrative and regulatory obstacles are having a negative impact on all businesses , in particular , small and medium-sized enterprises , which are unable to fully benefit from all the advantages offered by the Single Market .
The regulation of copyright licensing in the EU has not been resolved , which has a direct impact on counterfeiting and piracy .
This leads to reduced business confidence in e-commerce and fuels the fragmentation of intellectual property protection rules , which stifles innovation in the Single Market .
It is particularly important to properly address the issue of public procurement , which accounts for 17 % of EU GDP .
Hitherto , cross-border procurement has accounted for a small share of the whole public procurement market , because SMEs still have limited access to public procurement markets .
Services are a crucial sector for economic growth and employment , but the Single Market for services is still underdeveloped , particularly due to gaps and difficulties encountered by the Member States with respect to the implementation of the Services Directive .
I agree with the proposals made in the Commission communication ' Towards a Single Market Act ' , but I believe that in order to ensure the effective functioning of the Single Market , the Member States must improve the implementation of EU initiatives that have already been adopted , such as the Small Business Act , which would help address many of the administrative and regulatory problems that EU enterprises face today .
To maintain its position as a world economic leader , Europe must constantly support and stimulate economic development .
The European Single Market is of fundamental significance for both businesses and consumers .
We should give particular care to small and medium-sized enterprises , which drive economic growth and provide significant numbers of jobs .
Innovative measures and suitable financial instruments should be used to improve their competitiveness , access to information and participation in research programmes .
An interesting idea is the proposal to create project bonds , which will allow businesses to raise funds .
The digital Single Market should also be an important part of the economy .
Efforts should be made to stimulate electronic commerce in particular , because it contributes to increasing cross-border trade .
I also think it is essential to create an EU patent and a unified litigation system .
I am certain that a well-functioning Single Market will contribute to sustainable economic growth , so I endorse the resolution .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that in order to successfully revitalise the EU Single Market and to increase the global competitiveness of the EU as a whole and to create new jobs , it is necessary to adopt and implement many measures that would promote sustainable business growth and development .
I also believe that it is very important for these measures to be coordinated with measures for regional development , and for these to be complementary , so as to avoid a concentration of industry , businesses and services in certain regions , while other more remote regions are left to the mercy of fate .
The report also touches on a myriad of other issues affecting citizens ' daily lives , the competitiveness of businesses and also the creation of new jobs in Europe - the carrying out of research and promotion of new technologies , as well as the development and expansion of transport , energy and telecommunications infrastructure .
In addition , the report touches on an issue that is important for Lithuania , drawing attention to the need to upgrade energy infrastructure in Eastern European countries so that they can be linked successfully to Western European energy networks .
The affordability of energy for consumers throughout Europe is also highlighted in this area .
The report also encourages cooperation between the Commission and the Member States to establish and promote the use of more effective and cleaner transport systems , as well as develop international e-commerce , also improving online payment systems .
The European Union is one of the world 's leading economies , the engine of which is made up of small and medium-sized enterprises .
The EU must pay particular attention to these organisations who have felt the effects of the economic crisis most of all , not least because SMEs have the greatest potential for growth and employment .
It goes without saying , therefore , that European efforts should be aimed at encouraging sustainable economic growth .
I voted in favour of this report because it has the merit of identifying the right priorities to build a stronger Single Market , able to better meet the needs of EU companies and create higher growth rates .
So I agree with the guidelines outlined in this document which , in my opinion , can actively contribute to the transformation of the Single Market in an innovative environment , favourable to businesses , based on digital economy and the effective free movement of services .
To this end , I agree with the need to encourage e-commerce able to promote cross-border trade , the coordination of fiscal policies and greater streamlining of cross-border public contract procurement , points on which the European SMEs lag behind .
We voted in favour of the report on a Single Market for enterprises and growth .
The report contains many important proposals for the development of the Single Market .
However , we do not support the idea that differences in fiscal provisions may result in significant obstacles to cross-border transactions or that the coordination of national tax policies , as proposed by Mr Monti in his report , would bring substantial added value to enterprises and citizens .
On the other hand , we are in favour of coordination between the Member States to prevent tax avoidance and tax havens for enterprises .
Tax rates remain a matter for the Member States .
I voted in favour of this report .
In order to create a functional Single Market in which healthy and productive competition is the rule , I believe that the measures described in this report are essential
I strongly agree with the need to create a single digital market , because the lack of adequate rules affects the efficiency of the European market in no small way , especially in recent times , given the technological advances of other countries that are our economic competitors .
We must consider the enormous potential of e-commerce , especially as regards the growth of cross-border trade and , as I said before , the resulting increase in competitiveness that it would bring to the market .
Furthermore , I agree with the need to act on two other fronts ; the services sector and SMEs .
Proper implementation of the directive on services and on reforming the regulatory framework on standardisation so that it extends to these is indispensable .
In addition , we are waiting for the European Commission 's proposed legislation .
Finally , as I have said in other debates , we must identify new incentives and give more support to small and medium-sized enterprises , the backbone of our market and creators of so many jobs .
in writing . - ( RO ) I think that Europe will benefit from the improvement in access for all companies , including small and medium-sized enterprises , to information about the financial support for innovation which they can apply for , so as to become more involved in research programmes and , in particular , in public / private partnerships intending to run the research and innovation programmes .
I think that the potential offered by these enterprises has not been tapped sufficiently .
This is why the EU must support this sector in extending its activities , including at cross-border level , and in taking advantage of all the current opportunities available within the Single Market .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report on a ' Single Market for enterprises and growth ' because I believe it will greatly enhance our internal market for the benefit of all citizens .
This report will , in reality , seek to strengthen industrial competitiveness , sustainable development and job creation .
The European Union has a unique economy , boasting 500 million consumers .
By maintaining , enhancing and promoting Europe 's internal market , this will ensure greater movement of goods and services without barriers to trade between Member States .
It is critical during times of austerity to increase growth in our economy .
I agree that further steps should be taken to ensure adequate implementation of the Services and Professional Qualifications directives .
Through proper implementation of these directives , European citizens will be able to travel to other European Member States for work and to provide services without high administrative burdens .
One of the core objectives of the European Union is to have an area without barriers .
This report is also in favour of supporting SMEs which require a lot of support at this time .
As Europe is the largest economy in the world , implementing the Single Market is key to giving citizens and companies a feeling of confidence and security .
The crisis that the world , in general , and Europe , in particular , are experiencing leads us to reflect on the future of the EU and the measures that we must adopt in order to relaunch the European economy .
In October 2010 , the Commission adopted a communication called ' The Single Market Act ' , following Mr Monti 's report , ' A new strategy for the Single Market ' .
Among its objectives was the implementation of measures providing businesses with stronger , more sustainable and more equitable growth .
I am therefore pleased that this report has been adopted , as it aims , among other things , to reduce the bureaucratic burden on small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) by giving them access to credit , by investing in innovation and the modernisation of services , such as through electronic management , and by implementing a digital economy .
These are fundamental pillars of the Europe 2020 strategy , which will contribute greatly to making the Single Market more competitive and stimulating its growth .
This is another report from the package on consolidating the Single Market .
It contains shameless praise for the market and free competition , when faced with the obvious disaster that was caused by these policies and their terrible consequences , which are today being felt by workers , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and the people in general , particularly in countries with weaker economies .
Let us focus on the examples given in some quotes from the report , such as on the area of energy , for example : ' points out the importance of a fully operational internal market for energy [ ... ] ; stresses that the internal energy market should contribute to maintaining energy prices affordable for both consumers and businesses ' .
The contradiction and falsehood here is obvious .
One only has to look at what is happening in Portugal to realise that liberalisation has led to privatisation , high prices for businesses and consumers , and profits of more than EUR 1 billion for the shareholders of EDP - Energias de Portugal , S.A. , and a similar amount for Galp Energia , SGPS , S.A. and other companies in the sector .
However , the same might be said of sectors like the postal services , telecommunications or the financial sector .
This is another report from the Commission 's communication package on the Single Market Act , whose proposal follows on from Mr Monti 's report entitled ' A new strategy for the Single Market ' .
It is another paean to free competition , although it glosses over its contents to disguise the dynamite contained in this gift sent to workers , small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) and especially the people of countries with weaker economies .
Let us look at some examples of the items included in the report , especially on energy :
' points out the importance of a fully operational internal market for energy [ ... ] ; stresses that the internal energy market should contribute to maintaining energy prices affordable for both consumers and businesses ' .
Moreover , one only has to look at what is happening in Portugal to realise that liberalisation has led to privatisation , high prices for companies and consumers , and profits of more than EUR 1 billion for the shareholders of EDP - Energias de Portugal , S.A. , and a similar amount for Galp Energia , SGPS , S.A. and other companies in the sector .
Something similar might be said of other sectors including postal services or telecommunications , not to mention the financial sector .
We therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - The four Irish Fine Gael MEPs voted for the report on the Single Market Act for enterprises and growth because we support the overall thrust of the resolution , but we do not support CCCTB , as we have explained in previous explanations .
in writing . - The Buşoi report calls for a business friendly Single Market and quite rightly stresses the importance of SMEs .
In one part of the EU , Scotland , tens of thousands of small businesses have benefited from the Scottish Government 's Small Business Bonus Scheme and I hold this up as an example of best practice for other European nations .
I voted in favour of this report because in order to successfully revitalise the EU Single Market and to increase the global competitiveness of the EU as a whole and to create new jobs , it is necessary to adopt and implement many measures that would promote sustainable business growth and development .
Today , Europe has become the world 's biggest economy .
The Single Market is the cornerstone for businesses and consumers alike , but it can offer more growth and jobs and its full potential is yet to be seen .
Particular attention should be paid to small and medium-sized enterprises , which have the highest potential for further development and increased employment .
Therefore , it is very important to encourage sustainable economic growth .
The Single Market itself and the enterprises operating within it are vital for the future growth of EU economies .
The Single Market must become an innovative , business friendly environment , based on a digital economy and where the free movement of services is effective .
A well functioning Single Market for services has an important potential for growth and , hence , for our economic recovery .
Only sustainable growth can guarantee the creation of sustainable jobs .
Further steps should be taken to ensure proper implementation of the Services Directive and of the Professional Qualifications Directive .
Moreover , the creation of EU-wide professional cards where appropriate is an idea that needs some analysis , given the potential of such cards to enhance freedom of movement for EU citizens and simplify recruitment procedures for EU businesses .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as I see an urgent need to improve the conditions for SMEs so as to make Europe really competitive in the world .
It has been proved on countless occasions that the reduction of bureaucratic burdens on SMEs has resulted in economic growth and enhanced their competitiveness .
Not enough efforts have been made to enable SMEs to operate with fewer bureaucratic obstacles and with more efficiency .
SMEs are the driving force of Europe 's economy .
There are also dramatic developments going on in the e-world .
Currently , the EU is not really competitive on e-markets .
This means we have to do everything we can to boost e-commerce , making real progress in implementing the European Digital Single Market .
Important steps have been taken , but more remains to be done and we have to progress fast .
I welcome the efforts this report has proposed to further the issue in question .
The report on the Single Market for businesses and growth is , in my opinion , very balanced , and I believe that the implementation of the proposed measures will stimulate the growth of the Single Market and , ultimately , the economies of the Member States as well .
I particularly agree with the key priorities of the report , such as creating an EU patent and a single system for dispute resolution , emphasising the need for long-term investments in innovative sectors , boosting the confidence of business and consumers in e-commerce and galvanising the development of e-commerce in the Single Market , eliminating the bureaucratic obstacles faced by small and medium-sized firms in cross-border activities and rationalising the processes for awarding public contracts .
As I support all of the aforementioned measures , and as I am convinced of their usefulness and benefits , I voted for the adoption of this report .
The pursuit of the objectives set out by the 2020 strategy calls for Europe to create conditions which are favourable for growth and innovation through investment and decisive action in the European market .
Europe needs to sustain growth and promote effective strategies within the internal market , which aim at increasing competitiveness , innovation and research .
The Commission must guarantee the implementation of a package which will ensure the achievement of these objectives by taking measures to improve competitiveness in the domestic market .
The strengthening of economic governance in the European Union is therefore an important step which will enable companies in the market to maximise the benefits offered by the Single Market .
The creation of European bonds to finance projects and a patent which is valid throughout Europe are some of the points which led me to support the resolution .
The Single Market is an important goal to be reached .
Bearing in mind the different conditions within the various Member States , the EU 's task must be to minimise such discrepancies so as to allow all European enterprises to benefit .
Last October , the Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services , Michel Barnier , presented his ' Single Market Act ' , a collection of 50 proposals for boosting growth in the European Union .
The European Parliament was then invited to give its view on the various parts of this paper .
Part 1 of the Act discusses the Commission 's plans for introducing an environment which encourages entrepreneurship .
We must therefore promote creation and innovation from a perspective of sustainable development which combines international competitiveness with protection for SMEs .
This resolution by the European Parliament approves and supplements the commitments of the Commission , which is why I supported it .
It also reminds us of the need to support the real economy more than ever ; in particular , through an ambitious European industrial policy .
With a view to establishing a genuinely Single Market for SMEs , the resolution proposes the creation of a ' European private company ' status which would encourage the cross-border creation and functioning of these essential components of the Union 's economic fabric .
I voted for this report as I think that the Single Market is unquestionably the main asset to our global competitiveness .
Without it , we would not play such an important role in maintaining the global balance of economic forces , especially at a time when new powers are emerging on the global stage .
The progress of the internal market and further development of the regions complement each other and jointly create a powerful Europe characterised by cohesion and competitiveness .
In this respect , I would like to highlight the particularly important role played by regional policy in the integration of the Single Market .
I think that increased accessibility for every single region in the European Union is an absolute prerequisite for a dynamic and powerful Single Market .
The new Member States are in a specific situation where there is still a low level of accessibility .
Support for investments in the infrastructure and its improvement will help boost the competitiveness of the regions lagging behind and ensure the internal market 's harmonious operation .
This will help improve the whole European Union 's global competitiveness significantly .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
The Single Market itself and the enterprises operating within it are vital for the future growth of EU economies .
This draft report outlines the priority measures which should be taken to build a stronger Single Market that responds better to the needs of EU businesses and which would generate higher growth rates than before .
The priorities of the rapporteur are arranged in four groups , aiming at transforming the Single Market in an innovative , business friendly environment , based on a digital economy , and where free movement of services is effective .
A well functioning Single Market for services has an important potential for growth and , hence , for our economic recovery .
Only sustainable growth can guarantee the creation of sustainable jobs
This report proposes increased liberalisation of the energy and postal sectors and a stronger application of the Services Directive , on the pretext of supporting businesses and boosting growth .
True to neoliberal ideology , it blames administrative regulation and the protection of public services for impeding growth .
The European leaders have not learned the lessons from the 2008 crisis , yet a radical change of direction to another Europe is essential .
I am voting against this report .
The Single Market has always been one of the pillars of Europe 's economic development .
The communication ' A Single Market Act ' is based on the theme of political leadership and the principle of partnership as the fundamental instruments for relaunching and deepening the Single Market .
We have to create a new dynamic in interinstitutional relations , and in the cooperation and commitment of the Member States , as well as of the national parliaments and regional and local authorities , so that it is possible to improve the applicability and implementation of Single Market legislation .
We all have to commit , Member States and European institutions , to monitoring , evaluating and modernising the implementation of European legislation .
Small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) in particular are an important engine for our entire economy .
They should be offered far more opportunities to become established and to expand within the internal market .
Capital is required for this purpose and SMEs must be given easier access to it .
Another factor which will help us to ensure lasting and sustainable growth in European national economies is support for the service sector .
For this , the free movement of services is needed .
The internal market must be made more attractive as a whole in order to become an innovative and business friendly environment .
The EU also needs a digital internal market to improve competitiveness and promote growth .
All businesses within the EU should be able to benefit from the internal market , even if many areas , such as e-commerce , are still in clear need of development .
I did not vote in favour of the report because the rapporteur proposed the introduction of a new VAT strategy , but did not go into sufficient detail about how this would work in practice .
I voted in favour of this resolution because the Single Market is a very important factor for enterprises and growth .
Significant attention should be paid to innovations and creativity , and an appropriate mechanism for funding these .
Innovations provide a basis for strong and more sustainable growth and job creation .
Above all , in order to ensure that the funding mechanism functions effectively , we must create favourable conditions for long-term investment in innovative and job-creating sectors .
Particular attention must be paid to small and medium-sized enterprises which have a huge economic impact on the European economy .
The Single Market must become a better environment for SMEs , helping them to expand their cross-border activities , improving their access to capital markets , and removing administrative and fiscal barriers .
The conditions must be created for SMEs to receive appropriate support under the Union 's regional policy , given their importance for improving social ties in urban districts or sparsely populated areas .
The structure of the European banking sector must be pluralistic in order to meet the financing needs of SMEs .
It is very important to lay down a clearer VAT framework and a common consolidated corporate tax base .
I believe that a Statute for a European Private Company must be adopted as a matter of urgency to facilitate the establishment and cross-border operation of small and medium-sized enterprises .
It is noted that public procurement procedures must be more rational .
We must make conditions for cross-border procurement more favourable , ensuring reciprocity with industrialised countries and major emerging economies .
The financial and economic crisis has mobilised the EU in search of new rules and systems that ensure balance and growth ; Mario Monti 's report has set the tone for the drafting of the single European internal market act .
The main objective is to ensure growth and development , but also security and guarantees for small and medium-sized enterprises , investors and consumers and all market participants whose commercial functions must be facilitated .
My ' yes ' vote indicates not only a willingness to support the text , but also a real commitment to citizens to improve regulations and ensure equal opportunities for investment and consumption in a continually growing system for both the public and the private sector .
In this report , Parliament presents five major priorities , with the aim of consolidating the Single Market for enterprises and growth : the creation of an EU patent and a unified system for settling patent-related disputes ; funding for innovation ; the promotion of e-commerce ; improved access to and greater participation in the Single Market by small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) ; and the streamlining of procedures relating to public procurement .
I agree with the priorities presented , and I therefore voted in favour of this report .
I would like to reiterate my belief that the creation of an EU patent and a unified system for settling patent-related disputes is indispensable in order to support innovation and creativity in the Single Market .
Innovation and creativity are known to be factors in growth .
Alongside this measure , I believe that the Commission and the Member States should take into account the importance of innovation for strong and sustainable growth , as well as for job creation .
The way to promote growth is to ensure that there is proper funding for innovation , particularly through the creation of European loan securities for funding EU projects .
The Single Market must be relaunched and completed in order to meet the objectives set in the Europe 2020 strategy so as to offer more growth for businesses , including social economy enterprises ( cooperatives , associations , mutual societies and foundations ) and create more and better jobs , as well as provide adequate protection for the rights of European workers and consumers .
I call for the creation of a more SME-friendly regulatory environment by carefully assessing the impact of any new regulatory or legislative measures on SMEs , with a view to cutting red tape , boosting competitiveness and promoting quality employment .
It is also necessary to keep existing health and safety provisions for workers .
The Commission 's proposal needs to publish a VAT strategy as better tax coordination between Member States is needed to avoid unfair tax competition and market distortions .
I think that the proposal for a directive on introducing a common consolidated corporate tax base will boost the competitiveness of SMEs , in particular , by reducing obligations arising from administrative complexity and cutting high costs generated as a result of complying with different national tax systems , thereby exerting a potentially positive impact on public finances and employment .
The full realisation of a competitive Single Market , without barriers , is essential to relaunching the European economy and stimulating growth , competitiveness and sustainability in the EU .
It is therefore advisable to adopt measures enabling a stronger Single Market to be built which is better able to respond to the needs of companies in the EU , particularly small and medium-sized enterprises , thereby making it a favourable environment for innovation , based on a digital economy , where there is real freedom of movement for services .
A Single Market which works well is essential for ensuring competitiveness , the creation of jobs and sustainable growth in Europe .
That is why I voted in favour of the excellent report by my colleague , Mr Busoi , which puts forward several priorities for improving the functioning of the Single Market , accompanied by a number of legislative proposals for achieving this .
We must speed up the creation of the Community patent , rationalise procurement procedures and provide more of a stimulus to the digital economy by reinforcing the confidence of businesses and citizens in e-commerce .
Finally , let me highlight two essential levers of growth that must be applied urgently .
The first is long-term innovation for supporting the ecological transformation of economies .
This can be done by creating bonds in the EU , more specifically in the fields of energy , transport and telecommunications .
The second is to increase the participation of SMEs in the Single Market by developing their funding sources and by improving their access to capital markets , by eliminating fiscal barriers to their cross-border activities , and by revising the public procurement framework in order to make procedures more flexible and less bureaucratic .
in writing . - I voted in favour .
In October 2010 , the Commission adopted a communication entitled ' Towards a Single Market Act ' to re-launch the Single Market .
In the first part of this communication , the Commission proposes a number of actions to have stronger , sustainable and equitable growth for business .
Today , Europe has become the world 's biggest economy .
The Single Market is the cornerstone for businesses and consumers alike , but it can offer more growth and jobs , and its full potential is yet to be seen .
Essential attention should be paid to SMEs , which have the highest potential for further development and increased employment .
The communication , ' A Single Market Act ' , addresses the issue of political leadership and the principle of partnership as the fundamental instruments for relaunching the Single Market .
The dynamics of interinstitutional relations and the cooperation and commitment of the Member States , particularly national parliaments and regional and local authorities , are mechanisms that will improve the applicability and implementation of Single Market legislation .
I am voting in favour of this report as I believe that the measures presented are vital .
Of these , I would like to highlight the inclusion of an assessment of the state of the Single Market in the spring session of the Council , the publication of a Green Paper with the participation of civil society and regional and local authorities , the publication of correlation tables and , finally , the reduction of deficits and errors in the transposition of directives .
Both the Member States and the European institutions should engage in monitoring , evaluating and modernising the implementation of European legislation , as only then can integration policy be successful .
I would also like to point out that regional and local authorities should have a more important role , in line with the subsidiarity principle and the partnership principle .
I supported the report by our fellow Member , Mr Busoi , as well as the two reports by Mrs Kalniete and Mr Correia de Campos .
These three reports were drawn up following the proposal for a Single Market Act published by the European Commission .
The objective of Michel Barnier , Commissioner for the Internal Market , is to relaunch the Single Market but , above all , to bring it closer to the citizen .
This is an objective which I fully support .
The Single Market Act must be seen as an opportunity to demonstrate to citizens that European integration , and the Single Market in particular , is being carried out in their interest , not against them .
Guaranteeing access to a basic banking service - or , more generally , safeguarding the quality and accessibility of services that are essential for our fellow citizens - is a step in this direction .
The three European Parliament reports in response to the Commission 's Single Market Act address issues which are important to European industry and its small and medium-sized enterprises .
The simplification of legislation and bureaucracy , the fight against counterfeiting , the importance of innovation and increased access to credit represent points on which our businesses are expecting necessary interventions from Europe so they can return to being competitive again in international markets .
On the other hand , what is really necessary for the recovery and completion of the single European market is a uniform tax policy within the Union .
Tax policy is the oxygen that small and medium-sized European businesses need for a resurgence which must not stop at the initial incentive , but which will see them through consolidation and growth .
The lack of fiscal harmonisation in Europe creates imbalances between the various EU territories , such as North-Eastern Italy and Slovenia , which compete on fiscal levels as well as on the degree of development of their economies .
The three reports on the internal market do not excite us because , along with items that we could support , we find others with which we disagree .
In this case however , despite the things I disagree with in the report by the Member from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ( ALDE ) , such as the measures which , I believe , benefit large corporations rather than small enterprises , I will abstain from voting because of the importance given to emphasising innovation to promote growth .
in writing . - The European Commission 's proposed Single Market Act aims to unlock the potential of the Single Market and put the EU 's economy and competitiveness back on track after the economic crisis .
I voted for Parliament 's recommendations on the Commission 's Single Market Act and I urge the European Commission to take up those recommendations to ensure that governance structures are strengthened , support for innovation and job creation is provided , and citizens are put at the heart of the Single Market .
We need to work together on strengthening the governance of the Single Market and putting in place a more coordinated political leadership approach , which will increase the effectiveness of the Single Market Act and restore citizens ' confidence in the initiative .
I welcome the resolution calling for an increased focus on the mobility of citizens and I believe it is also essential that the re-launch of the Single Market focuses on the needs of SMEs in order to provide an environment that will create new , innovative businesses across the EU , and especially in Wales .
in writing . - I supported the twelve measures contained in the Single Market Act and hope that the Commission will translate this into effective legislative measures .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan
The next item is the debate on the Council and Commission statements on lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , allow me to say that I am pleased that we are continuing the debate that started last month .
On the one hand , this proves the gravity of the matter , and on the other , it is an indication that , beyond all those emotional reactions that the still extremely serious situation in Japan rightly elicits in all of us , our institutions intend to take action in this matter with appropriate prudency .
At the same time , I would like to reaffirm that we are ready to provide continuous and concrete assistance to the Japanese people , both in the form of humanitarian aid and assistance from nuclear experts .
The European Council stated this clearly on 25 March .
Furthermore , I would like to point out that the Hungarian Presidency reacted immediately to the disaster in Japan , in particular , the activities related to nuclear energy risks .
Let me already at the very outset dispel those misconceptions that the public may form regarding nuclear safety , namely that only now , in relation to an external crisis situation , does the EU realise the significance of the matter .
That is a major fallacy , on the one hand because in actuality , there has been a legally binding framework in effect on this subject in Europe for more than 25 years , which we are continuously adjusting , most recently , for example , through the 2009 Nuclear Safety Directive . On the other hand , also because ensuring nuclear safety is a continuous process , during which we are gradually perfecting the specifications , drawing conclusions from events such as those that took place now in Fukushima , and regularly checking the actual safety condition of the installations .
In March , the European Council provided actual confirmation that the EU 's response must follow directions which combine guaranteeing safety on-site with perfecting the regulatory framework .
One aspect of this multi-threaded EU response is the comprehensive risk and safety assessment of European nuclear power plants , that is , the matter of ' stress tests ' .
The scope of this , and the practical steps involved , must be established while taking into account recent events and making full use of available expertise .
The European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group and its members , the independent national regulatory authorities , must finish determining the aforementioned practical steps by the middle of May , which will probably allow for the assessment of these to be started in the summer .
Several Member States and nuclear operators have already adopted decisions requiring the safety review of power plants .
Based on this , the first conclusions can therefore be drawn and published at the end of the year .
The assessing authorities will therefore share the results of the stress tests with both the general public and the Commission .
Based on the latter report , the European Council will evaluate the preliminary results by the end of the year .
In the framework of the other , that is , the regulatory aspect , the European Council has already asked the Commission to review the existing legislative and regulatory framework for the safety of nuclear installations and to make a proposal for perfecting it as required .
At the same time , we must continue the work that is already under way in the field of legal regulation , and we must adopt the proposal for a directive on the management of spent fuel and radioactive waste .
After all , the safety specifications obviously need to be determined in such a way that they cover the entire life cycle of nuclear installations .
As a third step , we must also ask third countries in the neighbourhood of the EU to join this assessment and raise the level of their safety requirements .
Safety concerns are , of course , not restricted to nuclear energy .
We cannot afford , with regard to any energy source , however large its share in supply security may be , to put considerations of guaranteeing supply before safety aspects related to human health or environmental protection .
As you know , we must also take into account the existing situation in Europe , namely , that the fuel use of the Member States is based on different mixes .
As such , everyone is free to decide upon their energy mix .
It will remain this way in the foreseeable future , because we are talking about the energy mix , the determination of which lies within Member State competence .
However , in respect of common goals , this does not prevent us from making progress on the road to creating a common energy policy .
This year , for example , we will begin the examination of the Energy Roadmap 2050 .
In doing so , we will assess the degree to which individual energy sources need to contribute to achieving climate-related targets , in parallel with which we also need to meet our energy policy , supply security , sustainability and competitiveness objectives .
In addition to the freedom to determine the energy mix , however , the deepening of the internal market and increasingly close interconnections result in a growing interdependence between Member States ' energy policies and energy source selection decisions .
Accordingly , it is also sensible to form a common vision about the consequences of our energy policies on investments , energy prices and regulation .
This also means that , since nuclear energy currently accounts for 30 % of Europe 's energy production , none of the 14 Member States that choose nuclear energy can afford to close down their nuclear power plants immediately without first consulting the other Member States , and examining both potential alternative energy sources and network-related issues in the process .
To this end , the Presidency intends to hold a detailed exchange at the informal meeting of energy ministers in May to resolve issues relating to this subject .
Last but not least , it is important that we also inform the public about the underlying assumptions and about both the advantages and disadvantages of the chosen energy sources .
I am certain that we can also contribute to this with today 's debate . Thank you very much , Mr President .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , ladies and gentlemen , the terrible earthquake of 11 March , the subsequent tsunami , the accident in the nuclear power plant , which caused damage to the various blocks , and the fact that there is still no end in sight to the process of repairing the damage and overcoming the risks , as the nuclear power station is still out of control , even with the use of the latest technology : all of these events are causing us concern with regard to safety and the energy sector in the European Union and elsewhere .
For this reason , on 11 March , we invited a high-level group consisting of ministers and representatives of the national governments , the nuclear power plant construction companies and the energy sector to attend a meeting on 15 March .
In the Council of Energy Ministers , we made preparations on 21 March for the European Council , which finally , on 25 March , called on the Commission and the national nuclear safety authorities to carry out a special stress test and a comprehensive safety investigation with the aim of ensuring the highest possible safety standards .
Since then , we have been drawing up the test criteria .
The Directorates-General , myself and the nuclear safety authorities have been putting together a catalogue of test criteria , which will be presented to you and to the public before it is finally adopted .
On the one hand , this concerns the consequences of the risks for power stations in the European Union from earthquakes and from high water , particularly on the Atlantic coast .
On the other hand , it concerns the consequences for the power stations themselves , in other words , the question of how the cooling systems , the electricity supply and the emergency generators can be protected .
Other test factors include terrorist and cyber attacks and aircraft crashing into power stations .
We believe that the consultation and the decision on the test criteria will be completed by the middle of May at the meeting of ENSREG , the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group .
By the end of the year , we expect comprehensive testing to have taken place in order to ensure the highest possible safety standards in the 143 nuclear power plants in the European Union .
We have spoken to the governments of the Russian Federation and Ukraine and , in the next few days , we will be contacting Switzerland and Armenia and , in addition , the countries that are planning to build nuclear power stations , such as Turkey and Belarus .
Our aim in all of this is to ensure that the highest safety standards and the test criteria for the safety investigation are applied in the countries which are the immediate neighbours of the European Union .
We know that the responsibility for the energy mix and , therefore , also for energy technology , nuclear power plants and other technologies lies with the Member States .
Over the last few days , it has become clear that the Member States want to retain these powers .
In other words , it does not seem realistic on the basis of current treaties and legislation to take the decision on nuclear power at a European level .
However , the safety test , which everyone must take part in , seems to me to be the common denominator for all the Member States because of the high standards it imposes , regardless of whether they do or do not have nuclear power .
Around 76 % of electricity in France is generated by nuclear power , while the figure in Austria is 0 % .
A total of 14 Member States use nuclear power and 13 do not .
Germany is currently investigating shortening the operational time spans of its power stations .
Poland is considering whether to build its first nuclear power plant and Italy is looking at whether to invest in additional power stations .
Alongside the implementation of the safety investigation , we believe that the transfer of the Nuclear Safety Directive into national law by July of this year is of the greatest importance .
Our plan was to carry out an evaluation in 2014 of the Nuclear Safety Directive , which was adopted by Parliament and by the Council and is to be transposed into national law .
We now want to bring this forward .
We intend to inform you by the end of the year about our further considerations on how the directive can be strengthened , as it currently primarily concerns formal powers and the bodies that have to be established , together with other areas .
I would also like to mention the proposals for nuclear waste which have been presented by the Commission and are currently being debated by Parliament and the Council .
These will also contribute to the joint measures for ensuring the highest possible levels of safety .
We know that the safety investigation will result in the Member States drawing their own conclusions .
However , I am relying on the impact that reality will have in this case .
I am relying on the Member States to take on board the safety evaluation , the standards and the necessary measures proposed by the experts and to put these things into practice in their countries and their nuclear power stations .
In the middle of May , we will tell you when we expect to be able to present to you the draft of the stress test and the test criteria produced at a working level .
Mr President , on behalf of my group , I would like to thank Commissioner Oettinger for setting to work on the issue of nuclear safety immediately after the disaster in Japan .
This work is of great importance to the safety of our citizens , because the nuclear disaster in Japan has shown that we need to review our rules on nuclear safety .
This is an important task for you , and the Council , because we in Europe are mutually dependent when it comes to nuclear safety .
We need a European stress test for all nuclear installations and , as you said , the criteria must be harmonised .
We need an objective and transparent report - that is , a public report - on that stress test , the starting point of which has to be the highest security level .
Mr President , I hope that you and the Member States are working hard on that harmonised approach , so that we can rely on the highest security standards being in place .
Should a nuclear installation not pass the stress test , you and the Council must ensure that there is a commitment on the part of that Member State to taking immediate action .
Such action could even include the temporary , or even permanent , closure of a nuclear power plant .
In that regard , it is important that we also include nuclear power plants which straddle our borders because , sometimes , these have an even greater impact on our citizens than nuclear power plants which are fully in Europe .
Please pay great attention to this .
We need to properly investigate the considered actions and risks .
Nuclear power is a source of energy which we cannot give up just like that , because it provides a large part of our energy and contributes to our reduction in CO2 emissions .
However , we have to rethink our future and renewable energy and also ambitiously develop energy efficiency further .
Mr President , nuclear power differs from other energy sources .
In an extremely short time , it can do an enormous amount of harm to countries , people and future generations .
I am therefore pleased that there seems to be strong and broad support in the European Parliament when it comes to nuclear power and the safety issues .
I hope that this will also result in clear , broad , joint decisions .
Nuclear power cannot be regulated and monitored at national level alone .
Nuclear power does not know national boundaries , nor does it know European boundaries .
The safety debate and the safety work must therefore have a very wide agenda .
In the light of this , it is important for us to take as united a decision as possible and , for once , overlook the fact that we have slightly differing opinions on the issue of nuclear power .
This is about a common interest , in the short and long term : safety .
In the longer term , the situation indicates the unsustainable state of our current energy supply .
We do not have a sufficiently diverse energy mix .
Talk about investments in renewable energy and energy efficiency must be turned into action .
What we need is nothing less than a paradigm shift in our energy policy , but that is not what this resolution should be about .
It must be the beginning of a new start for the shifting of our energy system in the direction of sustainable energy and , of course , preparation for a strategy that also phases out nuclear power - in some cases , in the near future , and in others , in the slightly longer or medium to long term .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the tragic events in Japan have not only revealed mistakes and flaws in Japanese reactors .
The Fukushima events have also revealed shortcomings in the international system of safeguards in nuclear power plants .
Today , many Europeans are concerned about nuclear safety here in Europe .
It is therefore essential that the European Union should comprehensively reassess its approach to nuclear safety .
The view of the Liberals and Democrats is that the Council 's proposed stress tests are too weak .
We should not only test technology and geography , but also the entire safety culture and preparedness to respond to multifaceted disaster scenarios .
It is also absolutely vital that the tests should be made mandatory and be based on common and transparent Community criteria .
It should be obvious to everyone that we cannot leave it to governments and national authorities to supervise themselves .
Instead , the stress tests should be conducted by independent experts and in full transparency .
All facts should be made public under the supervision of the Commission .
( Applause )
Today , that is the only credible alternative for this technology .
There should also be a comprehensive review of EU nuclear safety legislation by the IAEA .
We should have European standards and stringent requirements .
There is a responsibility for the Commission , but there is also a responsibility for the Council to step forward and take its responsibility .
Lastly , it is essential that we should now also draw the lessons for alternative energy and energy efficiency .
It is time to decide on binding targets .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr Oettinger , you already know that I do not trust your stress tests .
I would like to explain to you briefly why this is the case .
I believe that it is not a good thing for the national authorities and the supervisory bodies to be given responsibility for defining the criteria for the test and evaluating the results .
Until now , they have been solely responsible for supervising and testing the nuclear power plants in the European Union .
The members of these bodies will be part of the familiar old boys ' network who are happy to certify that each others ' nuclear power stations were safe , are safe and will continue to be safe .
Do you really believe that the national regulatory authorities will suddenly realise that they have been doing a bad job up until now and have been too tolerant ?
I do not believe that , Mr Oettinger , and you have not yet explained to me how you plan to guarantee that this whole supervisory system will suddenly become independent .
The voluntary nature of the stress tests is further proof that we cannot take them as seriously as we would like to .
However , you still have time to change your plans and provide us with a guarantee that independent experts will be given access to the plants .
You can guarantee that everything will be tested and that we will not just see reports on paper from a system which I have rightly described as an old boys ' network , because those people involved have all known each other and been friends for decades and have always accepted the highest levels of risk .
I would like to explain to you that we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance expect the stress tests to be designed in such a way that they show which nuclear power plants really are no longer acceptable and which should be disconnected from the grid first .
If the stress tests are genuinely to bring about a change of direction in Europe , we see them as the basis for an exit timetable which will start now and , if everything goes well in Europe , could come to an end in around 2025 .
I would like to ask you to do one specific thing , Mr Oettinger .
Over the last few days , you have given a number of interviews and have explained in Germany , for example , that you know which nuclear power plants will not pass these stress tests and that you are certain about some of them .
Please make the names of these power plants public .
For example , if one of them is Fessenheim , a power station which , as the French supervisory body has said , is not adequately protected against high water or earthquakes , then you should publicise the names of the sites which represent a risk .
This would increase public confidence in your policies .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , may I thank the President-in-Office and the Commissioner for their statements .
Their measured content is in contrast with some other contributions .
First of all , let us remember that there is a world of difference between 50-year-old reactors in Japan and the new designs under preparation in Europe - a world of difference .
Let us also remember that there is a world of difference between the seismic risks faced in Japan and those in Western Europe .
We need , above all , to be absolutely certain about what happened before taking steps to review what we are doing and plan to do .
Modern reactors are being designed now to withstand risks that were unimaginable 20 or 50 years ago .
I am glad to see you agree with me , Mrs Harms .
( Heckling from Mrs Harms )
That was a rudery off-mike and you are taking up my speaking time , Mrs Harms .
There is a proposal for a moratorium .
I oppose that because it would be to act in haste without scientific evidence .
We must find out what has happened before we take any steps to change our already impressive safety culture in Europe .
I agree we want to reinforce our safety culture , but let us not act in haste .
Mr President , there have recently been demonstrations in Germany in which 250 000 people called for an immediate exit from nuclear power and a changeover to 100 % renewable energy .
Both of these things are possible .
After Chernobyl and Fukushima , it is clear that nuclear power will always involve a residual risk .
Therefore , it must be mandatory for the nuclear safety standards throughout Europe to be based on the best available technologies .
Despite the adoption of the Council Directive concerning the nuclear safety of nuclear installations in 2009 , the existing safety standards remain in place in the Member States .
Therefore , we urgently need a revision of this directive with the involvement of Parliament under the codecision procedure which is not based on the Euratom Treaty .
I want to see an initiative involving as many of the groups in Parliament as possible which will call on the Council and the Commission to draw up a proposal for a directive to this effect .
I believe that we need a nuclear exit scenario covering the whole of Europe .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I agree with what has been said until now and also that we have to think about the moratorium tomorrow , as Mr Chichester suggested .
However , I want to add the following : we are entering a new era , a new world .
All natural disasters that have taken place in the 21st century have been mega-disasters : mega-fires , mega-earthquakes and mega-sea tides .
How can we protect ourselves from , and avoid , the nuclear threat arising from these disasters ?
We can see that we risk ending up with mega-killings as well due to these catastrophes .
In this Parliament , we condemn crimes against humanity .
I consider TEPCO 's efficiency as a company to be a new form of crime against humanity : no transparency , no precautions , and nothing is done about the workers who are fighting the problem .
I urge all of you to think about this new crime against society that we are going to face in the 21st century .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we need energy to eat , travel , study , cure diseases , and for many other things .
That energy has always come from a variety of sources .
In some cases , from the oldest sources , such as hydropower , fossil energy , and even nuclear energy ; in other cases , from the most modern , for example , renewables .
In addition to this , technologies are being developed to bring about increased safety , in some cases , or to offer greater efficiency , as in the case of renewable energies .
There is also research that has not yet been applied , such as carbon storage , or that which is expected to - and will - lead us to fusion power .
All of this is necessary , ladies and gentlemen , because human life has operated and developed on the basis of constant improvements to the resources used and the research that made this possible .
Communication , energy , medicine and study are based on that : the continual improvement of all our resources .
Recently , the tsunami and the earthquake that caused it resulted in serious damage for the people of Japan , including victims , missing people and material losses , as well as significant damage to the Fukushima plant .
With all that in mind , what we have to do is improve safety .
Tomorrow , this House will vote on a joint resolution , on which the vast majority of the parliamentary groups have agreed .
It expresses what unites us , not what divides us .
I would ask the groups to remain loyal to the content of the proposal and not to allow their own interests to get in the way of the common interest or of the shared view that we have achieved on this proposal .
That is our responsibility for tomorrow .
( ES ) Mr President , first of all , I should like to express my deepest sympathy to the victims and the families evacuated because of the nuclear accident .
Ladies and gentlemen , the lesson we should indeed learn from this accident is the urgent need to strengthen security measures .
However , security also involves human resources .
We need to ensure the highest level of training for staff working in the sector .
We must guarantee optimum working conditions .
Creating an excellent framework for training and work is a task that can be carried out from within the European institutions .
I would also like to emphasise the commitments that the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament ( S & D ) has made in its energy plan for Europe , which are a firm pledge in favour of renewable energies , infrastructures , energy efficiency and electric mobility .
In this context , I also think we should reopen the debate on coal , because it is our only indigenous source of fossil energy .
Mr President , stress tests on technical standards are not enough .
It is not just about earthquakes .
The problem in Japan was the accumulation of events : flooding , loss of off-site power and disruption of communications .
We have seen how one problem leads to another , and that the very radioactivity of the site in Fukushima now is hugely hampering the safety work which needs to go on .
A nuclear accident is not a linear event ; the consequences ripple outwards like the radioactivity which is still discharging into the sea .
It is therefore vital that the proposed stress tests take into account the multiple , complex , geometric consequences of a disaster event .
Commissioner , as you say , Member States have the right to decide their energy mix , but you have the responsibility for nuclear safety .
Do you agree that Member States should impose a moratorium on the planning and commissioning of new nuclear plants ?
What will you be proposing to make sure that governments and investors focus instead , now , on how to get a greater commitment to energy efficiency and renewables ?

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , the dramatic events in Japan have shown us that the only totally safe nuclear power plant is the one that was never built or the one that was shut down .
These are the only ones that are completely safe .
Since the events in Japan , we know that all other claims are untrue .
The citizens of Europe know that and this is why they want to see a strong response from us .
The only response that we can give is that our vision is to develop a Europe which is totally based on renewable energy .
We can gradually begin to put this vision into practice by a combination of energy efficiency in homes , transport , industry and electricity generation , a wide range of renewable energies and the use of natural gas as a transition fuel .
Mr Oettinger , you are in the process of drawing up the Energy Roadmap 2050 .
Our question to you is : Are you prepared to work with us on a vision of this kind ?
Are you convinced that the Energy Roadmap 2050 should be used as the basis for a discussion not only with experts but also with the citizens of Europe about a different future for energy in Europe ?
( PL ) Mr President , if , today , we have to learn the lessons and do some homework after what has happened in Japan , we should do so with great caution .
We will have to concentrate and think carefully .
A move away from nuclear energy or the imposition of unrealistic requirements for this section of our energy system will not eliminate a single problem .
Just across our borders , yet more power stations will be built , which will not be subject to our safety standards or the supervision of our regulatory bodies .
In Kaliningrad and Belarus today , developments of this kind to supply the demand from Central Europe are already under way .
The flight of nuclear energy from the Union will show our efforts to be illusory .
Yet again , we will hit at the competitiveness of our energy system and , in so doing , at our economy and industry .
For the umpteenth time , ecological plans will benefit our competition , mainly from Russia .
Therefore , if today we are going to increase the standards we require from nuclear energy , we must have a guarantee that the electricity produced by reactors which are outside our borders will be subject to the same rigorous criteria .
( CS ) Mr President , there are several possible conclusions to be drawn from the disaster in Japan .
First , the energy sector should be under state control , and there should be reliable back-up facilities at every power plant , positioned sufficiently far away .
The TEPCO company has behaved irresponsibly .
Secondly , we should support the environment in all ways possible and say ' no ' to the green scaremongers who have long been blackmailing Europe .
Thirdly , we need a change of mood in our Parliament and in the Commission .
An uncivilised atmosphere has long prevailed in the European Parliament , and we need a Commission of courageous men and women who are not afraid of new solutions , and who have a pioneering spirit , not buck-passers who , after the manner of a certain kind of beetle , roll a ball of petty personal interests along in front of themselves , even in relation to European positions .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , I fully support the joint resolution .
We are sending two specific messages to those in positions of responsibility in the Member States and to the population of Europe .
We need common rules to protect us from nuclear accidents throughout the whole of Europe .
The time for a parochial approach to nuclear safety has long since gone .
Two older power stations in Germany , 180 km from Strasbourg , have been temporarily shut down and disconnected from the grid .
Around 100 km away from here in Fessenheim is a reactor which , as far as we know , is no safer than the two power plants in Germany that have been disconnected from the grid as a result of events in Japan .
This example clearly shows that we need common criteria at a very high level .
We have the legal basis in place and the question of how far we go with the existing legal basis will always be a political one .
We need to go much further than we have in the past .
The second message is that regardless of the decisions made in the Member States , and some will disconnect power stations from the grid more quickly than others , we should not be replacing the lost energy with additional gas imports , for example , from Russia .
Paragraphs 21 and 22 show the direction in which we want to go .
We want more renewable energy and more energy efficiency .
Mr Oettinger , before the events at Fukushima , you produced an energy efficiency action plan .
That was an important step forward and it now needs to be put into practice even more urgently .
Personally , I agree with the majority of this House that we need binding targets .
We no longer want to use fossil fuels .
We want jobs in trade and industry .
Energy efficiency is cost-effective and so we urgently need to make progress in this area .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , nuclear power is a non-carbon energy source , but also a transitional energy source which depends on exhaustible resources .
It is also a potentially dangerous form of energy .
The obvious priority , after Fukushima , is to take a view on the safety of our power stations .
These stress tests must be carried out in the most coordinated way possible at Union level , and potentially beyond in our immediate neighbourhood , by independent entities working in accordance with the strictest standards and with the greatest transparency .
Next , the fight against climate change requires a coherent and ambitious policy .
While nuclear power means that we can emit less CO2 into the atmosphere to produce the electricity we need , we must not be dependent on it .
In countries such as France which produce nuclear power , reducing its share is a precondition for any far-reaching decision .
This process means that we must redouble our efforts when it comes to saving energy and increasing the share of renewables , which , in the medium and long-term , will be able to cover almost all of our consumption .
This is about the safety of power stations , but it must also be about the security of provision throughout the European Union , so that no country finds itself in economic difficulty .
Finally , true solidarity requires the creation of an Energy Community .
( FR ) Mr President , regarding safety , I am , of course , only too happy to support all the proposals made by my fellow Members on the essential independence of those who will be responsible for carrying out the stress tests and the idea that these rules will be set at Community level .
Let us not deceive ourselves , though : we have some old power stations which were designed without regard for the accumulation of risks and , as a result , whether or not we carry out stress tests , we will never have complete safety with the existing power stations .
We must be fully aware of this .
Furthermore , I do not believe that most European citizens today accept the idea of paying the price for a nuclear accident in Europe .
That is a luxury that we cannot afford ; we must be fully aware of that .
We must therefore organise the phasing-out of nuclear power while bearing in mind our economic needs , our needs in terms of employment , our industrial capacities and the requirement not to increase our greenhouse gas emissions .
I think that we are all aware of that .
How should we do this ?
We should do it with the great European project that is the phasing-out of nuclear power .
Claude mentioned 15 years .
I think that that is very optimistic ; it will probably be a little longer .
However , this is a great project which could mobilise Europeans , could restore confidence in ourselves and also in the institutions , because beyond Fukushima , Mr President , this is still an act of defiance towards the public authorities and the supervisory bodies .
We have to be aware of this .
Mr President , I would like to ask Mrs Trautmann to answer a question for me .
In France , there is a system of independent regulators who do a very good job .
Do you believe that the French model could be applied throughout Europe , with a European regulator based on the French system ?
( FR ) Mr President , I thank my fellow Member , Mr Rübig , for asking this question .
I think that , actually , the French regulator is independent - his proposals are testament to that .
I think that , given the logic of what I mentioned concerning the European Energy Community , we should have an independent regulator at European level and make available the supervisory means to ensure that the regulator 's work is independent and that the regulator is genuinely competent .
On this point , Mrs Trautmann , an independent authority on the paper , yes .
Given its composition and the fact that there is no pluralism in the people who make it up , quite frankly , we could ask ourselves a lot of questions .
( FR ) Mr President , at national level , it is always possible to question the composition and , from this point of view , I agree with Mrs Lepage 's comment .
I think that we will soon see a period in which pluralism can be better ensured , but in any case , I would not want to question the honesty of the work by those people who have taken up their task conscientiously , and one person in particular , Mr Lacoste .
( CS ) Mr President , for several weeks now , we have been following with bated breath the incredible struggle in Japan with the effects of the gigantic earthquake and subsequent tsunami .
I also admire the way the Japanese have coped with it , something which has not been said here yet .
People always learn from every disaster .
Events such as these have always led to technical improvements and safety measures .
People do not stop flying after major air disasters .
Reliability and safety are improved .
It is important to gather all of the experience on the operation of nuclear power plants from the disaster in Japan .
We must evaluate this extreme natural stress test correctly and obtain as much experience as possible for technical and safety measures .
Nuclear plants must be ready to withstand extreme natural disasters .
We must also learn from the emergency procedures , as this , too , is part of plant operation and safety .
Politicians must refrain from quick and simple judgments .
It is surely sensible to have the maximum number of repeat verifications of nuclear plants .
The Japanese experience is an opportunity for the responsible appraisal of existing safety standards , without unnecessary political grandstanding .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , everyone knows that there are very different opinions both in the Member States and here in the political groups on the question of whether or not we should have nuclear power .
The debate today has shown that there are also differing views within the groups .
On the other hand , there has been a disaster in Japan which represents a huge problem .
We have started a debate on this subject and I think that the resolution offers us an important opportunity to focus today and tomorrow on one specific question , which is whether we can jointly raise our safety standards and whether we will be able to put in place increased European powers of whatever kind or greater European cooperation .
Although there are many things in this resolution which I do not like , I am of the opinion that my fellow Members have done an excellent job , because they have produced a text which focuses more closely on safety and on European cooperation .
Therefore , I would like to ask if it is not high time that we took the opportunity presented by this debate today and tomorrow to put aside the question of whether or not we should get out of nuclear power , or of whether we are enthusiastic or unenthusiastic supporters of nuclear power , and to focus on this instead .
If we could all agree not to put the amendments that we have tabled to the vote tomorrow - I would just like to see them presented - and to concentrate on voting with a large majority or perhaps even unanimously for more safety and greater European powers , we would be doing more for the reputation of the European Parliament and for the process of drawing consequences from the events in Japan than if we continue with the disputes that we are always having .
We can perhaps postpone them until the week after next .
I would like to ask you to think about whether we should try this .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Reul , you know that I have always supported higher levels of safety in the nuclear industry .
When it came to the Nuclear Safety Directive which we adopted two years ago , I had very little success .
A large majority of this House was against the highest safety standards .
The subject of a new feeling of mutual trust presents us with another major problem .
Parliament has no contribution to make to this debate .
If there is any doubt , the decisions on nuclear safety and stress tests will be made by the Council and by Euratom .
Parliament will be excluded from the process .
We are generally able to express our opinion , but whether this will have any consequences or not is in the lap of the gods .
If you are now saying that we will take action against the old Euratom Treaty in future and ensure that there is consultation and transparency in all the areas relating to safety , we will perhaps be able to come to a better understanding .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Harms , I did not fully understand your question , because it was not a question .
However , that is not a bad thing , because I have made an effort and will continue making an effort to take up this opportunity .
You know that we have totally opposing positions on this subject .
It would send out an important signal , regardless of the question of powers , if we could agree on the issue of increased safety with a large majority .
The resolution covers a number of areas , many more than those we have already adopted and many more than I was prepared to go along with .
That is true and you are absolutely right .
However , if we can manage to agree on more safety and more Europe , we will be sending out a signal to the Member States .
If we do this tomorrow on the basis of a dispute , because we have different positions when it comes to the issue of whether or not we should exit from nuclear power , then it will probably not have a major impact .
This is all that I am asking for , no more and no less .
Mr President , I am deeply insulted that Mrs Harms merely heckled me from off microphone but waved her blue card at my colleague , Mr Reul .
Can I not have equal treatment ?
Mr President , Mr Reul , I wanted to ask you whether your personal position has changed at all .
The sweater that I am wearing today is 30 years old .
In those days , we were demonstrating against nuclear power .
The so-called experts told us that there was a risk of an accident once every ten thousand years .
The Director of the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research , Mr Schnellhuber , recently said in an interview with Die Zeit that this is true .
If you divide ten thousand years by the 400 nuclear power plants in the world , the result is 25 years .
Therefore , we can expect a reactor accident to happen every 25 years .
First Chernobyl , then Fukushima .
Where next ?
Have you changed your position on this point ?
Do you still believe that nuclear power stations are safe or do you share my opinion that Zwentendorf is the only safe nuclear power station in the world ?
( DE ) Mr President , of course my opinion has changed , but not fundamentally .
Is it so bad not to change your views about something ?
However , my opinion has changed a great deal and I hope you have noticed that .
I have explained that I will vote in favour of this resolution if it stays as it is .
That is a major change in comparison to my previous views .
You may see that as being satisfactory or as unsatisfactory .
I stand by what I have said .
It would be good if we could adopt this resolution unanimously .
( DE ) Mr President , you have heard what the Chair of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy has said .
Now I am speaking as Chair of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the differences could not be greater .
The fact that we need the highest safety levels for all nuclear power plants goes without saying .
We all agree on that .
Mr Oettinger , your stress test is an important first step , but it does not go nearly far enough .
I also believe that we need to rethink our approach and come up with a new one which goes into greater depth and is far more fundamental .
This is why , in addition to the highest safety standards in the EU , we also need an exit scenario from a risky technology , which we cannot justify using on the densely populated continent of Europe .
Mr Reul , you and others will simply have to go along with this .
Your colleagues in Berlin have made much more progress than you have here in Strasbourg and in Brussels .
They have probably reached the turning point , while you are still stuck with your old ideas .
I hope that we can come up with a formulation , a scenario and a strategy for exiting from nuclear power .
Mr Oettinger , the road map which you are producing in June of this year would be a wonderful opportunity to achieve this .
After the stress tests , you must also give us your idea of how we can get out of nuclear technology .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that our condolences should go to all the victims of the great disaster which has hit Japan .
The situation is really worrying , but I think the task of politics is not to make choices under conditions of panic , but to try to remain rational and face reality as best we can .
That said , I think we should start from two important considerations .
The first is that there is only one sky and yet the land is divided by boundaries that have nothing to do with the problems we have on our agenda ; and the second is that we must always aim for sustainable development which has multiple components .
This sustainable development has three components which must be put together : economic , environmental and social .
If we succeed in this effort , I think we will move in the right direction .
I think the resolution tabled , which I fully support and which has been widely shared , comes at the right time for us to take on the responsibility of safety , an issue which should represent a diagnosis of the current situation , and to look to the future .
How should we look to the future ?
By meeting the criteria we committed ourselves to respecting and , above all , by moving towards decisions regarding efficiency and renewal , which should always take into account culture and innovation in research , including the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor ( ITER ) .
The Presidency has been informed that today is Mr Leinen 's birthday , so happy birthday , Mr Leinen .

( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , nuclear safety has a human face .
The design , construction , operation , supervision and closure of a power plant , and the drafting of the related laws , are all human activities .
The key component of safety is therefore knowledge and the maximum utilisation of human activities .
The maintenance and practical application of this knowledge is essential both in connection with the operation of power plants and , for a long time afterwards , in connection with their closure .
I agree with conducting stress tests and I agree that the experience gained should be incorporated in the Nuclear Safety Directive .
I agree that we should conduct cross-border checks , if only to calm the population .
I agree that we should do everything to participate in international organisations contributing the best of our knowledge .
I especially agree that we should use R & D activities to dispose of the nuclear waste of the past 60 years .
There is one thing I particularly agree with : whatever decision we make with regard to energy , we should insist that the 500 million people in Europe be supplied with electricity . Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are talking today about improving the safety of nuclear power , not about calling civil nuclear power into question when it is an essential component of energy independence and of the fight against greenhouse gases in many Member States of the European Union .
The European initiative of performing stress tests on all our power stations is a first essential and reasonable step which responds to the expectations of European citizens .
We must carry out these tests using a common approach and common criteria whose methodology will have to be entrusted to the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group .
The neighbouring countries of the European Union should also undergo these tests , given the cross-border risks that exist .
Besides these tests , the European Union must work to harmonise international standards at the highest level , within the G20 and the International Atomic Energy Agency , on the basis of the Western European Nuclear Regulators ' Association 's objectives for new reactors .
Within the European Union , we should promote and intensify cooperation between the national safety authorities .
The European Union must serve as a model , both for the strengthening of the rules and for efforts in solidarity .
In the face of this type of disaster , I think that the creation of a European Civil Protection Force is needed more than ever .

( NL ) Mr President , that is right : you will find advocates and opponents of nuclear energy across the political spectrum .
However , what I do not understand is why some people have still not opened their eyes to this topic , even after Fukushima .
The unthinkable has happened .
A combination of factors has led to a disaster that could perfectly conceivably happen in our part of the world , too .
There is no such thing as zero risk .
Today , we need to take three steps .
First of all , as the Commissioner has proposed , the stress test should be conducted in all openness , in all transparency , whilst , at the same time , steps should be taken to ensure that it covers as broad a range of plants as possible .
Yet , we must also ensure that we act on the results of this stress test .
Any nuclear plant which is not safe should be closed down .
Secondly , we must ensure that we organise a phasing out of nuclear energy .
We cannot have nuclear power plants which are built for a service life of thirty years still remaining in use after forty or even fifty years .
Thirdly , it would be too absurd for words if we , in this European Union , were to opt for new nuclear plants .
There is only one way forward in Europe , and that is renewable energy , and we in this House ought to reach a consensus in favour of renewables .
( PL ) Mr President , on 26 April , a quarter of a century will have passed since the Chernobyl disaster , the worst nuclear accident in history .
Twenty-five years on , we remember all the victims of the tragedy , those who suffered and those who , to this day , are still feeling the effects of the disaster .
This tragic anniversary has unfortunately coincided with the events in Japan .
In recalling the Chernobyl disaster , I would like to express my solidarity with the Japanese people , who are struggling with the effects of the accident at the Fukushima nuclear power station , which was itself caused by the waves of the tsunami .
Even today , contamination is to be found in food produced in the regions of Ukraine which were exposed to radioactive caesium 137 - an isotope which has a half-life of 30 years .
Greenpeace has carried out research which shows that in at least two provinces , Zhitomir and Rovno , the local population consumes contaminated milk , mushrooms , fruit , fresh-water fish and vegetables .
According to official data , there is a high level of radiation in areas at a distance of 30 km from the power station .
It is estimated , however , that the affected area may , in fact , include a total of around 50 000 km2 across many provinces in Ukraine .
There are currently 165 operational reactors in Europe , not including Russia .
It is important to know that they are not only located on the territory of the European Union , but also in neighbouring countries near the Union 's borders .
Russia and Belarus are beginning the construction of power stations near the borders of the Union .
We must ask what guarantee can be given of their safety ?
Energy should not be bought from nuclear power stations located outside the borders of the European Union if they do not comply with the highest standards of safety as defined by stress tests in the European Union .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
I will say that again : at this moment , nuclear power stations are being built by Russia and Belarus near the borders of the European Union .
In relation to this , I think European Union Member States should not buy nuclear energy from these power stations if they do not pass stress tests which are the same as those required in the European Union .
( RO ) Mr President , I want to begin by expressing my complete sympathy for the Japanese people .
I believe that it is important now for us to give them every support we can .
The Fukushima accident has shown us that some existing nuclear power plants are not safe .
This is why we must attach greater importance to nuclear safety .
I think that it is vital to carry out safety tests on the nuclear power plants immediately .
On the other hand , however , we must avoid the pitfall of making emotional and unfounded decisions about whether to keep or abandon nuclear energy .
The decision about the composition of the energy mix must remain under Member States ' jurisdiction , while the European Union 's role must be to ensure that the highest safety standards are applied .
However , any measure taken at European or national level with regard to the energy mix and regulating nuclear energy must be based on a high level of scientific objectivity .
( LV ) Mr President , nuclear energy currently generates approximately one third of total energy consumption in Europe .
If we wanted to replace this capacity in a short time , there are only two real alternatives : i.e. increase the use of either coal or natural gas .
Both these alternatives have their difficulties .
With coal , it is CO2 emissions .
With natural gas , of course , it is that the majority is imported from Russia .
In the short term , therefore , there are two things that can be done .
The more important thing is what has already been discussed : to increase safety measures .
However , ladies and gentlemen , it will not be enough to increase safety measures in Europe , for Europe 's neighbours , Russia and Belarus , are going ahead , regardless of our debates on nuclear safety .
They will develop their reactors , which is why we must ensure that Europe 's high standards are imposed not only in Europe , but also in the rest of the world , especially in our neighbouring states , Russia and Belarus .
Naturally , the second thing that Europe must do , also in the short term , what we can do , is constantly to reinforce our measures in the area of energy saving , and to place ever greater stress on renewable energy resources , making more use of wind , solar , water and biomass sources .
Naturally , also in the long term , it is precisely energy saving and an increased use of wind , solar , water and biomass that will reduce our dependence on both nuclear energy and on imported energy sources .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the news regarding Fukushima is increasingly worrying .
Safety limits have been greatly exceeded and we do not know what will happen in the near future .
There has been a lack of clear and transparent communications .
Stress tests should be conducted on existing nuclear plants and if the outcome raises concern we must have the courage to call for their immediate closure .
We need to introduce higher international safety standards and there should be no thought of constructing new nuclear plants .
We must prepare the way for a gradual withdrawal of this type of energy which causes irreparable damage to the environment and human health .
Careful thought on the development of future energy policies is essential .
We must urgently develop policies that aim at energy conservation and efficiency , and increased investment in research into new technologies and renewable energy sources .
Finally , we should open a debate involving citizens and local authorities .
( SL ) Mr President , I agree with the Members who have said that we should ensure nuclear safety at the European level .
However , ladies and gentlemen , we need to recognise in this respect that ' safety culture ' is a very broad concept , which takes into account both ... which includes both a safe nuclear technology and the ensuring of adequate financial resources , human resources , adequate safety standards and strong and independent supervisory bodies .
In my opinion , all this should also be part of these European safety standards .
This is not about us lacking trust in the existing institutions , but about ensuring , at the institutional level , the highest possible safety in the future too .
Commissioner , you have said that Member States are not interested in that , but who are these Member States ?
If we asked our citizens ( and such public opinion polls have already been carried out ) , you would see that they are happy for some of the powers to be transferred to the European Union .
I must state clearly that I am against the closure of nuclear power plants for political reasons .
There are several nuclear power plants in Japan , and one of them has been struck by this severe nuclear accident .
Before we adopt various measures , we need to have arguments and expert findings .
We therefore need to have expert analyses of what happened in Fukushima if we are to find out at all the real reasons for the nuclear accident and the damage to the core .
To conclude , let me just say that we have come a long way towards adopting a directive on radioactive waste and that , with this directive , we will be able to show that we are serious .
( The speaker agreed to take three blue card questions under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I ask my fellow Member if thousands of deaths are not a matter to think over and reflect on for a long time , seeing as she just said that we do not have sufficient reason to believe that nuclear power is dangerous .
Since there have been thousands of new deaths in Japan , I wanted to ask if this fact might not be enough .
Mr President , I would like to ask my colleague how many nuclear plants have to go down before she says that it is enough .
She talks about only one nuclear plant in Japan having been hit .
However , there were six nuclear plants , not one .
How many would be enough for her to change her opinion ?
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Jordan Cizelj , there is a power station in Krško in your country , which is viewed rather critically , among other things , because it is located in an earthquake zone .
Are you prepared at least to ensure that it is one of the first power stations to be investigated using strict and , hopefully , objective stress tests , so that we can make sure that the citizens are at no immediate risk from this power station , although it is in an earthquake zone , and that improvements can be made for as long as the power station remains in existence ?
( SL ) Mr President , there are , indeed , thousands of victims in Japan and I personally deeply sympathise with them and think that the European Union should offer all possible assistance .
However , what I am against is these victims being misused in the name of some ideological fight against the use of nuclear energy .
That is why I said that we need to analyse the causes which have led to this nuclear accident and that we need to find out whether they are at all possible in Europe and how we can avoid them .
I would also ask that we do not confuse victims of a natural disaster , victims of an earthquake and a tsunami , with potential victims of a nuclear accident .
That is my answer to the first question .
As far as the second question is concerned , how many accidents in nuclear plants ...
May I continue ?
How many accidents will it take to change my mind ?
I mentioned one plant which has several reactors , so a single plant with several reactors .
We know that there are a number of plants in Japan .
I think that each plant ... or each accident should be taken very seriously ; we should not be thinking in terms of how many accidents , because we need to take into account each accident , and not only the accident , but also any other incident assessed to be less than an accident .
We have to learn something from each such incident .
Indeed , this very example is telling us that we should not conclude from one accident that nuclear technology is unacceptable .
There is one more question I have not answered .
There were three questions .
The Krško nuclear power plant .
May I ?
The safety of this plant has been tested and , at the time , Austria , which was very active on this issue , also carried out additional seismic safety tests .
As a result , additional modifications were made and this is now , in fact , an established practice .
I firmly believe that everyone in Slovenia will agree to such a stress test being carried out at Krško immediately .
Since we are a small nuclear country , we are used to being subjected to a relatively greater number of international tests than is the case for other nuclear power plants in the larger countries .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Oettinger , ladies and gentlemen , I come from Austria and we are all worried about Krško .
I hope that the assurances made by Mrs Jordan Cizelj will be followed up .
I would like to express my concern for and sympathy with the people of Japan who have suffered a great deal and who are coping with these events with calm stoicism .
However , we should try to draw some positive conclusions from the disaster .
The only positive aspect is that we must reconsider our position and begin to learn lessons in Europe from the catastrophe .
One short-term lesson is the need to bring about a huge improvement in safety standards in European reactors .
Another lesson is that we must establish a European civil protection body .
Europe must allow its safety and rescue teams to work together across national borders .
The long-term lesson involves the need to draw up a common exit scenario , because events have clearly shown that nuclear technology as it currently stands is too dangerous and that is unlikely to change in future .
The consequences are too long-lasting .
You can see from my remarks that the divide runs right across all the groups , including the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
However , overall , I believe that we should take to heart the fact that the famous safety standards promised us by everyone simply cannot be guaranteed .
Therefore , the stress tests must cover an accumulation of different risks .
If we only investigate individual risks , we will never have a realistic scenario .
In this context , realistic means that it is very difficult , for example , to predict a tsunami , even if it is unlikely to happen here in Europe , but we do have earthquake zones here .
( Applause )
( RO ) Mr President , I would first of all like to express my admiration and respect for the attitude of the Japanese people towards the extraordinary situation they are going through .
This situation has given rise to heated debates about the future of nuclear energy - whether to continue with or abandon it .
I believe that we must adopt a balanced attitude , taking into account every aspect : the demands of the economy , public safety and climate change .
I believe that the future energy policy must be based on striking a balance between renewable energy , new technologies for conventional energy resources and nuclear energy in safe conditions .
Investments must be made in research into the efficient production of renewable energy .
We must invest to make secure new sources of conventional raw materials and new supply routes for Europe - the Southern Corridor .
At the same time , innovation and research are required into new technologies which will eliminate the polluting effect conventional energy production has on the environment .
The Nuclear Safety Directive must be revised in order to tighten requirements .
The stress tests proposed by the Commission are necessary .
The criteria must be set out , taking into account every aspect : age , technologies and natural hazards .
The tests must be carried out with the Commission 's involvement .
The tests ' results must be used when revising the directive .
The consequences of the tests must be very clear .
Those which pass continue to operate , those which fail stop .
I should point out the need for a European policy for treating and storing nuclear waste , as well as for decommissioning power plants .
Lastly , but by no means the least important point , the general public must retain their confidence in nuclear energy and be informed accordingly .
Mr President , I would like to make a short comment regarding nuclear plants in third countries that are very close to EU borders .
Two particular cases have already been mentioned today , two simultaneous nuclear projects : one in the Kaliningrad district of the Russian Federation , which is completely surrounded by Lithuania , Poland and the Baltic Sea , and the second in Belarus , where a nuclear power station is planned to be built just 20 km away from the Lithuanian border .
When the whole world was watching the dramatic developments in Fukushima , on 15 March , the Belarus Government and the Russian state-owned energy company Rosatom signed a contract under which Rosatom will have to finish the nuclear plant in Belarus by 2018 .
Russia is also preparing a USD 6 billion envelope to Belarus to finance this project .
So the Belarus authorities have been defiant about the need to properly inform Belarus 's neighbours about the planned project , and the project as it stands clearly violates the Espoo Convention on environmental impact assessment .
( RO ) Mr President , I welcome the Commission 's decision to impose stress tests on the European Union 's nuclear reactors .
We call on these inspections to be carried out based on common , detailed evaluation criteria in order to enhance nuclear safety further in the European Union .
The Union currently has 143 nuclear reactors , with nuclear energy accounting for 30 % of the energy mix .
Member States are responsible for their own energy mix , but nuclear safety is the responsibility of all of us .
This is why it is important for us to have a resolution on nuclear safety in the European Union .
I should emphasise that investments made in nuclear safety must be guaranteed for every nuclear reactor until the end of the period envisaged for their operation .
The stress tests will result in a rise in standards for future nuclear reactors and , by extension , in the cost of nuclear energy .
The Union must therefore make considerable investments in energy efficiency measures and in the production and use of renewable energy sources , particularly for buildings and transport .
( FI ) Mr President , it is a good thing that the EU wants stress tests for its Member States and its neighbours .
The only drawback is that they will not be compulsory .
The EU is now coyly asking if these could possibly be carried out .
Another failing is that the EU has not drawn up common standards .
It is imperative , however , that these should exist .
Thirdly , an independent body should carry out these tests .
I simply cannot believe that national bodies will say that there have been malfunctions in their country or that they themselves have neglected to monitor sites properly .
If these are to be genuine tests , there should be standards in place for them , they should be carried out openly , and independent parties should conduct them .
( FR ) Mr President , I would nevertheless like to remind my fellow Members that the Fukushima accident is not over and that there are still risks of explosion relating to the molten core .
I have a question to put to our Commissioner , Mr Oettinger .
It is about the implementation of these stress tests .
As our fellow Member has just said , how will you get a guarantee that all the criteria that you have mentioned to the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy are taken into account by each Member State that uses nuclear power stations ?
How will you force a Member State to allow independent experts to verify and monitor the power stations if it refuses ?
The reason I ask this is that , if they monitor themselves , I do not see how we will apply your stress tests .
There absolutely must be an independent body monitoring the power stations in each Member State .
How , furthermore , will we ensure that neighbouring countries - you spoke of Armenia , with Metsamor , and of other countries such as Belarus , and so on - accept such monitoring ?
Parliament will have to support you , Commissioner , but how will we do this ?
Finally , we have a real responsibility to phase out nuclear power , and this is where scenarios for achieving this must be proposed to Parliament .
It is the only guarantee that there will be no further accidents .
( SK ) Mr President , the extensive damage to the nuclear power plant in Fukushima caused by an extraordinary natural disaster has shown that it is extremely important to look after safety in facilities of this kind .
It is therefore right and proper that the European Commission has decided to perform a safety audit of all nuclear plants on our territory without delay .
European citizens have a right to safety , and a professional independent audit of nuclear facilities can alert us to any deficiencies and risks which we might avoid with careful operation .
I do not doubt that the result of the findings of the safety audit of our nuclear facilities will be a serious decision obliging operators of power plants to correct any deficiencies in the facilities immediately , and not try to circumvent the safety criteria , fulfilment of which must be a precondition for the running of a nuclear plant .
Commissioner , I am sure the European public expects us to conduct an open and honest dialogue today on the future of European energy policy , including the definition of new safety limits for all power plants in Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the nuclear disaster in Japan has shown us one thing .
Nature is stronger and more powerful than mankind .
For this reason , it is high time for us finally to disconnect from the grid the old nuclear power stations and those that are at risk of earthquakes and , in the long-term , to get out of nuclear power .
We need stress tests , Mr Oettinger !
We do not want a second Chernobyl .
We need limits for food from Japan .
I have one question for the Commission .
Do you really want to irradiate the people of Europe ?
You should withdraw this implementing regulation immediately and preferably today .
We must invest in and make use of alternative energies .
They do exist .
They are safe , environmentally friendly and less harmful to people .
One more point : they create new jobs .
In Austria , we had the Zwentendorf nuclear power plant that was never connected to the grid .
Now it is a solar power station .
Mr President , this debate should be about nuclear safety .
It has obviously gone further than that and is about the energy mix .
Could I suggest that we have that debate when the Commission brings forward its road map on energy ?
On the issue of safety , can I ask the Commissioner whether it is appropriate to use the words ' stress tests ' , because when it comes to banking , the words ' stress tests ' have certainly failed us .
What I would ask is to use the words ' safety assessments ' or ' risk assessments ' .
What follow-up will there be on those safety assessments ?
Will you ensure that they are carried out on all nuclear plants , including waste and reprocessing facilities , because I have a particular concern about Sellafield , which is close to the Irish border ?
We need to look at the safety of plants now .
Regrettably , some colleagues say , we are highly reliant on nuclear power - even those who do not have plants on their territory - so safety is paramount .
Let us move to another stage of looking at the energy mix .
Let us be honest : renewables are not an easy answer either .
( EL ) Mr President , it took us 25 years to forget Chernobyl and I fear that the disaster in Japan will not suffice to remind us .
We have been systematically condemning Japan .
It is as if we want to say that it is Japan , rather than nuclear energy , that is unsafe .
We have started safety tests on our nuclear power plants and are again insisting that there is such a thing as safe nuclear technology .
We need to shut down nuclear power plants over thirty years old immediately and put an end to any thoughts of building new plants .
We need an immediate ' nuclear ' tax that will allow us to reflect the entire environmental cost of nuclear energy .
We need to invest in improving the performance of photovoltaic energy and to make real investments in increasing the performance of all renewable energy sources .
Commissioner , the legislative initiative and responsibility for our action , or the consequences of our failure to act , lie with you .
Mr President , honourable Members , first of all , I would like to look at our long-term energy policy .
We want to invite you to become involved with the Energy Roadmap from day one .
For this reason , I am offering to meet with the groups from May onwards to discuss different scenarios for Europe 's energy sector for the decades to come .
One scenario , in other words , one option with all the resulting consequences , will definitely involve setting the target for the proportion of renewable energy used in electricity generation as high as possible , even at 100 % , which will have an impact on power grids , storage facilities , research , efficiency and a number of other factors .
However , at the same time , I would like to ask everyone to take the legal basis into consideration .
The Treaty of Lisbon is only 18 months old and you were more closely involved in its creation than I was .
The Treaty gives the European Union comprehensive legislative powers in the field of energy with only one far-reaching exception , which was included quite deliberately .
The question of energy technology and the energy mix remains in the hands of the national parliaments .
We can argue about whether this was the right thing to do , but it is clear that the conclusions to be drawn from the events in Japan for the Energy Roadmap must be based on the Treaty of Lisbon and , as things currently stand , I believe that Article 194 is unlikely to be revised in the foreseeable future .
I would like it to be revised and I believe that there is sufficient expertise at a European level with regard to the energy mix .
However , for the next few years , energy technology and electricity generation are a matter for the Member States .
However , there is one restriction in place , which we agreed on together with the Member States .
The target of 20 % renewable energy restricts the powers of the Member States to the remaining 80 % .
Therefore , because we will have to reach a level of 20 % renewable energy with the support and commitment of the Member States in nine years and will have to evaluate the situation constantly by means of progress reports , the powers of the Member States will be reduced to 80 % or to even less than this .
Why is this ?
This is because the overall figure of 20 % will mean perhaps 10 % renewable energy in the transport sector .
In the field of electricity generation , which is currently the focus of attention , we are aiming for a proportion of 35 % renewable energy - water , biomass , geothermal , solar and wind energy - in nine years .
This means that in three to four years , renewable energy will have overtaken coal and nuclear power in the electricity sector .
I believe that we cannot praise this development process highly enough .
A total of 35 % renewable energy in nine years !
The Energy Roadmap will be focusing not only on 2050 , but also on 2025 and 2030 , in other words , the next decade , during which we must invest in technology , power grids and storage facilities .
I am sure that we can come to a consensus on a percentage for energy generation of 40 + x % in 2030 and then reach a decision about this with the Member States .
Once renewable energy makes up a proportion of 40 % or more , the Member States will only be responsible for 60 % or less and this will mean that we will be making progress on the subject of powers at a European level with the knowledge and consent of the Member States .
This may not be fast enough for some people , but without amending the Treaty of Lisbon , which is currently not realistic , the target will be 20 % , then 35 % and later 40 % or more renewable energy .
This means a clear shift of power towards European control and the European level .
When we look at the renewable energy scenario , we should also always consider what is happening in the Member States .
One example is Poland , a large and up-and-coming country which I very much respect .
In Poland , 90 % of electricity is currently generated using coal .
Ninety per cent !
I do not believe that it is likely and , therefore , I would like to ask the Members of all the groups who are present from the large and up-and-coming EU Member State of Poland : Do you believe that the politicians in your country , regardless of who is in government , will be able to bring the percentage of coal down to zero over the next few years and decades ?
I do not think that they will .
Incidentally , Poland is currently planning a new nuclear power station .
This means that the Poles want nuclear power to make up part of their energy mix , with the aim of becoming less dependent on gas and on the Russian Federation .
Mrs Harms , the Polish Government was democratically elected and is highly respected within its own country .
We Germans in particular should not think that we always know better .
I trust our friends in Poland to take security issues into consideration in just the same way as I trust you .
( Applause and heckling )
To the group chair , I would like to say that we have a tendency in Germany to want to decide everything in Europe .
My advice is to take into consideration and to accept the democratic processes in Poland and in France with appropriate humility .
I am speaking as a European .
I know my own country of Germany and I respect the democratic processes in Poland , in France and in every other Member State .
However , any country whose energy supply is based on 90 % coal will find it more difficult to get down to 0 % .
This is why my plans include the option of coal without CO2 emissions .
Anyone who is familiar with the situation in Poland , Romania or Spain will understand that coal has to be included as an option in the Energy Roadmap 2050 , otherwise they will be ignoring the realities of democratically elected parliaments and governments .
For this reason , I believe that research into carbon capture and storage ( CCS ) and demonstration projects are very important en route to another objective , which involves achieving a CO2-free energy sector in the next few decades .
In Mrs Hedegaard 's road map , we have included a reduction of 10 % in CO2 emissions for the energy sector by 2050 compared with today 's levels .
( Heckling )
As far as the subject of nuclear power is concerned , we all know that there are countries which currently have a moratorium on nuclear power stations or which want to shut them down , for example , Germany .
Some of our neighbours , such as Switzerland , have postponed the planning process for new nuclear power plants .
However , there are countries which are in the process of building nuclear power stations , Finland , for example , and there are countries which currently have nuclear power and are planning new plants and others which do not have nuclear power and want to build their first power plant .
Therefore , I think it is very important , despite all these differences and differing cultures , that the stress test and the safety investigation with the highest safety standards should be introduced and accepted by all the Member States .
It is a small but decisive common denominator which will ensure the highest possible levels of safety for countries with and without nuclear power .
Some speakers have mentioned the fact that the authorities should be independent .
We have public control and supervision in a wide range of areas of life , including health , safety , road transport , energy , industry and other fields .
I would like to express my fundamental confidence in the system of public supervision .
Mrs Harms , you have made sweeping statements referring to the old boys ' network and suggested that the national nuclear regulatory bodies are not fulfilling their statutory tasks .
I believe that this is a serious accusation which implies a lack of trust in your fellow Member Mr Trittin who , as German Federal Environment Minister , was responsible for this regulatory body in Germany for seven years .
I have fundamental confidence in these bodies and we have the task of working with them .
Before the decision is made , I will be presenting you with a draft of the stress test and the test criteria in May in a way which is completely transparent .
I will be interested to hear your suggestions on where the draft can be improved , added to or tightened up , with the aim of starting a process which will ultimately lead to broad acceptance among all the Member States and a high level of control .
This stress test which we have been commissioned to develop by the Heads of State or Government is the first common European procedure for ensuring the highest safety standards in all 143 nuclear power plants .
This is an innovation and a development which should win the support of Parliament and not be met with criticism and mistrust right from the start .
My final point is that I inherited the Nuclear Safety Directive of June 2009 , which must be transposed into national law by July of this year .
I can say to you quite honestly that I feel that it does not have sufficient substance because it focuses primarily on implementing formal regulations , defining powers and specifying the requirements for supervisory bodies ; in my view , it does not have enough core content .
Therefore , in the second half of the year , while the safety investigation is going on , I would like to discuss with you , in line with the European Council 's requirements , the issue of how we can carry out an early , rapid revision of this safety directive and establish concrete requirements for the safety of nuclear energy at a European level .
( Applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this debate has been most instructive .
Thank you very much , I have been following it with keen attention .
The Hungarian Presidency began this half-year with great ambitions in the area of energy policy .
One ambition we did not have was to settle the issue of the energy mix .
I believe that today 's debate , too , has shown that this would not be a realistic goal .
A multitude of arguments have been made for and against having some form of guidance regarding the energy mix in the European Union .
I believe that we will not be able to settle this within the foreseeable future , but I am not sure if that is a problem ; as such , the Member States must be able to make responsible decisions regarding their own energy mix .
We did , however , have ambitions to make significant progress in the creation of a common energy market .
The European Council of 4 February 2011 set this as its objective , as well as the elimination of energy islands within the European Union by 2015 , and subsequently , at the Energy Council at the end of February , we were also able to adopt conclusions , which I believe is a major step forward .
To our knowledge , the Commission will publish the Energy Roadmap 2050 in November .
The energy ministers , however , will already hold a preliminary debate on this subject and the related goals at the informal Energy Council on 2 and 3 May in Budapest , and the Presidency will prepare a report and a political summary of this , which will be on the agenda of the formal Energy Council meeting in June .
I am certain that these questions , which have been raised now in this hall , will also come up during the Council debates , and I also trust that once the Hungarian Presidency summarises that debate , the Commission will be able to build upon it when finalising the Energy Roadmap it will publish in November .
However , the fact that the Member States have a maximum commitment to both the issue of nuclear energy safety and having a common European framework is best demonstrated by the conclusions of the European Council of 24 to 25 March .
These conclusions stress that we must draw lessons from the disaster in Japan , and that we must review the safety condition of the EU 's nuclear power plants and conduct the stress tests .
ENSREG and the Commission have been requested to do so as soon as possible , and to make a proposal regarding the competence and modalities of these , so that a general assessment can be prepared subsequently and published by the Commission on the basis of the assessments of these independent authorities .
Finally , the European Council itself will also address the topic again at the last European Council meeting of 2011 .
The Heads of State or Government also stressed that nuclear safety must not be limited to the territory of the European Union , and that we will also ask our neighbours to take these stress tests .
They also stated that the highest possible standards are needed in the area of nuclear safety , and that the European Council has set out serious tasks for the Commission , which - as I am certain , and as the Commissioner has also mentioned - it will carry out with the utmost commitment .
And so , as intense as today 's debate may have been , there have been common points on which , I believe , we are all in agreement : there should be a common European framework , we should do everything at every level to ensure the highest possible level of safety , and we should do all this in a transparent manner , ensuring maximum publicity .
The Council is ready to cooperate with both the European Council and the European Parliament along these principles .
I have received six motions for resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
There is a significant nuclear threat to Ireland from nuclear stations , some working and some closed , on the west coast of Britain .
Sellafield is the most famous .
Those stations are an understandable cause of concern to the people of Ireland , who have a right to be given accurate and up-to-date information about them .
Although there is a bilateral agreement on sharing information in case of a nuclear incident in place between Ireland and Britain , Ireland and other neighbouring countries must be involved earlier in the security process .
The EU must carry out a major review of the approach to nuclear safety it has in place and of the criteria used to evaluate the safety of stations .
Comprehensive , independent and transparent stress tests must begin immediately .
Stress tests on nuclear facilities represent a step forward .
To get the best from them , detailed results must be shared with neighbouring countries and with the European Commission to enable appropriate measures to be put in place and safety plans implemented , in order to protect the people of Europe .
in writing . - ( RO ) Safety regulations in the nuclear industry must be reviewed against the background of the Fukushima nuclear disaster .
We are talking about more than 400 nuclear reactors worldwide .
I welcome the introduction of ' stress tests ' as soon as possible .
However , this measure is not enough - a nuclear safety culture is required .
I should mention at this point the Chernobyl accident in 1986 , which introduced the concept of ' nuclear safety ' .
As regards Romania , I should point out that there is no risk of an earthquake jeopardising the operation of the Cernavodă nuclear power plant .
The preventive inspections carried out showed that both reactors are operating safely .
They generate approximately 20 % of the country 's energy consumption .
The plant can withstand earthquakes with a magnitude of 8 on the Richter scale , while the earthquakes which can occur in Romania have an average magnitude of between 7 and 7.5 .
The tragedy of Fukushima has taken us , in a very painful manner , into a new era in terms of the use of nuclear energy .
At the same time , both the energy challenges of the 21st century and the hazards caused by the age and increasing unreliability of numerous nuclear power plants have caused a change and , as a result , the Euratom Treaty , which has basically not been amended for over half a century , needs to be reviewed .
If there is to be full supervision at European level of a sector characterised by a lack of transparency , Euratom would need to be incorporated into the European Union and nuclear safety issues would need to be brought within the normal legislative procedure .
As part of the review , stricter safety specifications , restrictions ( such as earthquake zones ) and strict construction specifications for new nuclear plants could be added , together with regular , reliable stress testing of existing plants .
It goes without saying that the new strict framework would need to be applied by countries neighbouring the EU until such time , of course , as we manage to break free , once and for all , from the nightmare of nuclear power plants .
in writing . - I am opposed to nuclear fission power on the principle of safety , while I support ongoing research into the potential of nuclear fusion as a possible safer alternative in the longer term .
There is no safe way .
There will always be accidents .
The recent nuclear accident in Japan , which we were told could never happen , demonstrates yet again that current nuclear energy production is potentially catastrophic .
Its by-product , radioactive waste , is already a lethal threat to human health , effectively for ever .
Rather than investing billions of euro in new nuclear plants , we need to invest that money in developing renewable energy sources .
As a result of the Japanese experience , several countries will probably re-think their nuclear energy strategies .
Germany has already taken concrete steps and has shut down its nuclear power plants built prior to 1980 for three months .
Should multiple Member States across Europe re-think their nuclear energy strategies as a result of the events in Japan , this could have a considerable influence on European energy markets , as the power generated by the nuclear power plants would have to be substituted from other sources .
I am convinced that , in the current situation , hasty measures could have the same harmful effects as a potential disaster .
Instead , it would be most expedient to prudently take account of the effects of the individual scenarios .
Only by doing so can we prevent an increase in electricity prices similar to the consequences of the aforementioned German measures , and prevent Member States that are electricity exporters under normal circumstances from also being faced with challenges of supply security .
Europe must think through with a clear head the effects that a re-thinking of nuclear energy strategy would have on the energy market .
It is also unclear what technologies could be suitable for replacing nuclear power plant capacities .
A further important question is what effects a possible strategic shift would have on the gas markets , gas supply security and the EU 's carbon dioxide emission reduction targets .
Finally , I welcome the quick reaction of the European Commission and the announcement that European nuclear power plants will be subjected to stress tests .
The most important question , however , is what further measures Europe plans in order to guarantee the safety of nuclear energy production .
in writing . - ( BG ) The Fukushima tragedy forces us to learn lessons and immediately adopt the measures expected by European citizens .
However , these measures should be targeted in the right direction .
The basic problem which we need to tackle is how to guarantee European citizens ' safety .
In the coming months , the European Parliament will be dealing with a number of legislative texts which will determine the future of the energy sector in Europe , and of nuclear energy in particular .
At the moment , safety is our top priority .
We should not compare Europe 's power plants with the 40-year-old Fukushima nuclear power plant whose private owner has refused to fulfil the requirements for increasing safety .
The EU must adopt as soon as possible the minimum safety standards to be made mandatory for all power plants .
These standards should be drawn up and adopted prior to the stress tests being carried out at the power plants .
During its term of government , the Bulgarian Socialist Party insisted on several occasions on such standards being established , but this has not happened so far .
Both the standards and criteria for the stress tests must be drawn up by the specialists from the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group .
I support the development of new technologies and especially renewable energy sources .
However , it is patently clear that they are unable to replace the nuclear facilities in the short and medium term .
Another lesson from the accident at the Fukushima 1 nuclear plant is that it is dangerous to entrust power generation fully to the private sector .
Private capital maximises profits , even at the cost of neglecting safety measures .
How many global economic crises , ' Gulf of Mexico oil spills ' or ' Fukushimas ' will it take before we finally acknowledge this ?
The world is now in a financial crisis due to the irresponsibility of private investors .
There are millions of tonnes of oil in the sea due to the irresponsibility of private oil firms .
Due to the irresponsibility of a private firm , Japan will take decades to sort out the radioactive contamination of its land , sea and food chain .
Nuclear energy should always be under state and international control .
Planned stress tests must have uniform standards , transparent and independent control bodies and a cross-border nature .
Although , in Europe , there is a legal framework initiating constant improvements in the technology , there will be a need to invest extensively in research and training , in order to guarantee the highest possible level of safety and the protection of health and the environment , in line with the latest scientific and technical findings .
Extensive investments will also be necessary in the area of managing nuclear waste and spent fuel , which are currently stored in more-or-less temporary conditions .
The lessons from this disaster must be directed decisively towards ensuring safety , and not towards closing down the only truly sustainable , climate neutral energy source available to us .
in writing . - The nuclear accident in Japan has raised fresh concerns about the safety of nuclear power across the globe .
In Romania , the nuclear power plant at Cernavodă has been assessed by various bodies , including the European Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency .
A study in 2004 identified seismic hazard as being the single biggest risk factor for safety at the plant .
This risk must be managed effectively and , as the tragic events in Japan remind us , as a matter of urgency .
I therefore welcome the recent proposal to introduce stress tests for nuclear installations , as well as the entry into force of the directive on nuclear safety .
Regardless of what we decide about the future energy mix and how we meet our low carbon objectives , the safety of nuclear facilities , including long-term depositories , will continue to be of the upmost importance for both current and future generations .
Nuclear energy is a resource which the global economy cannot do without in the long term .
We must not come to the conclusion of rejecting nuclear energy just because dangerous accidents occur affecting the operation of nuclear power plants .
The solution is for us to assign more resources to research in this area and to improve nuclear technology so that we can reduce the risks caused by accidents .
Yes , we must phase out nuclear power - that is clear .
However , it is impossible to do this overnight .
In Belgium alone , 55 % of our electricity comes from nuclear energy .
How would we heat , feed and provide light for ourselves if we decided to close all our power stations tomorrow ?
That is why we must act on two levels .
Firstly , we must increase the safety standards of the existing power stations , in particular , using the stress tests that are currently carried out in the Member States .
As well as the essential harmonisation of these tests at European level , we must be as transparent as possible with the population .
We must restore confidence in our nuclear power .
Secondly , we must intensify our research and innovation to develop solutions as quickly as possible that will allow us to save energy and to promote sustainable and effective renewable energies .
The least expensive , least polluting and least dangerous energy is unconsumed energy .
These efforts make it necessary , from today , to have a binding regulation and massive investments at European level and in the Member States .
Situation in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen
The next item is the debate on the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Mrs Ashton , on the situation in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen .
The President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Németh , will speak on behalf of Mrs Ashton .
on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , I am here today to present to you some remarks on behalf of the High Representative , Catherine Ashton , on the situation in Bahrain , Syria and Yemen .
Events have recently taken a dramatic turn in Syria .
In Yemen , an already dire situation may well get worse and the very tense atmosphere which now prevails in Bahrain is of serious concern , even if the bloodshed there has been less .
The EU has been following the rapidly unfolding events in the entire region very attentively , as confirmed by numerous high-level meetings , formal statements and Council conclusions .
More than this , Baroness Ashton has been maintaining constant contact with key partners , as well as with key players in the countries themselves .
This is being done every day directly by phone or through her representatives in the countries in question , in order to bring the EU 's influence to bear wherever this is possible and whenever it can help .
Every country 's situation is unique and demands a strategic , carefully thought-out , well-tailored reaction .
But when events move so fast , it is all the more crucial to build sound policy on solid fundamental principles .
Let me cite three principles : first , the rejection of violence - mass protests must always be dealt with peacefully and with full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms ; secondly , the promotion of dialogue - differences and grievances must be addressed in a constructive manner by the right people being ready to talk to each other , setting aside prejudices and preconditions ; thirdly , fundamental political and economic reforms must come from within the countries , and the EU has made it very clear that it is ready to provide prompt support as and when requested .
Allow me now to move more specifically to the three countries before us .
In Bahrain , in spite of some return to normality on the streets , the situation remains tense .
Arrests are continuing , with individuals being seized for having apparently done no more than exercise their right to freedom of expression .
Just as elsewhere in the region , the EU and the High Representative herself have condemned the violence in Bahrain outright and called on the authorities and all forces present to respect fully human rights and fundamental freedoms as well as international humanitarian standards .
We have also repeatedly urged the Bahraini authorities and the opposition to start a genuine national dialogue .
The High Representative has spoken with the Foreign Minister directly to this end .
Without concrete steps to get all the right people to talk to each other without exclusions and without preconditions , there is an increasing risk that radical elements will prevail .
This would have clear and worrying implications for regional stability .
The best way to preserve and promote stability remains dialogue .
This is the message that the High Representative will be taking with her when she meets the ministers of the Gulf Cooperation Council very shortly this month .
In Syria , popular protests have spread over a number of cities since mid-March .
The brutal repression with which they have been met is unacceptable .
The High Representative and the European Union have made numerous calls on the Syrian authorities to stop the violence , respect people 's right to demonstrate peacefully and to listen to their legitimate aspirations .
The Syrian people deserve long-awaited political reforms , notably in relation to freedom of expression , assembly , political participation and governance .
President Assad 's address to the nation on 30 March provided for neither a clear programme for reform nor a timetable for its implementation .
The EU will continue to press Syria on delivering reforms without delay .
They must be real , political as well as socio-economic , serious - not just cosmetic - and to be implemented without further delay .
We will be monitoring very closely how the new government , still to be formed , will take reforms forward .
We hope that the formation of a legal committee will result in the drawing up of new legislation to allow for the lifting of the state of emergency and guarantee human rights and fundamental freedoms .
At the same time , the EU will continue to press the Syrian leadership in public and private to refrain from using force against demonstrators .
Equally important is to convey that those responsible for the violence and the fatalities must be held accountable and that all political prisoners and human rights defenders must be released .
In Yemen , the situation remains of the utmost concern .
The High Representative 's messages , following the deplorable violence on 18 March , were crystal clear and the Foreign Affairs Council 's conclusions on 21 March reiterated the EU 's condemnation of the use of force against protesters .
The EU also stated unequivocally that those responsible for loss of life and injuries should be held accountable for their actions and brought to justice .
Since then , the messages coming from the Yemeni leadership have been less clear .
For this reason , the High Representative called President Saleh directly on the phone on 30 March urging him to do everything possible to avert further bloodshed .
She stated her view that the best way to ensure this is for a credible and rapid political transition to begin without delay .
That constitutional transition should be founded on substantive and consistent commitments which are properly followed through .
Time is running out and the victims will be the Yemeni people .
This is why , in close concert with international partners , the EU has been , and will remain , very actively involved in trying to defuse the crisis in Yemen .

While Mr Brok is seated next to Mr Salafranca , I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate him on his team 's success yesterday .
He is wearing the scarf of Schalke 04 , a team that achieved a glorious victory , but with the help of one of the best players in the world , the Spaniard , Raúl .
Now we have congratulated Mr Brok , Mr Salafranca has the floor on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for one and a half minutes .
Mr President , I entirely agree with what you have just said .
Mr Németh , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that we have been continuously following the flow of information provided by the High Representative , Mrs Ashton , on the developments in these countries and I think we should recognise the efforts she is making on behalf of the European Union in support of the democratic aspirations in Bahrain , Yemen and Syria .
Tomorrow , Parliament will adopt a resolution supported by all the political groups in this regard .
However I would like to put forward a couple of questions , Mr President , and would ask Mr Németh to pass them on to Mrs Ashton .
First of all , in some bodies of the Union and , of course , in this Parliament , there is the feeling that we are taking a step back in the development of the Common Security and Defence Policy , and that we are being taken back to the times of political cooperation .
Obviously , that is not why we established the Treaty of Lisbon .
Secondly , a contradiction has arisen , related to the growing need for a European presence in those countries , with no knowledge of what will be the end result of these transitional processes .
It is clear that we have to be present , and it is also clear that the slogan used in Mrs Ashton 's communication is very wise : ' more for more '
However , the question I wish to ask - and I shall conclude now , Mr President - is whether the EU Member States are willing to increase resources to meet the growing needs that are emerging in those countries .
Mr President , we are very aware of the intense diplomatic efforts that Mrs Ashton has deployed , and that she continues to deploy , and we are aware , too , of the difficulties of the situations that she is encountering .
Indeed , Syria , Yemen and Bahrain are countries with which we have no agreements besides trade agreements , which do not , for example , contain clauses on human rights , and we have very few levers available to us .
Nevertheless , in spite of that , I would like to say three things .
First of all , in relation to the inspirations of the people , in relation to those who are in the streets today , under fire from snipers , we must not only stand behind them , but we must also make sure that there is an end to violence at all costs .
Today , I saw a Syrian dissident .
What these dissidents are calling for , in the end , is an end to violence so that they can express themselves .
On this topic , I would like to say that , even if we do not have an agreement with Syria , we should now make use of the entire arsenal of sanctions available to us , if necessary , to end this violence .
The second thing that I wanted to say is that in general , these are countries - and this is true of the Gulf countries as well as Libya - that we have armed , indeed overarmed .
I think a minimum requirement is better arms controls , so that these countries and these governments do not become powder kegs which then turn against their populations .
Finally , there is the question of double standards .
I would like to say that we have been very prudent in relation to Bahrain , and we have been very firm in relation to other countries .
I know that Bahrain is a particularly sensitive situation , that Saudi Arabia has sent troops there , and that Saudi Arabia and the Gulf Cooperation Council are helping us against Libya , but we would not want to trade the price of a barrel of oil and of the support for us against the Libyan Government for the price of silence regarding the Shi 'ites who are currently being repressed by the government of Bahrain .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I am angry .
At our group meeting yesterday , we heard from three witnesses from Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International who were present in Bahrain , Yemen and Syria .
Their stories were appalling .
It made me angry .
The letter we received from Baroness Ashton is no strategy .
Once again , it is another agenda .
We should stop sending empty messages , as we have done for too long with Tunisia , Egypt and Libya .
It is time to take action .
Firstly , the EU should call for a special session of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva .
The UN should send a mission to the three countries in order to hold the regimes accountable for human rights violations .
Secondly , the EU should call for a ban on arms exports from all EU Member States to those three countries .
It is unacceptable that EU countries are still selling arms to these regimes .
Thirdly , the EU should make clear that , if political regimes in those countries constitute an obstacle to democratisation , it is time for them to go .
Meanwhile , we should introduce sanctions such as freezing assets and a travel ban .
I repeat that it is time to take action .
Mr President , it is very good news that populations are moving to reclaim their freedoms and rights , and to obtain a change of the political regime and more democracy .
This is at the heart of the European Union 's foreign policy and of the European project .
That can only evoke our enthusiasm and our support .
The very bad news , however , is that these populations are suffering an extremely tough repression , demonstrating these values and aspirations while putting their lives at risk , and that is totally unacceptable .
Thus , the imperative of protecting the populations , which has led to military action in Libya , must now take other forms to protect those who are demonstrating in these three countries .
I think that the statements are extremely important - the legitimate statements , the aspirations held by these populations - but we also need action .
As part of this action , we need an assurance that all those leaders responsible for using disproportionate force against their populations will not go unpunished .
In order to do that , the diplomatic convocation and activation of the Member States of the United Nations Human Rights Council must be in full swing in order to get missions , reports and resolutions so that the politicians responsible get an assurance that these acts of violence will not remain unpunished .
Finally , I think that we certainly do have methods for bypassing the ' blackout ' of the press .
Journalists , whether national or foreign , are facing considerable difficulties in documenting the situation .
We know what to do ; we have instruments for bypassing these obstacles .
We absolutely must make use of them .
Then , when we have the means to act , I think that we must find a way of using them .
Clearly , this is not the time to chase the Syrian President to get his signature on a readmission agreement , which could , in any case , only be envisaged under certain conditions , including a very serious , effective and relevant programme , the implementation of reforms in Syria and the freeing of all prisoners of conscience and peaceful demonstrators , not just here , but also in the other two countries .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I would like to say this to the Minister : as I sat here listening to your statement , I heard what you had to say , but it was mere words - sometimes very sweet words , but unfortunately empty words .
It was all reactionary ; there was nothing proactive in what you put before us .
As I listened , I actually wrote the heading ' Plan ' on a sheet of paper , where I intended to make notes of the information you would give us about what the EU was going to do .
I still have before me a completely blank sheet .
You had nothing to contribute today .
There was nothing proactive in the agenda you outlined .
People throughout the Middle East are looking to Europe to come forward and help them to gain their rights , and all you have for them is empty words .
In the last action plan that was put forward , there was a core element missing throughout , and there was much press debate about the fact that Middle Eastern leaders are still able to take money from their populations and bring it into Europe , and we are doing nothing to prevent that from happening in the future .
You yourself said that time is running out .
If that is the case , and I believe it to be the case , then why have you come forward with nothing but a blank sheet for us today ?
Please have more respect for this House .
Mr President , we are with the people of Yemen , Syria and Bahrain in their aspirations to freedom and democracy , and in the bloody repression of the demonstrations and popular protests .
Therefore , we must be clear .
Firstly , I call for us to please stop the sale of arms to these countries immediately .
Europe continues to sell arms that are being used to kill civilians .
Secondly , we should be on the side of the people , not of authoritarian or dictatorial regimes .
Having said that , in our solidarity , we should not forget that we are still applying double standards , with one set of rules for addressing peoples ' democratic aspirations , and another for taking care of and conducting business .
In Libya , the bombing has clearly gone beyond the mandate of the UN itself , while in Bahrain , we did nothing more than protest when the Saudi Arabian army entered the country in order to save a kleptocracy .
While young people are doing whatever it takes against armies and police , putting heart and soul into confronting these forces , we limit ourselves to writing diplomatic notes .
I would like to finish , Mr President , by saying that it is as wrong to think that there are military solutions to political problems as it is for us to think that the Arab peoples have still not noticed our duplicity .
Mr President , radical regime change , in the sense of the seizure of power by radical Islamic forces in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen , would be tantamount to outright disaster , both domestically and internationally .
The real winner in this unforeseen situation , at least in the Arabian Peninsula , would certainly be the Iranian ruling duo , Khamenei-Ahmadinejad , and this would put paid to the already small chance of a Persian spring for the time being .
By the way , the crisis situation in Damascus , Manamah and Sana 'a has offered the EU an excellent opportunity to impose , in close coordination with the United States , clear conditions for our continued backing of these regimes which are in dire straits : political and socio-economic reforms .
Mr President , a few years ago , we visited Syria with an EP delegation .
Since 2003 , this state , the only secular one in the region , has provided shelter to hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Christians , which should serve as a warning sign .
Let the west make every effort to ensure that the extremely bloody sectarian civil war in Iraq does not spill over into Syria .
( DE ) Mr President , the jasmine revolution which started in Tunisia is unfortunately not taking such a peaceful path in Yemen , Syria and Bahrain .
A dialogue between the government and the opposition is definitely the best way of agreeing on an active solution to social and economic problems , which is what is wanted by the people , and a move towards more democratic participation .
Whether agreements of this kind will then be kept is another question altogether .
After all , the wave of protests was triggered by broken promises of political reform .
The people have been put off with promises for too long and now action is needed .
The dual strategy of violently suppressing opposition demonstrations and , at the same time , promising a few small reforms without introducing any real political change could lead to an escalation of the situation in all three countries , as we are aware .
The ongoing unrest in Syria gives rise to the concern that arms bought by the government could be sold on to terrorist organisations , such as Hezbollah .
In my opinion , the EU should play the role of impartial mediator in these conflicts .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the match is not won until after the second game , so let us wait for the return leg between Inter Milan and Schalke 04 to see who will go through to the next round .
Meanwhile , I agree that Raul is a great footballer .
What is happening in Syria , Yemen and Bahrain is not dissimilar from what is happening in other parts of the world .
Though economic reasons are usually the cause of such upheavals , in all cases , there is a deep longing for freedom .
Facebook and the Internet have broken the isolation of many , too many , fake democracies which have long lingered in many regions of the world .
There is a new leadership , a new idea of politics which reflects the dreams of many young people .
There is a desire for citizenship , especially where the youth of the world are more aware and educated .
A few days ago , the dissident , Suhayr al-Atassi , was released and this is a signal , though slight , which points to the development of freedom of thought and political freedom .
The same excitement is felt in Yemen , where protests against President Saleh mount , and much the same in Bahrain .
We must act with force to stop this violence .
The journey to democratisation must be assisted ; we cannot allow ourselves , once again , to lag behind .
What is happening in the Mediterranean is surely a difficult signal to understand , which is why Europe must speak up and act with solidarity which would , at this time , probably help the regions exposed to increased migration pressures in the Mediterranean .
Mr President , whether it is the coordinated sniper attack or the protest camp in Sana 'a , Yemen on 15 March , the crackdown on the protests by 100 000 people in Dara , Syria , on 17 March , or the sixth floor of Salmaniya Hospital , Bahrain , where injured protestors are taken by men in balaclavas wielding guns , never to return , and where the injured are forced to go because it has the only blood bank in the country , we have to show that , while the media may only concentrate on one country at a time , this Parliament will stand up for human rights everywhere where they are under threat .
Today , we must call on the Foreign Affairs Council to seek clear accountability for all those responsible for the violence , independent investigations and no impunity .
This is the basic warning to prevent further violence against protestors now .
Secondly , when we hear that Bahraini security forces have fired supposedly non-lethal pellets , at a distance of less than one metre , killing protestors by literally splitting their heads in half , we have to suspend the authorisation , supply and transfer of all arms in the region .
Finally , the principles of Commissioner Füle 's communication on the southern neighbourhood must inform our approach to the process of seeking an association agreement with Syria .
That has to start by our insisting on unhindered access for international human rights monitors now .
The Arab world has changed with the Jasmine Revolution and we have to show that we have changed with it .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , spring has arrived in the Mediterranean , but in the Gulf and in Syria , winter still reigns .
The images of violence which we are seeing are horrifying .
Several hundred people have been killed and Amnesty International and the United Nations have produced alarming reports .
The calls which the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe are making are clear .
We want a special session of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva to be held as quickly as possible .
The Council of Europe and the Member States of the European Union which are represented on the UN Human Rights Council should take up this call .
The UN Council is always very quick to act when it comes to taking one side in the Middle East conflict .
It is now time for it to face the real challenge presented by these extreme violations of human rights .
We need reform , we need a move to democracy , and we need an arms embargo .
All of these things have already been mentioned here .
I watched the speech made by President Assad of Syria live .
This is a medieval-style dictatorship which uses western PR agencies to present its representatives as pseudo-modernising influences in glossy magazines .
The agencies and the magazines should be asking themselves whether this is really the right thing to do .
Now to Yemen .
This is where there is , in my opinion , the greatest danger : the risk of a split between north and south , an active al-Qaeda cell and the danger of a failed state .
We already have a failed state of this kind in the case of Somalia and our Atalanta mission is in operation in the Gulf of Aden .
Europe has a direct interest in the area and we need to hear more than what the representative of the Council has said here today .
( NL ) Mr President , to be honest , I must admit that my reaction was one of astonishment when I noted the three principles which the minister was putting forward : the rejection of violence , the promotion of dialogue to patch up some of the differences of opinion and address some of the grievances and , of course , the necessary political reforms .
Now , merely calling for dialogue at the moment will really make no difference , nor is it really credible .
I think that the European Union should really take much stronger action to bring about those democratic reforms .
We hear that the High Representative has a great number of official contacts , but what is she doing to maintain contact with civil society ; what is she doing to listen to them ?
The previous speakers have said it already : the European Union must stop supplying weapons to the region immediately .
When I see that , for example , more than EUR 100 million worth of weapons were supplied to Yemen alone last year by no fewer than eight European countries , I wonder if the European common position on arms exports actually means anything at all .
Should we not be taking urgent action on this ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I refer to Bahrain .
This little country lies in a strategic position in terms of the balance of the Gulf and energy supply distribution .
The presence of a major oil refinery for Saudi crude is well known .
I would like to draw your attention to one aspect of this situation which seems particularly worrying to me .
Reliable sources have identified Iranian influence on the Shi 'ite population of Bahrain .
This is in addition to the legitimate aspirations for more substantial reforms in the government of that country .
It is difficult to determine how much weight outside influence has had on the recent events in Bahrain , but there is a risk of destabilisation of the region that could extend to eastern regions of Saudi Arabia , home to another large group of Shi 'ites .
Iran funds Hamas , supports Hezbollah in Lebanon and influences the internal politics of Iraq , where Shi 'ite Islam is the predominant component of the government .
If the disruption of balance spread to the Gulf , the impact would be obvious and there could be global repercussions .
We must be very careful in assessing what happens in the Middle East and distinguish the legitimate aspirations of peoples for greater democracy from external influences which have strategic ambitions in the area .
( NL ) Mr President , we are talking today about three very different countries with very specific local conditions .
In Yemen , the uprising has reached mass proportions , despite brutal violence on the part of the police and the army .
In Bahrain , there is a serious risk that the whole region might become destabilised because of the involvement of Saudi Arabia and Iran .
Finally , in Syria , the opposition has virtually no room for manoeuvre and the regime seems prepared to go to any lengths to put down the protests .
On the basis of those specific circumstances , I believe that the EU should conduct bilateral relations with these countries .
There are a couple of principles which need to be upheld .
Obviously , every citizen has a right to demonstrate and to freely express his or her opinion .
However , what should we do about peaceful protests , where those very citizens simultaneously become victims of repression , because of police and army intervention ?
Are we going to investigate this internationally ?
What is the EU doing to promote that investigation ?
Secondly , there is an obligation on governments to engage in dialogue with the opposition and with civil society organisations , because violence and oppression are never the solution .
What is the EU doing specifically to foster this dialogue ?
And if , after that , the regimes in Syria and Bahrain , and also in Yemen , are still unable or unwilling to listen to their people , what will be the consequences of that in terms of our relations with those countries ?
Mr President , we need to offer concrete help , as has been said many times , but that concrete help must also have real substance .
How are we going to achieve that ?
I would have liked to have heard a plan today of how we are going to go about this .
I would just like to address a comment to the Commissioner .
I think that , in the specific case of Syria , and Turkey too , we should call for pressure to be applied , amongst other means , as part of the plans which are apparently going to be put together over the coming days .
One final comment .
I think that our delegation for relations with the Mashreq countries could do some excellent work here and that we should do everything to enable them to do so .
( PT ) Mr President , the EU must be consistent in its statements and actions on the popular uprisings in Yemen , Syria , Bahrain and the other countries of the Arab world .
More than its credibility is at stake : there is also the effectiveness of the message it is sending to the dictatorships that are the targets of the protests , along with the men and women who are risking their likes to take to the streets to call for human rights , justice and democracy .
The EU has been dismayingly ambiguous regarding Bahrain , in particular .
This is a reflection of the contradictions of a foreign policy with double standards , which is concerned with oil and the supply of weapons by the Member States , not only to Bahrain , but also to Saudi Arabia , in violation of the common position on the export of military equipment .
Parliament is calling for an immediate halt to the sale of weapons , and the High Representative is calling - loud and clear - for the Bahraini authorities to account for those who have been killed or gone missing in the repression of the peaceful protests , and to stop the blackout measures being imposed on the media immediately .
Mr President , last night , I helped to organise a hearing of experts from the region who told us that in Bahrain , the deaths so far at the hands of the security forces have been at least 23 ; in Syria , 132 ; and in Yemen , at least 63 .
It may be asked : what can the EU do ?
Well , our resolution which will be adopted tomorrow makes some suggestions .
However , I have to say that in previous months , the European Parliament has passed resolutions on Tunisia , Egypt and Libya , and my office has made a comparison between those resolutions and the actions of the Commission , its blueprint for change , and it does not give me much courage .
We are wasting our words here unless the Commission listens to us and unless the Council listens .
So , as I say , I am publishing this analysis on my website .
I believe that the Lisbon Treaty gave the European Parliament additional responsibilities .
We must be taken seriously by the other elements in the foreign policy of the European Union .
Especially at a time of massive change in the Arab world , we all need to work together .
Mr President , Syria , Bahrain and Yemen are three tyrannies being challenged by their own citizens and these citizens deserve our unconditional support .
Until this moment , the EU 's action vis-à-vis the wave of democratisation in the region has been uncertain and lacking in strength and credibility .
If we want to increase both , we should start first of all to eliminate the double standards we used in the past .
We supported these autocracies in several ways and we , the Europeans , along with Russia and the United States , sold them almost any sort of armaments .
Now we are lamenting the consequences of our arms trade with the Gulf autocracies in terms of casualties , in terms of innocent victims of the weapons we sold to them .
If we want to be credible , we should cancel all contracts in armaments to these countries and to the Gulf Cooperation Council , and ask for the establishment of an arms embargo in all of the North Africa and Middle East region .
The reduction of their military budget will be a dividend to invest in a fund for democratic transition .
( ES ) Mr President , the historic and irreversible move towards democracy in the Arab countries did not end with the still-fragile transitions in Egypt and Tunisia , nor with the support , also historic , of the international community for the activation of the principle of responsibility to protect the Libyan population .
The change is now continuing in Syria , Yemen and Bahrain , and the European Union must be present ; it must learn from what has gone before and take on the leadership of the international response , through far-reaching measures , Commissioner Füle , such as the well-defined European Neighbourhood Policy , and through concrete and immediate measures so that the population of these countries as well as the citizens of Europe know that there is no rift in the European Union 's commitment to freedom , dignity , democracy and human rights .
The authorities in Syria , Yemen and Bahrain should remember that the use of violence by the state against the people has immediate repercussions ; they must also realise that it is not enough to make superficial changes in their autocratic governments .
Instead , they must initiate an immediate dialogue with the opposition movements and civil society ; release political prisoners , journalists and human rights defenders at once ; and end the state of emergency immediately .
Mr President , we should not turn a blind eye to blatant human rights violations taking place in the three countries .
The situation in Syria is very serious and its stakes the highest .
In Syria , teachers , opposition activists , journalists and bloggers are being targeted .
There are many people killed ; many detained ; foreign journalists have been kicked out of the country ; an information blockade is in place ; no independent press at all .
So we should consider sanctions against Syria .
We should also consider policy actions in Yemen and Bahrain .
As for Yemen , we have a standing agreement on arms exports ; we should consider suspending this agreement .
As we debate the situation in those three countries : firstly , let us call for accountability ; secondly let us have special sessions in the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I lived in Bahrain for three years , from 1987 to 1990 .
Then , it was considered one of the most democratic countries of the Gulf and has been considered so even in recent years .
So one must say , imagine what happens in other countries given that Saudi Arabia performs a few hundred executions a year , given that terrible massacres take place in Iran , given that throughout the Gulf , killings are commonplace and there is complete denial of the rights of the press .
Today , we approved the resolution on Syria , Yemen and Bahrain , but when we will prepare a resolution for Saudi Arabia , for Algeria , for China and for the other countries which violate human rights in the world ?
The problem is that here in the West , I see a strange thing , on the one hand ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , what role must Europe play in countries whose regimes are being confronted by the people , but whose leaders remain deaf to repeated calls for more democracy , real structural reforms and fairer development ?
That is the question being put to us .
For me , there is an initial response .
It is an urgent one .
The Union must flex its muscles by using the entire arsenal of sanctions available to it to put a stop to the repression and to obtain the immediate release of political prisoners and journalists .
It must support the introduction of an independent commission for an inquiry into the acts committed and call for a special session of the Human Rights Council .
In the medium term , I think that we must look again in depth at our relations with these countries .
The European Union must , from now on , show that it is firmly on the side of public opinion , on the side of the people and not of those in power .
To this end , the Union must establish and conduct a permanent dialogue with all the forces of civil society , with all those who want to support democracy as well as the leaders of the opposition movements .
This is , therefore , a profound change ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , we have heard that Parliament is now very serious about tackling the serious human rights violations in the three countries : Bahrain , Yemen and Syria .
We need to hear from the European External Action Service , we need to hear from the Commission how we can show that we are no longer working on the basis of double standards .
We have been told about very many concrete measures .
We need to hear how the operations in the UN Human Rights Council are proceeding .
Is the European Union united in the call for special sessions on Syria , Bahrain and Yemen ?
We have heard that it is time to stop exporting weapons to these countries .
We cannot wait , so please , what are the European External Action Service and the Commission going to do about these things now ?
Mr President , in Syria , security forces have brutally responded to demonstrations about legitimate grievances with lethal force .
President Assad 's belligerence and his rhetoric towards Israel , our ally , his support for terrorists such as Hezbollah , and his friendship with Iran , all mark him out , in my view , as a dangerous autocrat .
In contrast , Bahrain is a relatively modern and progressive constitutional monarchy .
Unfortunately , Shi 'ite extremists , inspired and supported by Iran , continue to stoke sectarian tensions and spread propaganda against the government and the king .
The king has made patient efforts to listen to protestors ' concerns and enter into dialogue , but , of course , we must condemn all deaths of unarmed protestors .
Finally , it seems in Yemen that President Saleh , by his use of disproportionate force , has alienated his principal backers , including the United States , despite his firm action over many years to root out al-Qaeda terrorists .
Withdrawing EU support from him now , without knowing what comes afterwards , is a high-risk strategy .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , we might ask what we should do to alleviate the political impasse and suffering of the people in these countries , but it presupposes three propositions .
One , that it is within our capacity to do anything ; two , that it is the proper role to do anything ; and three , that the present situation is not in any way attributable to our interference .
British military personnel are , as we speak , being handed redundancy notices - often while on active duty - by the wretched UK Government .
It would be absurd to expect the remaining servicemen to be stretched to engage in further adventures .
States make a solemn , but usually unwritten , covenant with their troops to send them into battle and risk their lives , but only when the vital interests of the nation or nationals are at stake .
We have no vital interests in these states .
There is also every reason to believe that external forces associated with the United States and its allies have a vested interest in destabilising Syria .
I have no brief for the Ba 'athist regime ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , I believe that many of the young people who live in these countries long for democracy , modernisation and freedom .
We need to take this fact into account .
We must try to win friends in these countries and not make blanket judgments .
Instead , we must identify those individuals who do not follow the rules of a modern society .
For this reason , we should try to organise exchange programmes for small and medium-sized businesses , for teachers , university professors and journalists .
Our job is to make friends in these countries .
I hope that we will soon be taking action of this kind .
Mr President , Minister , like many in this House today , I share a sense of horror at the violence and the human rights violations we have witnessed throughout the entire region .
However , I could not let this moment pass without saying - particularly to you , Minister - that your statement today on behalf of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy demonstrates most ably , and perhaps better than any of us could ever do , the nonsense of this office and the millions of euro we have spent on it .
Your message today is quite right : one of rejection of violence , one of promotion of dialogue , one of reform from within the countries concerned .
But , quite frankly , in these situations , it is all motherhood and apple pie .
We need much , much more than the odd telephone call and a statement calling for this , that or the other ; and I think that the people in the Middle East ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for the speeches .
( The speech continues in English . )
Mr President , allow me first to respond specifically to a few questions relating to Bahrain .
The question of Iranian interference in Bahrain 's domestic affairs was raised .
There is no hard evidence so far that Iran has been meddling in the Bahraini situation by provoking radicalisation .
Clearly this is a risk , and one more good reason to start a national dialogue in Bahrain as soon as possible to avoid that option .
Concerning the Saudi invasion in Bahrain , I would like to underline the fact that the six Gulf Cooperation Council states have a collective security agreement amongst themselves .
The presence of Saudi and other Gulf forces in Bahrain was requested in the framework of that agreement and was provided for by more than one GCC Member State .
This is not merely a legalistic consideration .
We have to take the regional dimension very seriously in our evaluation of developments in this region .
Concerning Yemen , I would point out that the European Union did suspend some assistance to Yemen : for example , its assistance on civilian counter-terrorism .
We thought that we needed to have a differentiated approach in this respect .
Allow me to speak now in Hungarian to respond to some questions which have been raised .
( HU ) Mr Salafranca raised the question of what the result of the transition will be .
In this regard , I would like to underline that we do not know what the result of the Arab Spring will be .
Nobody knows , and a couple of months ago , we did not even know that such a domino effect could be set in motion .
However , I believe that , for the time being , the final outcome of this Arab Spring is not set in stone .
I therefore also believe that it will depend to a very great degree on us .
This is how I would like to answer Mr Salafranca : the final outcome of this Arab Spring will depend to a very great degree on us , too .
I believe that the proposals put forward here have been very useful , and I believe that both the attending representatives of the Commission and the representatives of the Council and the External Action Service were very pleased to welcome all proposals put forward .
We are in the process of reviewing our Neighbourhood Policy , and all proposals that have been put forward here will be integrated in the review of that policy .
I therefore believe that it is a very fortunate circumstance that the Eastern Partnership summit in Budapest , which was scheduled for a few weeks from now , will not take place , because this way , we will have time to incorporate the proposals that have been put forward now into the review of the Neighbourhood Policy .
I consider it very important that this Neighbourhood Policy be unified .
This Neighbourhood Policy must cover the Eastern Dimension in the same way as the Southern one .
And only if we are able to create a unified , coherent , well-thought-out Neighbourhood Policy here , within the European Union , can we be credible in the eyes of our southern neighbours , who are paying keen attention to everything we say .
The proposals put forward here in connection with the Neighbourhood Policy - as , for example , by the last speakers here , Mrs Dodds and Mr Rübig - stressed civilian relations .
The priority treatment of civilian relations , citizen relations , and especially relations with young people , is among our Neighbourhood Policy ideas .
The creation of truly new funds and , if necessary , funds of new magnitudes , must also be a key part of this review .
At the same time , we should not forget that each aspect requires an individual approach .
There are countries where the introduction of sanctions or arms embargoes , or , in some cases , military action , has already been unavoidable .
As you know , Libya is not the only country in our southern neighbourhood where there is an armed intervention under way ; there has also been one in Côte d 'Ivoire for a few days now .
This will be a separate topic here tonight , and we are yet to talk about this .
However , I believe that these countries , where military intervention has become unavoidable due to civil war , must not be confused with the countries we are discussing now , even though these repressive countries , these authoritarian , repressive countries , are also toying with the use of violence .
However , I believe that the High Representative has sent a very strong message to these countries as regards their attitude to violence .
And the military action itself , which is taking place in Libya and Côte d 'Ivoire , must be a very strong message to these countries , to all three of these countries .
In the past few weeks , the European and international community has managed to form a very clear philosophy .
The ' right to protect ' and ' the responsibility to protect ' are new principles which have been applied by the international community recently , and which must also be a warning sign to Yemen , Bahrain and everyone , to all authoritarian regimes in the region .
What is taking place now , the military interventions , is not an analogy to Iraq , but much more to Rwanda or Kosovo , where the international community had to intervene in order to protect citizens .
I believe that the international community is sending out this message very strongly now to countries that use violence against their citizens .
Ladies and gentlemen , the honourable institution that is the European Parliament , allow me to only briefly respond to a few more specific proposals .
I will relay your highly unanimous and general proposal for convening a special session of the UN Human Rights Council to the High Representative .
This proposition has definitely been a key element in the debate here and one that should be given consideration .
Likewise , I will also relay to the High Representative the similarly clear and consensual opinion about arms exports that has been expressed here .
I believe that we need to be able to establish a suitable balance between cooperation and sanctions with regard to these three groups of countries .
It is definitely a particular task when it comes not to the application of sanctions and military intervention , but to cooperation and , if necessary , some degree of sanctions with regard to a group of countries .
I also consider what Mrs Oomen-Ruijten stated , that the European Union must also be able to rely very strongly on Turkey when forming its policy regarding the region , to be important .
Thank you very much for the debates , and thank you very much for the comments , speeches and questions .
I have received six motions for resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The resolution on the situation in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen rightly denounces the brutal and murderous repression whose victims are the demonstrators in Syria , as well as those in Yemen and Bahrain .
The leaders of these three countries are giving orders to fire on their own people , who are legitimately demanding political freedom , human dignity and social fairness .
Through this resolution , the European Parliament is strongly expressing its solidarity with the Syrian , Bahraini and Yemeni citizens , who are showing great courage in demonstrating their aspirations while faced with government forces who are opening fire on unarmed civilians .
As well as the Islamic faith , Syria , Bahrain and Yemen have one thing in common : an authoritarian regime , regardless of whether the ruler is a king , a president or the Assad clan .
In Western terms , they are undoubtedly undemocratic systems .
Growing revolutionary tendencies like those in Egypt or Tunisia are being nipped in the bud and democracy and human rights are being disregarded .
In Yemen , for example , 37 % of under-age girls undergo forced marriages .
This puts Yemen in second place in the world , exceeded only by Somalia .
The governments of these three countries must demonstrate that they are working for and not against their people .
For decades , the EU has supported and paid court to countries like this , while this was to its economic and geopolitical advantage .
The EU should fight more strongly for democracy and human rights and combat the process of radical Islamification in these countries .
in writing . - Although the situation in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen is something that ought to be addressed urgently , I would like to draw your attention to the alarming situation in Lebanon , where seven citizens of the EU from Estonia are held captive .
I would like to thank Baroness Ashton for her prompt reply and her reassurance two weeks ago that the matter will be treated on the highest possible level in the EU .
We have now received the information that the abductors , claiming to be members of the ' Renaissance and Reform movement ' have handed in an obscure ransom note that says that they will announce their further demands at a later time .
The seven Estonian citizens are told to be alive .
I would like to plea to Baroness Ashton to get involved in the resolution of the hostage crisis in her capacity as the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
There are European lives at stake and this requires urgently the instant attention of the European External Action Service .
This is a chance for Baroness Ashton to demonstrate what she is actually made of .
Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
The next item is the debate on the Council and Commission statements on the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , the European Union is fully committed to the success of the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries , which will take place in Istanbul on 9-13 May 2011 .
It believes that this conference provides a major opportunity to enhance support for the least developed countries ( LDCs ) .
The Council has very recently adopted conclusions to be used as guidelines by the EU negotiators in the preparatory process and during the conference .
Prioritising LDCs is a necessity in our common endeavour to reach the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) .
We therefore remain firmly committed to supporting the inclusive and sustainable development of all LDCs , which represent the poorest and weakest segment of the international community , and which are also characterised by their acute susceptibility to external economic shocks , natural and man-made disasters and communicable diseases .
We strongly support an outcome focusing on areas and measures that can add value with regard to the specific needs of LDCs and which should reflect the lessons learned from the 2001 Brussels Programme of Action , by maintaining coherence with the MDGs and setting specific goals and targets for LDCs .
A long-term commitment through a renewed partnership with LDCs containing suitable measures is fundamental in a rapidly changing world .
In particular , the European Union considers that the outcome of the Istanbul conference should address three main objectives : firstly , combating the vulnerability and fragility of LDCs and further enhancing their resilience to shocks ; secondly , creating a favourable environment for the sustainable development of LDCs ; thirdly , promoting inclusive and sustainable economic growth for LDCs .
These objectives will continue to guide the European Union 's discussions with the LDCs throughout the preparatory process and during the conference itself .
The European Union has always led the international community 's efforts to support the LDCs , and is their largest donor .
It has been the most successful development partner at fulfilling its commitments , notably in terms of market access , rules of origin and debt alleviation .
It has made significant progress on official development assistance ( ODA ) as well as on policy coherence for development .
Some LDCs have achieved good economic growth and progress in development during the last decade , yet we recognise that overall , progress has been uneven .
Considerable work remains to be done , notably in sub-Saharan Africa and in countries that are in both conflict and fragile situations .
For that reason , the EU has recently reaffirmed its commitment , in the context of the overall ODA commitment , to meet collectively the target of providing 0.15-0.20 of GNP to the LDCs .
The LDCs have primary responsibility for their own development , and assistance by the donor community ought to be based on the initiative and full ownership of the recipient countries .
The European Union also stresses the interdependence of overall progress in the LDCs with the improvement of good governance , democracy , human rights and gender equality .
Finally , at the same time , we are firmly convinced that all countries have the responsibility to help developing countries to lift themselves out of poverty and achieve progress towards the MDGs .
Progress in the LDCs is interconnected with the quality and coherence of development partner policies .
Strong efforts should therefore be directed at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of aid mechanisms and to fulfilling existing commitments .
On several occasions , the EU has called on other donors to meet these commitments .
Emerging economies should also provide their fair share of assistance to LDCs .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is committed to the success of the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries in Istanbul , creating a renewed political momentum for inclusive growth , sustainable development and poverty reduction in the least developed countries .
This conviction and commitment of ours is expressed in the Council conclusions , adopted last week on 31 March , on Guidelines for the participation of the EU in the upcoming conference on the least developed countries .
I am also very happy to note that Parliament will be strongly represented in the delegation that will be attending this conference .
Many least developed countries have made progress in their development , but progress has been uneven and considerable work remains to be done .
Too few of the least developed countries are graduating from the category and most are lagging behind in achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
We , both donors and least developed countries , need to learn important lessons from the success of some of the least developed countries , as well as from the implementation of the Brussels Programme of Action .
Global partnership and mutual responsibility are vital for the success of the conference .
Development is a joint challenge .
The developing countries have primary responsibility for their own development by designing and implementing appropriate policies and achieving good governance .
As regards the least developed countries , the European Union has been their most successful development partner in fulfilling its commitments , notably in terms of market access , rules of origin and debt alleviation .
The European Union is the largest donor to the least developed countries and has made significant progress concerning Official Development Assistance , tripling its aid to these countries in the past decade .
In Istanbul , the European Union will call upon other donors and development partners to match its commitment and ambition .
Developed countries have a responsibility to help developing countries to lift themselves out of poverty .
In this context of global partnership , the emerging economies should also do their share .
Sustainable development and long-term equitable and inclusive growth are essential for each of these countries .
The private sector has a crucial role to play in this regard and can have a huge impact on people 's lives through generating wealth and employment .
The potential of trade as an engine for growth and employment is considerable .
Nevertheless , the European Union wants to underline the interdependence of progress in the least developed countries with human rights , gender equality , democracy , good governance , peace and security .
Progress in the least developed countries is interconnected with equality and coherence of development partners ' policies .
Therefore , strenuous efforts should be directed towards improving the efficiency and effectiveness of aid mechanisms , as well as policy coherence for development .
The Presidency has already announced three priorities , so let me just add that the conference should address the issue of graduation also .
The European Union will be calling for a more systematic mechanism for granting time-sensitive concession and support to graduating countries .
The Commission is convinced that this new momentum will result in a significant increase in the number of countries graduating from the category of the least developed countries in the next decade .

Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , as you quite rightly said Mr Németh , the Council conclusions , in conjunction with the commitments made by the European Union , need to be accompanied by effective measures to support the overall endeavour .
Of course , the European Parliament representation at the UN conference on the least developed countries in Istanbul will be ' armed ' with a good resolution expressing satisfactory positions .
However , there is a problem with the representation 's status because , as observers , they will not be able to intervene directly and I think that the Commission and President Barroso could make an important intervention in order to change this situation .
Growth and security in the European Union and control of migration flows cannot be achieved with approximately one billion citizens living in misery and poverty .
It would appear that efforts to develop the least developed countries need to be revised because , although the least developed countries are also to blame , the mechanisms used to break the vicious circle of poverty appear to be ineffective .
I would point out that the wealth of under-developed countries is being exploited by outsiders and that the democratic deficit , corruption and insecurity are the overriding characteristics of these countries .
All this results in a lack of basic infrastructures in the education , health , transport , communications , primary production , agricultural , banking and public administration sectors .
I think that mechanisms could be adopted in Istanbul to improve the approach to the problem of poverty .
Mr President , economic growth of 7 % , a large increase in the number of children attending primary school , more countries whose people are demanding democracy : in the least developed countries in Africa , much progress has been made in the past 10 years .
These countries have worked for better governance and mobilised their own financial resources .
The rich countries ' particular contribution has been debt relief and ensuring the availability of vaccines .
However , we are not there yet , because rapid economic growth in the poorest countries has not gone hand in hand with a proportional reduction in poverty .
The list of the poorest countries has remained virtually unchanged for decades .
The number of people living on less than USD 1 a day has decreased , but the number of people living on less than USD 2 a day remains the same .
The rich countries have kept corrupt regimes in place , rather than considering a fair sharing of resources .
It is therefore absurd and cynical to say that development is not working .
We have not given it enough of a chance .
The UN conference in Istanbul will have to draw some conclusions from this .
Much more attention needs to be given to the equitable distribution of wealth within the poorest countries themselves .
This will provide stability and a fair distribution .
This will eliminate tensions and bring peace .
Social justice will also do much more to bring about economic development than the inequality of dictatorships ruled by a small clique at the top .
Countries with democracy achieve fair distribution much faster than dictatorships .
Good governance will bring us closer to achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
We also need to do more for public health .
For a family in a poor country , disease is a financial disaster .
Disease is a luxury which no one can afford .
We must therefore work towards financing healthcare through health insurance , so that not only vaccines are available , but also good hospitals and clinics .
Mr President , between 1980 and 2011 , global GDP increased by USD 19 000 billion .
This increase should mean that we have sufficient means to eradicate extreme poverty .
So much for the arithmetic .
With regard to policy , improving the lot of the poorest is not as straightforward .
We must therefore make some clear choices .
Firstly , we must target the poorest countries in our cooperation programmes .
Secondly , and this is a corollary of the first point , we must withdraw gradually from emerging countries .
China , the main creditor of the United States , has sufficient means at its disposal to deal with the poverty prevailing within its borders .
The third point is that we need strong partnerships with the least developed countries .
They need to do the bulk of the work .
All we can do is assist them with our know-how , our expertise and our political will .
We can do nothing more and nothing less than that .
I would make one last point : as we are the largest donor , it is also up to us , as the European Union , to assume a leadership role at this conference .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I want to thank Mrs Theocharous for raising the issue of the status of the European Parliament at international conferences : we are one of the three sister institutions of the EU and we need to have a look at this very quickly or there is going to be trouble .
We are the largest donor to the least developed countries in the world ; we have trebled aid in the last few years , but poverty has increased , not decreased .
Some ten years ago , Pascal Lamy and the Development Committee introduced ' Everything but Arms ' .
Gradually , this Parliament turned it into ' Anything but Farms ' .
Now the least developed countries in the world do not have industrial capacity , they have agriculture capacity .
If you are really interested in eliminating poverty and helping these people , we need to increase their capacity to trade .
It is not aid but trade that is going to reduce poverty .
But in order to reduce poverty and to increase trade , we need to increase their capacity to export what they can export , which is agricultural produce , fisheries produce and so on .
But we do not do that .
We have introduced stringent standards , which is very important for the health of the European consumer , but we do not help to increase the capacity of these least developed countries .
So , out of 51 , only three have matriculated from being a least developed country to not being a least developed country .
We have got to increase that effort otherwise we are just fooling ourselves and those countries .
Mr President , I would like to ask the representatives of the Council and the Commission why they believe that they have to address this subject using speech bubbles .
I do not think that we are helping anyone by not making a specific statement to the effect that in the run-up to the Istanbul conference , the Member States and the European Union must finally meet their obligations in full and that we cannot tolerate Member States increasingly shirking their responsibilities .
It is unacceptable that one billion people still live in hunger , most of them in the least developed countries ( LDCs ) , in other words , the poorest countries in the world .
It is also unacceptable that the majority of our development aid does not go to support and develop agriculture .
The proportion used for this purpose has fallen rapidly in recent years , while one billion people go hungry .
I am slowly beginning to think that saying that we hope the LDCs will become more resistant to shocks is a cynical approach .
I am calling on you to take specific measures to address the problems and to make concrete commitments to provide the LDCs with real help .
( NL ) Mr President , the forthcoming UN summit on the least developed countries is a good opportunity for a debate on whether development aid makes sense or if it is , in fact , nonsensical .
The aid quantity argument , as it is generally known - that is , the proposition that the more aid you grant , the more economic development there will be - has been totally discredited .
I would like to use my speaking time to quote what the Kenyan economist James Shikwati said to Der Spiegel online on 7 April 2005 . Quote : ' Development aid serves to keep large bureaucracies in place , encourages corruption and complacency and teaches Africans to beg , rather than be independent ' , unquote .
In addition , development aid weakens the local markets and it causes the spirit of enterprise , the very spirit that we so badly need , to evaporate .
Regardless of how absurd it may sound , development aid is one of the causes of Africa 's problems .
If the west stopped these payments , normal Africans would not even notice .
It is only government officials who would be hard hit .
So , instead of us handing out more money , what is needed is less corruption , more entrepreneurship and more self-reliance .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( NL ) Mr Claeys , would you agree with me that the foreign interests of the rich Western European countries and of the United States have led to dictators being kept in power and , consequently , to development aid often failing to work , because that aid has ended up in the wrong pockets and because we have never done anything to tackle that , in the interests of maintaining a ' stability ' which has not , in fact , been worth the name , as has been demonstrated in North Africa and the Middle East ?
Standing up for democracy means standing up for democrats in developing countries and letting dictators fall , whilst keeping development aid flowing .
( NL ) Mr Berman , yes , I do partly agree with what you have said .
Indeed , we are to blame for the fact that some dictators have been able to remain in power .
I am thinking , for example , of the European policy towards Cuba , where we have seen that Fidel Castro has been considered a partner with whom we can do business .
That sort of thing should , indeed , be consigned to the past and we should only talk to people who have been democratically elected and who also have the power to establish democracy in their own country .
( PL ) Mr President , the term ' least developed countries ' arose 40 years ago to help developed countries and other donors identify those communities around the world which are most in need of aid .
The definition of ' least developed country ' used by the United Nations is not based exclusively on per capita income levels , but also takes account of human capital and problems with economic development .
The geographical distribution of these countries is very distinctive , because the great majority of them are found in Africa .
The European Union is right , therefore , in giving particular attention to this continent .
A fundamental problem is the fact that the number of countries identified as LDCs is growing , while the number of countries which have developed sufficiently to be able to graduate from the group is as low as three .
This , therefore , is why the UN conference should give serious consideration to how to introduce an effective , measurable and easy-to-monitor strategy for countries to leave the LDC .
I am pleased that the European Commission and the Council have proposals which might help in this process .
One of these is the promotion of inclusive growth .
I know that some fellow Members are worried by this term because they are not sure if the growth will be truly inclusive .
On the other hand , however , without growth , we will not build developing countries ' economic potential .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , we need a tangible objective , which can be adopted at the conference in Istanbul , and this objective should be to reduce the number of least developed countries to half of what they are today .
This sounds self-evident but , over the last 30 years , just 3 of these countries have managed to rise above the category of least developed countries .
In order to achieve this , we need to honour our commitments and contribute 0.15 to 0.20 % of our annual Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) to development aid for these countries .
It is equally important to safeguard policy coherence for development .
We cannot give money to these countries , on the one hand , and basically steal from them through unfair trade agreements between them and the EU , on the other .
We need to pay our monetary debt and that also means investing in these countries , both in order to adapt them and to combat climate change and to pay off our debt that has accumulated from our unfair common agricultural policy .
In order to do so , we need to promote the food sovereignty of these countries by supporting traditional agricultural policies , local resources , local crops and local markets , and preventing speculative attacks , land capture and seed monopolies , which threaten all of us , especially these weak countries .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , I wonder whether the honourable gentleman will agree with me - because he used a very strong word ' steal ' - that we steal from developing countries .
Such an example could be that we give EUR 2 million to a small island off the Atlantic coast for their fisheries , for 7 000 tonnes of tuna , and we sell that on the streets of Europe for EUR 235 million .
So we convert EUR 2 million to EUR 235 million .

That is what we do with our fisheries policies .
( EL ) Mr President , Mr Deva is right .
Fisheries agreements between the European Union and third countries are , to a large degree , an issue that needs to be re-examined in depth .
Agreements are necessary , but the European Union also needs , when entering into these fisheries agreements with the countries in question , to do so in the most viable way possible .
However , we also need to check if the money we pay in return for fishing is enough and if it is being used as development aid , to ultimately strengthen these countries so that they can get out of the category of least developed countries .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Németh is not right in his optimism over countries graduating from least developed country status , whereas Mr Deva , Mr Kaczmarek and Mr Arsenis are right in saying that in the last 10 years , only three countries - Botswana , Cape Verde and Maldives - have graduated from this group .


This means that in fact , the chief cause of the poverty is politics , for there are very wealthy countries which do not possess any natural resources , such as Switzerland and Japan , and , on the other hand , there are countries which are rich in natural resources but which are nevertheless poor .
This means that the cause of the poverty is politics , and not vice versa .
Therefore , alongside aid to the LDC countries and trading with them , the role of the European Union should be to give political assistance leading to stabilisation and democracy in these countries .
This is what we have to do .
( RO ) Mr President , the Fourth UN conference on the least developed countries provides a good opportunity to review the international Aid for Trade policy .
This group of countries is facing financial difficulties against the background of the global economic changes in the wake of the financial crisis .
The steady rise in basic food prices is an acute problem which cannot be ignored .
The main aim of Aid for Trade is to boost the 48 states ' domestic and international competitiveness .
In this regard , I should stress the importance of eradicating poverty and making effective use of the financial aid provided as part of achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
I think that it is useful getting developing countries involved in this process as a result of the experience they have in the area of reforming trade facilities .
( FR ) Mr President , progress in least developed countries reflects our own development policies and those of the international community .
The rise in the number of countries classified as least developed is a clear indication that it is time to review our policies , our instruments and our resources .
The poorest countries are very susceptible to war , crises and widespread poverty .
Hence , it is vital that we continue to work to establish peace , stability , democracy and human rights .
Three other elements should be taken into account .
Firstly , we need to re-examine internal factors such as corruption , the lack of democratic safeguards and property rights loopholes , which cause these countries to remain underdeveloped .
Secondly , we need to enhance our economic approach by providing greater support for farmers , for SMEs and for good use of State resources with a view to creating new instruments .
Lastly , we need to make our aid instruments more targeted and ensure that they are consistent with the Millennium Development Goals .
If we adjust global development policies to reflect the real needs in each country and greater participation by the private sector and civil society , we will be better able to rise to the challenges of the next decade .
( ES ) Mr President , 10 years ago in Brussels , donor countries agreed on a Programme of Action for least developed countries ( LDCs ) .
We set targets for eliminating extreme poverty in those countries .
It is clear to all of us that LDCs are suffering most from the effects of the global crisis , whether economic , financial , or environmental , or caused by rising food prices .
However , 10 years later , we have not achieved the goals we set and only two of the 48 countries that make up the LDC block have managed to graduate from LDC status .
We are at a pivotal moment .
At the upcoming Fourth United Nations conference in Istanbul , the work carried out so far will be reviewed and a new Programme of Action will be established .
We should renew our commitment to LDCs and show that in 10 years , we have learned the lessons of the previous period and are in a position to provide effective , quality support that will enable us to meet our objectives , not in 2021 but in 2015 , by fulfilling the Millennium Development Goals .

Mr President , the three key areas - the vulnerability of LDCs , sustainable development and the promotion of economic growth - are all welcome .
However , I wanted to ask whether food security will be part of the discussions .
There was mention of sub-Saharan Africa ; currently 80 % of sub-Saharan African farmers are female .
If we can help with the development of better agricultural methods , investing in those who are the most vulnerable in our world , helping them to feed themselves , we can make a huge contribution to the health and the wellbeing of the poorest in our world .
I wish the delegation well as they go from this Parliament to the conference , but I also look forward to the report back that we will hear from all those who will attend .
( RO ) Mr President , I firmly believe that this Parliament takes responsibility for the results achieved by the European Union as part of the project promoting global solidarity in the fight against poverty .
At the same time , it is my strong conviction that we are a Parliament which takes responsibility for using European taxpayers ' money .
I would like to try to acknowledge the idea that this conference must provide , including us , with an opportunity to assess the solidarity model which we have promoted .
This is because , if we look at what we call less developed countries , we will see that the poor countries still remain poor , while the rich countries maintain a certain standard of living .
We need to reassess the model we use for making donations and the support we give because we are at risk of this aid becoming detrimental to the recipient countries .
( PT ) Mr President , in this debate , we have been discussing the poorest and weakest countries in the world .
These include almost 50 countries whose people are suffering from the effects of successive failures to implement the recommendations of successive United Nations conferences .
It is not the inevitability of fate , nor inescapable natural limitations or constraints that make these countries poor ; on the contrary , several of them are very rich indeed in natural resources .
Rather , it is the injustice and inhumanity of a system that is the world 's dominant mode of economic and social organisation , and that is sustained by asymmetrical relationships , which create and replicate inequalities .
It is the result of free trade , of financial deregulation , of the illicit but permitted flight of capital to tax havens , and of war and conflicts fed by disputes over natural resources .
It is in breaking with the foundations of this system , and in a genuine and solidarity-based policy of cooperation and development aid , that the possibility of these peoples ' emancipation and their countries ' development lies .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think that this interesting debate shows that we all share the same objectives .
This is also reflected in the joint motion for a resolution presented by the political groups .
In particular , I would like to mention the following main objectives that we all share : first of all , that the conference should be results-oriented and that the European Union should fulfil its commitments .
The object of this is to support countries , so that they can graduate from least developed country status .
We have undertaken commitments in terms of market access and debt alleviation , as well as reserving a share of official development assistance for the least developed countries .
Clearly , policy coherence for development should contribute to all policy areas in support of the least developed countries ' fight against poverty and priority should be given , as Ms Stihler quite rightly highlighted , to food security , agriculture and infrastructure .
Indeed , as Mr Deva suggested , trade plays a very important role .
We have all recognised the least developed countries ' primary responsibility for their own development , which is why a more efficient tax system and good governance in tax matters are needed to enhance their domestic resources .
Finally , even if they bear practically no responsibility for climate change , the least developed countries will be hit the hardest by it and we have an obligation to help them adapt to this .
In conclusion , this House has always given great support for the cause of the least developed countries and I am sure that this will continue .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , concerning the sum total of the ODA , I would like to underline that , since 2002 when establishing its commitment for the Monterey conference , the Council has reiterated the need to mobilise all other available sources of financing for development - primarily domestic resources complemented by viable innovative financing mechanisms - and support from developed countries , the private sector and emerging economies .
In the latest conclusions of April 2011 , the Council pointed out that the EU is seriously considering proposals for innovative financing mechanisms with significant revenue generation potential , with a view to ensuring predictable financing for development , especially for the poorest and most vulnerable countries .
I agree with Commissioner Füle 's opinion concerning the relevance of keeping to our commitments in the European Union and also his comments concerning the importance of increasing the possibility of trade between LDCs and the European Union .
I have received six motions for resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 7 April 2011 , at noon .
2010 progress report on Iceland
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the 2010 progress report on Iceland .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I greatly appreciate the European Parliament 's active involvement in the enlargement process and its constructive participation in the general debate on enlargement , and , of course , specifically in the accession process of Iceland .
As one of the most successful Union policies in EU history , the enlargement of the European Union is among the most important of our Presidency 's priorities .
On 17 June 2010 , the European Council unanimously decided to grant Iceland candidate status .
The first meeting of the accession conference at ministerial level took place on 27 July 2010 , and November 2010 saw the start of the screening process , which is proceeding as planned .
The next accession conference at ministerial level is scheduled for 27 June ; this way , we will have the opportunity to take stock of the results achieved and , we hope , open up as many chapters as possible .
There are several particularly important areas which I would like to point out specifically .
Parliament 's draft resolution also identifies these issues .
In its 2010 report on the results achieved , the Commission concluded that Iceland meets the political criteria required for membership , and even though it was hit hard by the economic and financial crisis , it is suitably prepared to take the measures necessary to meet the requirements of EU membership .
On 14 December 2010 , the Council recalled , in its conclusions , that Iceland is a democracy that has a long history of good functioning , with strong institutions and close relations to the EU .
It also concluded that Iceland 's general preparedness was sufficient for it to adopt and apply the EU acquis , in particular , due to the fact that the country is a member of the European Economic Area and party to the Schengen Agreement .
Iceland can be considered a functioning market economy and may , in the medium term , regain its ability to hold its own against the competitive pressure and market forces present in the Single Market .
The Council recalled that the negotiations are aimed at Iceland fully adopting and applying the EU acquis .
The course of the negotiations will be determined by whether Iceland meets all of its obligations under the EEA Agreement , taking full account , among other things , of the European Council conclusions of 17 June 2010 , and also by the results it achieves in eliminating other deficiencies identified in the Commission 's opinion .
At the same time , the Council recalled , on the one hand , that while the accession negotiations are in progress , the EEA Agreement will continue to represent the fundamental treaty basis between Iceland and the EU and , on the other , that Iceland has also been an active and constructive partner over the past two years within this framework and with regard to the Schengen Area .
The country has also achieved good results in applying the developing EU acquis .
The Council therefore encouraged Iceland to continue this practice .
The European Parliament 's draft resolution paints a comprehensive picture of the results achieved and the tasks to be completed .
As regards the latter , I would like to draw your attention to our common task , that is , the necessity for appropriate and in-depth communication with the public , both with regard to Icelandic and EU citizens .
In the light of the above , I would once again like to point out that there is still very much work to be done , including during the Hungarian Presidency .
As regards the Presidency , we are naturally counting on all Member States , the Commission and , of course , the European Parliament , to support Iceland in this endeavour .
It is essential that we maintain the impetus of the work and thereby move the negotiations forward as much as possible while still in this half-year .
I am convinced that Iceland 's accession can become a success story .
It may give impetus to the entire enlargement policy and enhance its success .
The motto and goal of the Hungarian Presidency is a strong Europe .
All progress made in Iceland 's accession process contributes to the achievement of this .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today 's debate on Iceland and the next steps in its accession process is very opportune .
I would like to thank the House for its support for Icelandic membership and to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Preda , for his high quality report .
The resolution under discussion is a helpful contribution to the process : it delivers the right messages to Iceland at the right moment .
The assessment of Iceland 's compliance with the acquis - the screening exercise - is on track .
Since November 2010 , 24 chapters have been discussed and 23 bilateral screening meetings have been completed , covering fisheries , agriculture , environment , regional policy and financial services .
Screening is an important technical process and the meetings have already identified sensitive issues and challenges in key chapters , such as agriculture , environment and fisheries .
This stage of the negotiation process will be completed by June 2011 .
I can confirm that we expect actual negotiations to start towards the end of the Hungarian Presidency , with the opening of some chapters at the accession conference scheduled for 27 June 2011 .
This is an ambitious but achievable timetable and all sides are committed to moving forward .
The Commission stands ready to take Iceland 's specificities and expectations into account , within the existing approach on accession negotiations and fully safeguarding the principles and rules of the Union .
We therefore aim to work in an open and constructive spirit to find solutions acceptable to both sides , in a way that reflects the high level of cooperation between the European Union and the Icelandic authorities .
As with any accession so far , it is to be expected that this will not always be an easy task , but we trust that we have embarked with Iceland on a successful journey .
As regards Icesave , and as referred to in your resolution , the Commission would welcome a swift resolution of this matter in the interests of all the parties involved .
On the economic front , Iceland 's banking and fiscal consolidation in the framework of the IMF programme has been impressive .
The adjustment programme is on track and the government is committed to further consolidation .
Enhanced debt restructuring will help to strengthen economic recovery .
The government is also working on a strategy for the gradual lifting of capital controls .
This will contribute to an improved business climate .
Let me also briefly mention the support measures we are putting in place under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance ( IPA ) .
There is provision for a total indicative envelope of EUR 28 million for the next three years to support strengthening of administrative capacity and to prepare Iceland for management of the structural funds .
Good progress is being made on finalising the national IPA programme for 2011 and a number of specific activities have started in the framework of the Technical Assistance and Information Exchange ( TAIEX ) programme .
I fully share your views on the need for a fact-based public debate on EU accession .
It can indeed play a decisive role in increasing understanding of the realities of the policies and actions of the European Union , and can help to dispel myths .
Furthermore , I warmly welcome the fact that the Icelandic authorities have started intensive communication activities .
It is encouraging to note that public opinion in Iceland has improved significantly in favour of the EU over the past year - both in relation to support for continuing the accession process and in terms of the attitude towards membership of the EU and its image .
The Commission is stepping up its own information and communication activities to facilitate well informed public debate .
The European Union Delegation in Reykjavík is fully operational and actively involved in communication activities , and an EU info centre is planned .
With the screening period almost over , I am very much looking forward to starting to open the various chapters with Iceland .
Mr President , I would like to begin by welcoming the presence of the Commission and Council in the Chamber , as well as the fruitful cooperation we have had so far with these two institutions , including in drafting this resolution .
Just like nine months ago , when we announced Iceland 's application to join the European Union , we have decided to touch on four main points in this report .
1 .
Political criteria .
Iceland excels in this respect , with a strong tradition of democracy .
In addition to this , I believe that we must welcome the progress made during recent months on strengthening the independence of the judiciary , removing the predominant position of the Minister for Justice on appointing magistrates and on increasing the latter 's independence .
At the same time , these measures must be implemented rigorously .
2 .
Economic criteria .
As a member of the European Economic Area , Iceland already fulfils a large proportion of a Member State 's obligations .
I welcome the agreement on the Icesave legislation .
I hope that , as indicated by the surveys , the Icelandic population will decide to support it in the referendum to be held in three days ' time , thereby ensuring that this bilateral dispute disappears from the negotiation process for accession to the EU .
3 .
Regional cooperation is also an important factor .
Iceland 's accession to the EU offers the Union a unique opportunity to strengthen its presence in the Arctic region in general , and on the Arctic Council in particular .
Last but not least , public opinion is vital to ensuring that the accession process culminates in success .
With this in mind , I believe that encouragement must be given to the initiative from the authorities in Reykjavik to launch a public debate and consult with all the stakeholders in this project .
This is all the more important as opinion polls indicate Icelanders ' support for continuing the accession negotiations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow 's vote is one of the steps which will soon lead to the accession of Iceland to the European Union .
Iceland has made significant progress , as Mr Preda said .
I will mention a few examples : the strengthening of judicial independence , a special commission of inquiry to investigate and analyse the processes that led to the collapse of the Icelandic banking system , the creation of a joint Parliamentary Committee between the European Union and Iceland , the situation regarding entry into the euro area , increased experience in the renewable energy sector .
The very thorny issue of ' Icesave remains open , and on Saturday there will be a referendum which will bring Icelanders to the polls .
Although the outcome of the referendum is a matter of debate , I think it has very strong democratic value because it gives the people of Iceland a sense of responsibility and involves them even more in this delicate stage of negotiations .
Although the first referendum did not bring a positive result , the Icelandic Government has worked hard to create a broad coalition capable of explaining to citizens the reason for Iceland 's commitment to reimbursing the UK and the Netherlands for the damage they suffered .
Europe 's role at this time should be one of patience and respect , without exerting excessive pressure which might cause some sort of self-defence and closure in Icelandic society .
With regard to fisheries and agriculture , I believe that Europe and Iceland must find the best solution to meet the criteria established in the Treaty and to preserve the Icelandic economy , ecosystems and the country 's specific characteristics .
The accession of Iceland to the European Union will mean that Europe moves towards the North Pole , with significant positive effects in the political , economic , environmental and scientific fields .
It is clear that belonging to Europe , sixty years on , is still an attractive possibility .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I am pleased to learn from the Commissioner that screening the accession chapters relating to Iceland , which began in November of last year , is expected to be completed shortly .
Of course , Iceland , as a member of the EEA , has had a major advantage in that they have already adopted a significant part of the acquis .
I am also pleased to note from opinion polls in Iceland that 65 % of the Icelandic people want the negotiations to continue .
I will use my position as chair of the JPC to prevail upon the Icelandic people not to take up entrenched positions until such time as they know exactly what the deal is later on this year .
The second meeting of the EU-Icelandic Joint Parliamentary Committee will take place in Reykjavík on 26 and 27 April .
It was established last year and I genuinely believe that it is an important forum for dialogue and cooperation between the EU and the Icelandic Parliament .
I have to say that I am disappointed that the coastal states did not reach an agreement in Oslo at the beginning of March .
It is essential that agreement be reached .
We cannot fish one million tonnes of mackerel between the four coastal states while we are being told that the scientific advice is for only half of that .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , a small country always causes a lot of headaches to the EU when it wants to join , and Iceland 's headaches as we know are fisheries , the environment and everything else the Commissioner mentioned .
However , we have a recipe and this Chamber could adopt a more welcoming attitude , because small countries need to be treated tenderly .
I always admire Mr Tannock 's principled , political approach towards the acquis and what Iceland is or is not doing .
This time , however , my group and I disapprove of the radical tone of those amendments and that is why we very much ask for a compromise to be found by tomorrow with the rapporteur .
I already envisage six extra chairs in this Parliament and an extra booth for interpreters .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the ECR Group fully supports Icelandic accession to the European Union , although the decision is firmly a matter for Icelanders alone in a referendum .
Iceland is a small , stable and wealthy democracy and a founder member of NATO and the Council of Europe .
Its economy is heavily dependent on fishing , however , having had a disastrous venture into financial services , and Iceland is therefore likely to demand a significant concession to protect its fishing industries if it ever joins the EU .
This would then , hopefully , provide the UK and other Member States with an ideal opportunity to push for broader and further reform of the controversial common fisheries policy .
With regard to whaling , I make no apologies for it .
I do not like bullfighting or cockfighting either but these are , believe it or not , allowed in some parts of the EU on the grounds of national culture , so if Iceland joins the EU , it must be allowed - in my personal view - to safeguard its whaling industry if it insists on so doing .
Finally , Iceland must commit to repaying monies owed to the UK and the Netherlands after the collapse of Icesave .
A negative result in the forthcoming referendum in Iceland on this issue could prove a serious handicap with regard to support from the UK Government .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , in Britain , the first day of April is called April Fool 's Day and people take great delight in fooling one another .
So when some report that Iceland is on course to join the EU next year , I think : ' April Fool ! '
In reality , a survey has shown that 64 % of Icelanders want to remain independent , only 24 % want to carry on applying for EU membership and , indeed , 60 % of Icelandic businesses are against it .
It is also said that Iceland wants the security of the euro .
April Fool !
Even Portugal 's own banks are currently refusing to buy Portuguese bonds .
Iceland will neither give up its rich fishing grounds - producing 40 % of its exports - to join the disastrous common fisheries policy , nor abandon an Icelandic Parliament that is more than 1 000 years old and the winner of a UNESCO award for democracy .
Even with a banking hangover , Iceland , like Britain , remains better off outside .
No fooling there !
I got a little confused there , Mr Campbell Bannerman , with the April Fool thing .
It is 6 April today , I just double checked , but I suppose you can declare April Fool 's day as any day you want !
Mr President , as is so common here , this debate has little connection to reality and none whatsoever to democracy .
Most here talk as though Iceland being sucked into the Euro black hole is a done deal .
But that is not the message coming from Icelanders .
Current opinion polls show that those who wish to keep their independence outnumber the Euro-Quislings and Europhiles nearly two to one .
Seventy-five percent of Icelanders wisely do not trust the EU .
The only Icelandic party in favour of membership has slumped from 30 % to 18 % in the polls .
It is the same all over Europe .
While the political elite move to ever closer union and federal empire , the people want freedom and independence .
Such mismatches are the seedbed of revolution .
Congratulate yourselves on accession progress all you like , but the coming financial meltdown in the countries being crushed in your Euro straightjacket will be costly to us all , but fatal to your Utopia .
Iceland , and the nations now stuck in your raspberry Reich , will be free at last .
( SV ) Mr President , Iceland is a small nation in terms of its population , with around 300 000 inhabitants , but it is a great nation .
I really want to emphasise what has been said here .
Iceland has democratic traditions , it has an impressive culture , and it was actually also able to provide social security long before other countries were able to .
Clearly , we could get bogged down talking about the economic excesses of 2008 , but there have been such excesses in more countries than just little Iceland .
It is clear that when a small nation with a population of 300 000 is affected by the unrestrained market economy , there are no inertia effects in the administration .
That is something that we should not forget when we talk about a country , an island nation , in the Arctic region .
I also understand very well that the Icelanders are interested in fishing .
It is also the branch of industry that has made it possible for generation after generation to live on the island .
We have to be careful when we talk about a small nation that we do not fall into a kind of big brother role .
Iceland is naturally subject to scrutiny by the EU , and I would like to say that it is coping with it better than many current Member States would have done if they had been subject to as rigorous scrutiny as we are now subjecting Iceland to .
By that , I do not mean that it is wrong .
I also believe that it will be easier for Norway to draw closer to the EU and eventually become a Member if Iceland joins .
Iceland should be welcomed .
Iceland will breathe life into the EU and it is certainly not a sacrificial offering .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur .
The motion for a resolution before us is balanced and covers all key aspects of the progress report .
With 33 chapters discussed in the progress report , Iceland moves forward quickly to meeting the criteria to join the EU .
The reference in the motion to the report of the special investigation committee into the collapse of the Icelandic banking system is important .
The fact that justice will be served on the culprits of the crisis is welcome .
Perhaps the EU and its Member States could copy Iceland 's sensible approach .
However , there are two issues I wish to raise this evening : Icesave and mackerel .
The referendum at the end of this week will hopefully bring an end to the saga .
However , I was disappointed that the second referendum was necessary after the intense renegotiation and the approval of the Althingi , the Icelandic Parliament .
On mackerel , the unilateral increase of quotas without discussion and the consequences for neighbouring fleets was short-sighted .
The need to resolve issues surrounding fisheries is essential to the success of the accession negotiations .
Finally , I would like to wish the second JPC , led by Pat the Cope Gallagher , to Reykjavík on 26 and 27 April , well .
Mr President , I am glad to hear that a majority of the Icelanders in recent opinion polls say that they have no intention of joining the EU because , frankly , why do we want them to join ?
What exactly are they going to bring to our European club ?
They have got a collapsed economy , their banks have defaulted , their volcano closed our airspace for nine days - I presume we would have to pick up the bill for that if it happens again - and now they are plundering our mackerel stocks .
In 2005 , Iceland landed 367 tonnes of north-east Atlantic mackerel .
This year , they intend to land 150 000 tonnes .
What kind of good management - sustainable management of fisheries - do you call that ?
They always pride themselves on having a sustainable fishery and they laugh at the common fisheries policy that we employ .
This is almost criminal .
This is almost illegal fishing and there is no way we should invite them to join the EU .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin with my usual refrain : Parliament has only one seat , Strasbourg .
As you know , the Committee on Fisheries is concerned about the mackerel situation .
I am particularly troubled by the recent breakdown of negotiations between the European Union , Iceland and the Faroe Islands .
For over 10 years , the mackerel quota has been allocated using a fixed allocation key based on historical catches for each coastal State .
Since 2010 , Iceland has been demanding new , much higher quotas , citing a hypothetical geographic redistribution of mackerel stocks caused by climate change .
Iceland therefore suddenly - as Mr Stevenson has just said - increased its catch quota from 2 000 tonnes to 130 000 tonnes in 2010 .
That is an increase of over 6 500 % , ladies and gentlemen .
This decision is unacceptable because it has been taken unilaterally and penalises EU fishermen .
What is more , it sends a very negative message in the context of Iceland 's accession negotiations .
We cannot accept this unilateral decision .
We would like to see a rapid resolution of the conflict between Iceland and the European Union .
Iceland needs to adapt to our common fisheries policy , rather than our common fisheries policy changing for Iceland 's benefit .
In my view , Iceland is playing a dangerous game by imposing these unacceptable conditions on us .
Iceland needs to put forward a more realistic proposal .
At the end of the day , no one wants to see overfishing or the collapse of mackerel stocks , which would be damaging for all sides .
I urge Iceland to be more responsible and flexible in negotiations and to display greater transparency in discussions .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Iceland very sincerely on gaining candidate country status .
According to the Commission statement , Iceland 's preparations to meet European Union requirements are generally good and on schedule .
It should not be forgotten , however , that one condition for the accession of any country to the European Union is the clear commitment of both government and society .
Therefore , I think an effective strategy for informing society is of key significance for gaining the support of society for Iceland 's membership of the European Union .
Poland 's experience shows that a significant role may be played here not only by a broad range of government measures , but also by national media , local non-governmental organisations and international cooperation at regional and local level .
( RO ) Mr President , as I also observed during the European Parliament delegation 's official visit last year , of which I was a member , Iceland has made huge investments in education and research and development .
I congratulate the Icelandic authorities for the support given to the Lisbon strategy and their involvement in it , including through the adoption of an Iceland 2020 strategy , which highlights the importance of these areas and outlines targets for the years ahead .
I think that accession to the European Union will entail benefits for all the parties involved .
Iceland will gain economic and monetary stability , while the European Union will become more powerful in the Arctic region and in areas such as renewable energy and climate change .
I firmly believe that improving dialogue with civil society and also between the European Union and Iceland is of paramount importance .
My simple recommendation to the Icelandic people is for them to wait for the final outcome of the negotiations before adopting a stance .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we can actually congratulate ourselves .
The willingness of the Icelanders to join us shows that the EU is still an attractive prospect .
The stability , prosperity and security that result from European integration have been so successfully achieved that a country with such a high standard of living as Iceland is willing to join us .
Of course , Iceland 's economic crisis may well also have some sort of role in all this .
Iceland 's membership of the EU , however , may not be a matter of course .
Have we considered adequately what Iceland 's added value would be for Europe ?
Iceland has already , in practice , outsourced its legislation to Brussels and its defence forces to NATO .
It would be the smallest country in the EU in terms of population .
On the other hand , it is perhaps an irony that , compared to earlier enlargements , Iceland , as a wealthy and cherished applicant country , would actually meet the conditions set for EU membership .
I am hoping for active and completely open discussions on Iceland 's membership of the EU .
( SK ) Mr President , it is necessary to take account of many aspects when evaluating the report on the progress of Iceland .
Iceland is a fully functioning democracy and a country which fulfils all the expected standards on human rights .
Iceland is part of the European Free Trade Area , and is therefore compatible with the acquis in many of the areas covered by this agenda .
In comparison with other candidate countries , this puts Iceland ahead of the competition .
Despite the fact that Iceland has a functioning market economy , one of its biggest problems is the crisis in the financial sector .
The divided banking sector and public debt amounting to 90 % of GDP are alarming .
The situation may be improving , but only very slowly .
Reduced inflation is a positive development , in my opinion , but , at the same time , there is rising unemployment .
I welcome Iceland 's decision reinforcing the independence of the judiciary in relation to the replacement of judges .
I personally consider the progress made by Iceland in the area of education and culture to be a huge success .
Standards are very high compared to the EU , thanks to which the country is participating in the Youth in Action and Erasmus Mundus lifelong learning programmes I also agree with the Commission 's conclusions that Iceland is a stable democracy with strong institutions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , today 's discussion has proved productive in identifying the steps Iceland needs to take in order to ensure a positive outcome in the accession negotiations .
As acknowledged in the draft resolution we discussed today , and in the Commission progress report of last November , Iceland is at an advanced stage of meeting membership obligations and has achieved a great deal , but it needs to deliver more on a number of well-defined issues .
Some of you have mentioned mackerel .
While this issue relates primarily to the management , by the coastal states concerned , of the mackerel stock in the north-east Atlantic , let me say this : we are disappointed at the lack of progress in the latest consultations .
Substantial differences of opinion between the parties remain - particularly between the European Union and Norway , on the one hand , and the Faroe Islands and Iceland , on the other - with regard to their respective shares .
The sustainability of this resource is important for our fishing industry , and the Commission will continue to explore all possible avenues in order to find a balanced solution for the mackerel stock , in cooperation with the coastal states .
Iceland is now entering a decisive stage in which the pace of progress towards EU membership depends on its own determination .
I am positive that , with our joint support and , most importantly , with the involvement and support of its people , Iceland is capable of making real progress in the direction of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for this debate .
You have pointed out quite a number of issues , which I am convinced the Council will address appropriately during the accession negotiations , and we will be able to pay the utmost attention to their settlement .
I would like to inform you that I am planning to attend the Iceland-EU Association Council meeting at the end of April , and I trust that we will receive first hand information from the Icelandic authorities regarding these matters .
There has never been one second of doubt that it is agriculture , but especially fisheries , or the Icesave case , where the situation is the most difficult .
However , I trust that the Commission will handle these issues in a very transparent manner .
The Members will also be appropriately informed about these issues at all times over the course of the accession negotiations .
Finally , I would like to add one more thought : I am very pleased that , during the debate , no speaker questioned the fact that Iceland has a perfectly functional democratic institutional system and political culture - we all recognised this .
And I am certain that the Icelandic people will make a very responsible decision about whether or not to join the European Union .
Let us trust them with this ; this is their task .
Our task is to enable their accession , and should they decide on it , we will welcome them accordingly . Thank you very much , Mr President .
To wind up the debate , I have received a motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Iceland has not seriously considered full membership of the EU since the beginning of European integration , applying for accession in 2009 , following a financial collapse .
Despite this , the country has managed to achieve European standards and , in many areas , to fulfil the set conditions necessary for successful integration into the current 27 countries of the EU .
Membership of the European Economic Area and the Schengen Area has contributed substantially to this progress .
Although Iceland has managed to implement a considerable part of European legislation , the actual accession procedure may be complicated by , for example , economic policy or the policy on fishing .
This represents half of Iceland 's exports , accounting for 10 % of its GDP .
The as yet unsettled dispute between Iceland and the Netherlands and Great Britain may be viewed as another possible obstacle to Icelandic membership .
The parties involved continue to look for an appropriate way to compensate Dutch and British citizens who lost their savings through the collapse of Icelandic banks .
The fact that a considerable proportion of Icelandic citizens do not much favour EU membership may also be regarded as a negative factor to some extent , despite the considerable support from the population for the accession talks .
It might therefore be appropriate for the Icelandic Government to initiate steps to inform the citizens as to what membership in European institutions would mean for the country , and the resulting benefits in the everyday lives of the population .
As we know , Iceland began accession negotiations in July 2010 .
From the outset , Iceland has been in a privileged position because of its membership in the European Economic Area .
Iceland 's progress on the road to EU membership is evident .
The prospect of accession is being seen in a positive light , but there are still some disputed matters , such as whaling , which is banned in the EU , Iceland 's desire to protect its fisheries and agriculture markets and the dispute over Icesave .
Further progress is essential , mainly in the areas of fisheries , agriculture and rural development .
It is important to reach agreement on the question of fishing quotas .
We should emphasise the necessity of bringing Iceland 's fisheries legislation into line with the principles of the EU internal market .
Let us not forget that Iceland is a country in which the economy is , to a great extent , based on fisheries .
Therefore , following Iceland 's accession to the EU , it would want to retain a certain degree of control over the management of fisheries in its own exclusive economic zone .
We should also give attention to the serious differences on the question of whaling .
The ban on whaling is part of the body of EU law , which every new Member State has to accept .
Worthy of note are the recent results of public opinion polls , which showed a rise in the support of society for continuing the accession negotiations and increased trust in the European Parliament .
The prospect of Iceland 's accession has been well received .
However , contentious issues still exist , such as whaling , which is banned in the European Union , and Iceland 's wish to protect its fisheries markets .
I do not think we can make any allowances in the case of whaling .
Regardless of historical factors , we cannot allow a situation in which a country applying for EU membership intends to catch these rare and protected animals .
Standards which were adopted and came into force in the European Community after many years of work cannot be ' bent ' to fit a brutal reality for reasons of tradition .
Another question is the dispute over the size of mackerel catches .
As you know , despite appeals to observe the principles of responsible fishing , in 2010 , the government in Reykjavik unilaterally established a total allowable catch for the species which was much higher than the limits put forward in scientific advice .
Iceland has not demonstrated the necessary openness and flexibility to achieve a compromise on this matter .
Furthermore , Iceland has announced that it will introduce catch limits for 2011 of 146 000 tonnes .
Such an approach fills me with fear when I think of future cooperation with Iceland on fisheries .
We all realise that this conflict jeopardises the accession negotiations with Iceland .
However , I personally think that in both cases , we should not agree to any concessions and should enforce compliance with the standards set by the Union in the fisheries sector .
2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the 2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow , you will adopt the resolution on the 2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
As you know , in its conclusions of 14 December 2010 , the Council reaffirmed its unanimous commitment to the European Union perspective of the Western Balkan countries .
The ultimate goal of this perspective is the membership of these countries in the European Union .
I congratulate you on the balanced findings of the draft resolution .
The text objectively reflects the situation at hand , and formulates valuable recommendations .
It is unfortunate that , despite the results and progress , FYROM has so far not been allowed to commence accession negotiations .
I believe that this is a loss , not only for the candidate , but also for the EU .
I am pleased that the core message of Parliament 's draft resolution corresponds to one of the basic principles of the Presidency .
Individual performance must always be acknowledged by the EU .
As regards the specifics , we welcome the fact that the country has made significant achievements in such key areas of reform as the operation of the police , and the judicial system .
The implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement continues to constitute a fundamental element of democracy and the rule of law in the country .
There is some success to report in this respect as well , for example , in the implementation of the Act on languages .
Nevertheless , it is essential that the country produce further achievements as soon as possible in areas such as dialogue between political actors , the reform of the justice system and public administration , the fight against corruption , freedom of expression and improving the business environment .
The areas concerned are also covered in detail by the resolution you will be adopting , and these must also continue to have priority among the plans of the Skopje Government .
The Council acknowledged that the Commission repeated its recommendation for accession negotiations to be started with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
In its conclusions of December 2010 , the Council stated that it was ready to come back to this issue during the term of the Hungarian Presidency , but unfortunately , in the absence of any new relevant developments , the Presidency has been unable to initiate this step as yet .
At this point , I must stress that good neighbourly relations continue to be of the essence .
It must be treated as a fact that progress in general , and especially steps taken towards European integration , can only be successful if there is political commitment at all levels of society .
Nevertheless , the political actors in a democratic society have a special , exceptional responsibility , for example , in resolving differences of opinion through democratic means , namely , dialogue and compromise .
We therefore call upon the political actors of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to resume their dialogue , not only in order to accelerate the pace of the reform processes , but also to ensure the maturity of the democratic institutions of their country .
The perspective of the early elections requires special attention .
The stability of the current coalition is remarkable despite the difficulties .
It would be grounds for concern if the next elections created fault lines in the political palette .
In order to reduce this risk , it would be important to announce the early elections based on the wide agreement that has been established in Parliament .
While , on the one hand , I would like to encourage the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , its political leadership and institutions , to step up their efforts and endeavour to meet the expectations formed by their citizens , on the other hand , I would like to urge the Commission and the European Parliament to continue to pay appropriate attention to the candidate and the region .
No other incentive for ensuring the stability and prosperity of the Balkans available to us is as effective as a European perspective and the promotion of the accession process .
I trust that , during the Hungarian Presidency , there will be a tangible sign to prove to the Balkans that the enlargement process is being kept alive , and this sign could be the decisive event in Croatia 's accession , that is , the conclusion of its accession negotiations .
I am convinced that this would act as a magnet to all countries in the Balkans , including the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am grateful for the opportunity to discuss the state of play of the accession process with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I also thank Mr Vigenin for taking this report forward , building on Mr Thaler 's thorough preparation .
The report is comprehensive , accurate and sets out the challenges ahead .
Over the last 20 years , the country has made significant progress for two reasons .
Firstly , great efforts had to be made to overcome difficult problems and even conflicts .
Secondly , the European perspective has been a great incentive for progress .
The challenge today is to use the very same formula - great efforts combined with a European incentive - to take the country forward .
I am grateful for the support of the European Parliament for the Commission 's recommendation to start accession negotiations .
We believe the country is ready to engage in a higher level of integration with Europe .
In fact , the accession negotiations are our most powerful instrument to support reforms .
Yet I must share with you my preoccupation with recent developments .
Our recommendation confirmed that the country has sufficiently met the political criteria but underlined that further efforts are needed in most areas .
Developments so far this year have not shown the expected progress .
The Commission has been consistently asking for political dialogue , judiciary and public administration reform , fight against corruption , freedom of expression and implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement .
I had a very good meeting with Prime Minister Gruevski in Brussels on 24 March .
We agreed to step up our efforts to bring the EU agenda back to top priority for the country .
The Commission will support and monitor the process , including through a regular accession dialogue between the Commission and the government .
Concerning elections , we expect that the leaders will spare no efforts to ensure that elections will be fully transparent and in line with the best international standards .
The timing is totally up to them .
I continue stressing that freedom of expression is fundamental and that journalists must be able to express their views freely .
The Commission expects due process and non-selective application of the law .
The fight against corruption also needs to be pursued vigorously .
I fully agree with the emphasis placed on this subject in the European Parliament 's report and I welcome your suggestions regarding strengthened monitoring in this field .
For me , the 10th anniversary of the Ohrid Framework Agreement this summer is an opportunity to take stock of implementation , to bring all the communities of the country together and to renew the commitment to address the ongoing challenges .
Lastly , on the post-visa liberalisation monitoring , we need a review of the measures taken to prevent abuses of the visa regime .
Countries benefiting from visa-free access to the European Union need to take all necessary measures to limit unfounded asylum applications .
2011 is an important year for the whole region .
President Barroso and I will be visiting the region together , starting tomorrow and concluding in Ohrid on Saturday .
We will be showing our commitment to the countries of the region and , at the same time , underlining that they should spare no effort in creating a positive momentum for enlargement .
It is important that Skopje plays an active part .
It is therefore essential that the name issue is solved .
Both parties have repeated their commitment to finding a solution .
I would have hoped that this would be more substantially reflected in the recent round of negotiations in New York .
I have consistently raised the matter , encouraging both parties to remain fully engaged .
And I know that the two Prime Ministers in their direct contacts have already invested considerable efforts in reaching a mutually acceptable agreement .
I hope that they are able to capitalise on these efforts this year .
A solution would be a major breakthrough in turning 2011 into a promising year for enlargement .
I also thank you for your comments and requests related to the IPA Programme .
IPA is the concrete demonstration that we do not only assess and criticise countries , but we , in fact , support them very practically in their efforts .
Therefore , I fully agree with you that this instrument must be used as efficiently and effectively as possible .
I take note of your requests for further funding in the areas of unemployment , transport and the environment , to add to our ongoing efforts .
For most IPA components , the choice of projects is the responsibility of the national authorities .
This is very important for the country 's ownership .
Furthermore , for the period 2011-2013 , we are introducing , together with the authorities of the country , a sector-based approach .
It means we will focus on sectors where the help is most needed , and plan for several years ahead .
In this context , your suggestions are very valuable input for our ongoing programming dialogue .
In conclusion , I believe the Commission and Parliament are very much in agreement on the achievements of the country , and the remaining challenges .
I very much hope that the name issue will indeed be resolved in the near future , and before the judgment of the International Court of Justice , which is awaited in the autumn .
We are all keenly aware that the European Union has its role to play in providing the right incentives .
We are at a critical juncture with the country .
It can either take the path towards Europe , to our mutual benefit , or stand by as the rest of the region moves forward .
This is a time for all of us to fulfil our responsibilities and our commitments .
Mr President , representatives of the Commission and Council , ladies and gentlemen , I took responsibility for presenting the European Parliament resolution on the 2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
I want to emphasise that the former rapporteur , Zoran Thaler , did an excellent job .
We have before us an objective report which I hope will receive broad support during tomorrow 's vote .
In 2011 , new impetus may be given to the enlargement process in the entire Western Balkans region .
Croatia is about to complete its membership negotiations .
Serbia is on course to receive an endorsement from the European Commission to start such negotiations .
Macedonia must do everything it can not to lag further behind in this process .
The key problem is resolving the name dispute with Greece .
The early elections provide an opportunity for the new government that will be formed to use the electorate 's trust to make a definitive decision on this issue .
It must be clear that postponing the process entails an increasingly higher cost for Macedonia 's citizens .
We hope that the country 's leaders will be bold and far-sighted .
Mediation may also be sought from the European Commission so that the path to European Union membership can finally be opened to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
We hope that the Council will take into account the European Parliament 's position and that membership negotiations will start as soon as possible .
However , the country must not simply wait , but carry out all the necessary reforms in the meantime .
This will enable the negotiations to conclude much more quickly in the future .
The process of building a stable political system must continue . A key element in this is to improve electoral legislation .
A greater number and more effective measures and legislation are required against corruption , as well as reforms to the judicial system and public administration .
We are expecting serious efforts in terms of guaranteeing media freedom and independence .
Interethnic relations are a cause for concern .
The 10th anniversary of the Ohrid Framework Agreement provides an occasion to carry out a review of the achievements made and to outline future objectives with the involvement of all ethnic groups .
I hope that European integration and the necessary reforms in the country will convey key messages to all the main political forces and that they will give their broad agreement after the elections as well .
I wish to end by saying that the European Parliament will soon appoint a standing rapporteur whom we expect to be shown due respect and trust .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vigenin , you have spoken here as the rapporteur and not as an ordinary speaker .
Are you aware that the country has introduced massive reforms and made huge progress ?
The instability comes from the European Union 's actions .
The EU and the Council were prevented from acting by the blackmailing tactics of Greece , which have been clearly addressed by the Hungarian Presidency .
Did you know that or do you really believe what you said ?

( BG ) Mr President , I do not know , Mr Posselt , what you failed to understand in my speech and what contradicts the actual report and the view which the Committee on Foreign Affairs was united on .
I do not think that we need unnecessarily to give the authorities in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia the opportunity to use statements like yours to attempt to shift the blame for the reforms that have not been carried out and the objectives not achieved to the European Commission and European Parliament .
I think that the report encourages the reforms , but also requires further measures still , which is natural when we see that there are genuine problems in a country which will possibly be a member of the European Union .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , we have quite a balanced and objective report before us and I wish to thank all the colleagues who contributed to it .
The report is of significant importance for the future of the country and its EU integration process .
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has been a candidate country since 2005 and now , for the second time , the Commission has recommended that negotiations be opened .
We are supporting this recommendation , and the report calls again on the Council to open the negotiations immediately .
I believe this is a timely call .
The FYROM needs the European agenda as a stimulus to positive changes in the future .
Having said that , we should not be giving concessions to the FYROM , but we do need to motivate its politicians to progress and work on the European agenda .
The country has recently been going through a political crisis , with part of the opposition boycotting the parliament .
This is not the way that political discourse should be conducted .
Political contradictions need to be addressed through dialogue , on the basis of democratic institutions created for that purpose .
Therefore , I hope that the early elections called for June 2011 will contribute to resolving the situation .
They should be transparent , free and fair and should be conducted in line with all applicable international standards and with the participation of all the political parties .
The issue of regional cooperation and relations with neighbours is especially important for the FYROM and its neighbours .
I hope that the main issue which has been holding the country back from starting negotiations will be resolved soon .
In conclusion , let me say that we as politicians need to bring more vision and a broader perspective to the region .
It is our duty and responsibility to stimulate positive changes in this country .
Mr President , in keeping with the vision on enlargement , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe supports the immediate commencement of negotiations .
Mr President , I would not like Macedonia to join Turkey as one of the states which , to paraphrase Talleyrand , are dancing rather than advancing towards their European aspirations .
Although this report - and I must thank the former rapporteur , Mr Thaler , for the balance and objectivity he showed in drafting it - concludes that the situation in Macedonia has improved in a number of respects , I believe that starting negotiations will be a solution which will help speed up the reforms , create a democratic framework and a real opportunity for this country to become a European Union Member State .
It is ironic that this country 's population , unlike Iceland 's , is motivated to embrace European values .
In the latter , the number of people interested in sharing these values of ours is very small .
On the other hand , in Macedonia , the assessment of the political leadership 's performance is not favourable .
I do not believe that this assessment must take priority .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , the Committee on Foreign Affairs has delivered a good and balanced report on the progress of Macedonia , and we as Greens will gladly support it .
On the one hand , it is critical of the authorities in Macedonia , and more so than last year .
They need to work on political stability , they need to stop any provocation of ethnic non-majorities and neighbours , and they need to guarantee freedom of the media and expression .
On the other hand , it unambiguously calls for the opening of negotiations .
The country complies with the criteria and deserves that .
I wish Greece would respect the advice of the Commission and Parliament and stop blocking the accession process .
It can always put the brakes on the final decision if it really wants to .
I very much hope Macedonia will keep working on becoming a mature European democracy , regardless of what Greece does .
The accession dialogue that Commissioner Füle just mentioned sounds promising in that respect .
Reform is a good thing in any case .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , this year , we celebrate 30 years since your country , Greece , became a member of the EU .
As a confirmed philhellene , I believe Greece has contributed massively to our Union .
It has gained a great deal too , so why Greece would continue to deny the same benefits to its neighbour , Macedonia , simply on the base of its name , is quite beyond me and many from my country .
It is time other Member States took a much firmer line with Greece on this matter .
Having received a massive package of debt refinancing from the EU to prevent its euro-based economy from collapse , Greece is hardly now in a position to hold hostage the whole enlargement process with its neighbour .
Macedonia as a candidate has waited long and patiently for accession negotiations to start .
It would be a disaster now if continued delays result in Macedonia turning inwards and abandoning its EU and NATO membership ambitions .
This is a genuine risk given Macedonia 's domestic political fragility and its imminent elections .
We need to send a strong signal of support to the forces of reform and progress in Macedonia .
Failure to do so would resonate negatively throughout the Western Balkans , a region where EU membership prospects are the glue that binds these fractious countries together .
Mr President , we are in favour of the enlargement of the European Union to include all the Balkan countries , if they so wish .
However , I should like to point out , based on progress in enlargement to date , that cooperation with these countries and the accession procedure - especially in times of economic crisis - should contribute to sustainable development and the economic and social prosperity of the enlargement countries and the Union and their citizens , and not to the imposition of economic policies that plunge these countries into recession , increase unemployment and cut back social rights .
Also , Commissioner , I believe that the accession procedure should be carried out with respect for international law and international procedures , in this case , with respect and support for the procedure to find a commonly acceptable solution to the question of the name , under the aegis of the UN .
This is an important issue and should be resolved before accession negotiations commence .
The political forces in FYROM should take the necessary steps and avoid practices and rhetoric that exacerbate the problem .
Their political will , in terms of whether or not they want an accession procedure , will be judged on this point and not on military-type missions , such as Afghanistan , which the report again considers to be an achievement of this country .
Mr President , Mr Zoran Thaler , who acted as the rapporteur on FYROM , is no longer with us following the serious complaints which we all read about in the Sunday Times .
In my view , he enjoys a presumption of innocence .
However , in light of the accusations against him , the present report on FYROM does not enjoy a presumption of credibility .
In a letter to the President of the House dated 22 March , I asked for the report not to be put to the vote until such time as the results of enquiries had been released following the opening of the conciliation procedure .
I therefore call on every Member to abstain in this vote , in order to maintain the integrity and credibility of the House .
I personally shall do so .
Nevertheless , I must comment , in any event , that I do not agree with the position taken by Mrs Győri , but I do consider the views of Mr Füle and the deputy rapporteur to be realistic .
They have pointed out that this country is riddled with corruption , with no plan on the horizon , and that relations between the various ethnic groups and the quarrel with Greece over the question of the name remain .
Therefore , serious account needs to be taken of this point in the report .
( BG ) Mr President , I will agree , to a certain extent , with what Commissioner Füle said , namely , that we can actually see tangible progress in Macedonia 's development as it advances towards the European Union .
However , numerous unresolved issues also remain .
For example , the case concerning the registration of the Bulgarian non-governmental organisation ' RADKO ' has been pending for years on end before the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia .
On account of this registration and its rejection , to be more precise , ' RADKO ' won a case here in the building of the European Court of Human Rights , very close to our Parliament , for which Macedonia was condemned .
People considering themselves Bulgarian , whom I will refer to as a ' Bulgarian ethnic group ' to make it easier , even though this is not an accurate definition , are still the only ethnic group in Macedonia without a registered political party .
This is due to the repression that has already been going on for 20 years against anyone declaring that they consider themselves Bulgarian .
This has reached the point that these people no longer want to form a political party like all the other ethnic groups in Macedonia are doing .
I feel that these issues are vitally important and need to be resolved because they are part of the political criteria which , in my view - and on this point I will disagree with the Commissioner - Macedonia has not met .
Until these problems are resolved , it is not possible to initiate any new phase whatsoever in the negotiations on Macedonia 's accession to the European Union .

( EL ) Mr President , I have listened to the Commission ; the Commission report this time is much more critical than last time and we all know what is happening inside the country .
Nevertheless , I have listened to fellow Members putting forward unprecedented theories .
Theories such as , because Greece is in economic crisis , it should say ' yes ' to whatever everyone else wants .
I should like to point out to my fellow Members that , for as long as Greece is in economic crisis , no government will agree to start negotiations in the Council and the proof of Greece 's good faith was demonstrated when it agreed to this country 's candidature .
Consequently , either the issue over the name , which is being used as a cover for propaganda and efforts to put the current political situation first , will be resolved or negotiations will not start and no Greek government will agree to this .
Also , I wish to say to my fellow Members that there are numerous countries which have prevented other countries - over long periods of time - from joining the Union .
Greece cannot therefore be condemned for exercising its absolute right under the Treaties in the Council .

( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Mr Füle , I was one of the first or perhaps the first rapporteur on Macedonia in this House and I am watching with regret how the situation has and has not developed .
After this , I became rapporteur for Croatia and there , it is possible to see a clear difference .
Croatia had problems with its neighbours , including Slovenia , but Croatia worked to solve the problems .
If Macedonia does not make enough effort to resolve its difficulties , although I do not want to blame just one side , then at least that is Macedonia 's problem .
Let us be honest .
You cannot give the country a greater sense of identity by erecting a statue of Alexander the Great in every square or by calling the airport after Alexander the Great .
You must have an interest in resolving the problems .
Why is this interest important ?
Mr Füle referred to the Ohrid Framework Agreement , which represented major progress .
However , the less effort the country and the government make to implement domestic reforms and to find a solution together with Greece , the more the Albanian population of the country will say : ' What are we doing in this country when we really have no option of joining the European Union ? '
This is why it is so urgent for Macedonia to work together with Greece to resolve the problem .
( BG ) Mr President , Mrs Győri , Commissioner , I , too , would like to thank Mr Vigenin for the fine presentation of this report .
The European Union 's political will is for all the countries in the Western Balkans to be quickly and successfully integrated into the European Union and be given full membership of the European family .
The problems which have accumulated historically , especially in the Balkans , can only be overcome through European integration .
This would allow the borders in this part of Europe to turn from a sign of division to a sign of unity , as in the case here , for example , between France and Germany .
The resolution takes into account and welcomes the progress made by this country , especially in the economic sector .
However , it emphasises that the country needs to complete the remaining section of the journey towards full membership .
The resolution mentions problem areas as well . These are political and interethnic relations , good neighbourly relations , the state of freedom of the media and the rights of all citizens , irrespective of their declared ethnic origin .
Particularly those who openly declare their Bulgarian ethnic origin are sometimes subject to discrimination .
The resolution also mentions the importance of preserving cultural and historical heritage , which is an important European value .
It is good that this resolution explicitly mentions the situation regarding the ethnic Bulgarian cultural monuments in Macedonia .
Trust is built through respecting the historical facts and not through provocative , needless manipulation and distortion of the truth .
I sincerely want Macedonia 's citizens to overcome the problems of the past quickly so that we can welcome them as fully-fledged citizens of the European Union .
However , this process of overcoming problems is achieved through having the political will to break the ties with people who served in the former Yugoslav Communist secret services , infiltrated and engaged in acts of provocation in Macedonia 's political and economic , media and social life , just as happened , of course , in other Eastern European countries .
( EL ) Mr President , a few days ago , Mr Gruevski 's government announced early elections .
In the midst of the outcry about violations of the independence of the press , the independence of the judiciary and the Skopje 2014 urban development plan , at a time when political dialogue has ground to a halt , Mr Gruevski is attempting a forward retreat .
If the unresolved question of the name is added to this unfortunate internal environment , this will severely try the European prospects of this country .
The Greek Government has repeatedly proven that it wishes to close this chapter once and for all , by increasing bilateral contacts at prime ministerial level .
Unfortunately , so far , nothing positive has come out of this , through no fault of Greece 's .
Within this framework , Mr Gruevski is playing pre-election games and trying to convince international public opinion that it is Greece which is pulling new rabbits out of the hat on the name question , thereby constantly obstructing any resolution of the difference .
Responsibility for the European future of this country is in its hands and it is being called upon to assume its responsibilities .
( SV ) Mr President , as I only have one minute , I will just mention one point .
What we have learnt so far from enlargement is that the real reforms only begin once the negotiations start .
It is not the case that tomorrow , as soon as we initiate negotiations with Macedonia , we will also conclude this process .
This is only the beginning .
There will then be numerous opportunities to block the country if Greece should so wish , but to block the country now in this situation , and with the particular geographical location of this country , is totally irresponsible .
Macedonia is in a very sensitive position .
To make this country wait even longer would be to send out the wrong signals .
It would only contribute to increasing nationalism and strengthen the very negative forces that we want to combat through enlargement .
( SK ) Mr President , on the journey from Strasbourg to Brussels , we cross Luxembourg twice .
First through the sovereign state of Luxembourg , and then through the Belgian region of the same name .
If the Belgians had followed the logic of the Greeks when the EU was being established , it would not exist today .
Macedonia is ready to begin talks on EU accession .
However , if it is to continue on a democratic path , it will need our help and solidarity , just as Greece needed it recently .
I fully respect the veto right of every Member State when it comes to accepting new members .
I would like to appeal to the Members from Greece , however , to show goodwill and support not only this report , but also the amendment , which reinstates the reference to Macedonian in the text as one of the official languages .
( HU ) Mr President , the achievements made by Macedonia in relation to European integration were already greatly appreciated by the country report of February last year .
The relevant decision of the European Parliament once again urged the settlement of the name debate and the immediate commencement of accession negotiations .
I consider it unacceptable , and even downright scandalous , that there has not been any substantial progress in this regard in the past year either .
This undermines the credibility of the EU itself .
The EU , as well as the Hungarian Presidency , counts the accession of the countries of the Balkans , including Croatia and the Macedonian state , among its priorities .
I ask Parliament , the Council and the Commission to support , regardless of the country 's name , Macedonia 's accession negotiations being started as soon as possible .
( HU ) Mr President , I agree with those who point out that there is mutual responsibility .
The European Union , the European Council is responsible for continuing to drag its feet over the accession negotiations and thereby depriving itself of one of its most important tools , namely , the stabilisation of the region , and so is the Macedonian leadership for believing that , if the accession negotiations do not begin , it does not need to continue the reforms referred to by Minister Győri and Commissioner Füle .
And as far as the name is concerned , I must say that as a Central European , a Hungarian , I find this dispute between Greece and Macedonia exceedingly absurd .
I consider the inflexibility of both parties unacceptable .
I wonder how the European Union would have reacted if , for example , Hungary had objected to the accession of Romania in 2007 .
There was not the slightest risk of this happening in Hungary , and I therefore ask both parties to exercise reasonable self-restraint .
( SK ) Mr President , it cannot be denied that Macedonia has made substantial progress over the past year .
However , there is still room for improvement in key areas . In my opinion , the most important requirements are to secure the independence of the judiciary , the level of freedom of expression in the media , a stronger civil society and better political dialogue .
The office of ombudsman had considerably more work over the past year , but the number of its recommendations accepted by the public administration fell .
I therefore agree with the Commission 's view that the position of the ombudsman must be strengthened .
However , I welcome the success in the area of improving the protection of minorities and cultural rights .
Macedonia has substantially reduced the number of Roma who are without personal documents .
Unfortunately , their living conditions are still wretched and they continue to face discrimination .
As we all know , this is an issue which does not apply only to Macedonia .
The situation of the Roma confirms to us all the more that this is a pan-European problem .
Despite the problems , Macedonia remains a stable country in the region , enjoying good relations with neighbouring states , and I believe it is well on its way towards the EU .
( SK ) Mr President , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has long been interested in joining the EU .
According to the available information , the country is now ready to begin accession talks , as it has sufficiently fulfilled the necessary political criteria , achieving progress in the reform of public administration , the judiciary and police forces .
The political system appears to be stable , the political parties communicate with one another and the position of minorities has also improved .
Certain reservations may still be raised in relation to the independence of the judiciary , the fight against corruption and freedom of expression in the media , all of which has a negative impact on the business environment and the inflow of foreign capital .
However , progress has been achieved in the area of harmonising laws and policies , especially in the free movement of goods , the law on trading companies and financial services , and also justice , freedom and security .
I am therefore certain that the citizens of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia now quite rightly expect that free Europe will offer them the hand of friendship .
Let us have the confidence to open the doors of the European Union to them .
( EL ) Mr President , in this House , we all support the European prospects of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
We - and especially the Greek MEPs - also want to resolve the long-standing issue of the name of this country .
These are two objectives which , by default , are closely linked , but which do not run in parallel , Commissioner .
Do you believe that these two interlinked objectives will be achieved if we support the immediate start of accession negotiations between this country and the European Union tomorrow ?
I can assure you that they will bring about precisely the opposite : we will give the Gruevski government an incentive for even greater intransigence , thereby prolonging the impasse in negotiations on the name and , as a result , further freezing this country 's accession prospects .
If we adopt this report tomorrow , it will therefore be the wrong message , the wrong policy and the wrong move , which is why I shall be voting against the report tomorrow .
( DE ) Mr President , like Mr Swoboda , I would like to compare Croatia and Macedonia .
Both countries have an exemplary record as far as minorities are concerned .
The minorities in both countries are all represented in the government , which is not the case in most EU Member States .
However , there is one difference .
In Croatia , the opposition has largely taken a constructive approach .
In Macedonia , the socialist opposition has used brutal blocking tactics .
I regret the fact that some Members of this House have today turned themselves into the tools of the socialist opposition during the election campaign .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as acknowledged in the draft resolution we are discussing today , and in the Commission progress report of November 2010 , the country has sufficiently met the political criteria .
However , it needs to maintain the momentum of the reform process in all areas .
It is a critical issue indeed .
As the discussion has shown , we all agree on this important point .
As I have said already , we are at a critical juncture with the country .
It must continue on the path towards Europe as the rest of the region moves forward .
The leadership of the country needs to focus on the future for the benefit of its citizens .
They will have all our support in this endeavour .
Let me make one more remark which I think is important for the country we are debating and for the whole region .
It is not for the first time we have seen a party being represented in a parliament walking out and boycotting the work of the parliament .
Let me tell you my personal view ; it is unacceptable .
I think all the aspirant countries and candidate countries need to use the democratic institutions to strengthen them and not undermine them .
They need to learn that democracy needs to be exercised within the democratic institutions and not outside .
I hope very much that you will join me in sending a powerful message to the countries in the region that the political parties , whether they are from the right or left , should use the inclusive character of the process to work together on the European agenda and not take their argument to the street .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to respond to one aspect , namely the issue of the name of the country , and let me begin by stating that I deeply sympathise with the dissatisfaction , and even anger , of the Members over this matter .
There is nothing worse than a situation where we are stalling over an issue , and even if the country delivers in terms of performance , we are unable to acknowledge it .
I must say that I consider maintaining good neighbourly relations to be essential , and enlargement is only possible along these lines .
A part of this should be that the parties come to a mutually acceptable solution through negotiations , under the auspices of the UN .
The Council welcomes the ongoing high-level dialogue and is looking forward to it yielding results .
Currently , all attention is focused on the ongoing case before the International Court of Justice , where the arguments put forward orally were heard between 21 and 30 March .
The final decision is expected for September 2011 .
However , the fact that the name dispute remains unresolved , and the protraction of the so far unsuccessful negotiations , must not be a justification for slowing down the reforms in the country .
The Hungarian Presidency conducted in-depth bilateral negotiations with the parties concerned before the beginning of its term of Presidency , and encouraged them to find a solution .
It is they who must find this solution .
Although everyone else is free to help , it ultimately depends on them .
We therefore continuously encourage this dialogue and this search for a solution .
I would be deeply sorry if we could not make progress in this matter during the Hungarian Presidency .
As I have mentioned , the reason for this is not only the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , but the entire region , the courtyard of the European Union , for which the time has come to no longer be a courtyard but an integral part of the EU .
It should be important for us to finally be able to make progress . Thank you very much , Mr President .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I am both pleased and sad that we are having this debate today .
I am sad because six years have already elapsed since the Council granted the Republic of Macedonia candidate country status without any date being set for starting negotiations , in spite of the progress made .
While examining Mr Vigenin 's report , I recognise many of the demands made on my country , Romania , during the pre-accession period .
However , I notice that , in spite of the prompt , specific response from the Republic of Macedonia to these demands , we have not made any kind of progress in opening negotiations .
I think that the Republic of Macedonia 's journey towards EU membership is taking far too long and we do not want its citizens to lose their optimism and hope one day .
I agree with our rapporteur who is calling on the Commission , Council and High Representative to start developing a generally applicable arbitration mechanism which will resolve bilateral issues , including the dispute with Greece about this country 's name .
This is an important test not only for the post-Treaty of Lisbon common foreign policy , but also for the Union 's ability to resolve disputes at its borders .
The last assessment report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) is neither worse nor better than the previous ones .
However , we all know that the content of these reports is not the main obstacle to the commencement of accession talks .
The obstacle is the dispute with Greece over names .
Without this , the talks would probably have started already .
The EU should therefore play a more determined role in solving it , perhaps even a decisive role .
After almost 20 years of fruitless searching for a way out , it is now entirely appropriate to debate the next steps , including possible changes to the negotiating mechanism .
The Commission should submit relevant alternative proposals in this direction .
Through our lengthy passivity , we have all contributed to the uncertain fate of the entire country , yet this is a country that is still - even after so many years - reporting to the EU .
We should also end the ' foot-dragging ' between Parliament , the Commission and the Council over the start of accession talks .
No one takes seriously the ' dialogue of the deaf ' between Parliament and the Commission on the one side , and the Council on the other .
This is because it undermines the credibility of the EU as a whole .
Let us not fool ourselves - support for EU accession is still high in FYROM .
However , it has fallen noticeably over the long term .
The patience of the people of FYROM , both Macedonians and Albanians , has its limits , even if each have their reasons for this .
Situation in Côte d 'Ivoire
The next item is the statement by the Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire .
on behalf of the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . - Mr President , last Monday , the United Nations operations in Côte d 'Ivoire and French Licorne troops proceeded to neutralise the heavy weaponry that was concentrated in the hands of former President Laurent Gbagbo .
These weapons had , during the last weeks , frequently been used to terrorise the civilian population in Abidjan , resulting in numerous dead and wounded .
The neutralisation of these weapons was thus necessary to protect civilians , and was carried out in accordance with the mandate given by the UN Security Council in its Resolution 1975 .
Shortly afterwards , the Republican forces loyal to the democratically elected President Alassane Ouattara launched a ground offensive on Laurent Gbagbo 's last stronghold in Abidjan in order to force him to hand over power .
Due to these ongoing operations , it is our hope that the whole of Côte d 'Ivoire has now been brought under the control of its legal government .
I can only regret that this transfer of power could only be achieved at the price of human life and suffering , and that the verdict of the ballot boxes alone was not enough .
This , however , is a victory for democracy in Africa and sends an important message to many countries undergoing political elections in this continent .
Since his defeat in the presidential elections on 28 November 2010 , Mr Gbagbo has refused to hand over power despite the fact that international observers described the elections as free and fair and the entire international community , through the UN certification , recognised his opponent , Alassane Ouattara , as legally-elected President .
During the four months that have passed since , several initiatives have been made by ECOWAS , the African Union and the UN to negotiate a peaceful handover of power .
I would like to commend these organisations for their efforts made in the name of peace and democracy .
Unfortunately , all proposals for a peaceful handover of power were rejected by Mr Gbagbo , who insisted on clinging onto power illegally .
The EU therefore holds him personally responsible for the sufferings and bloodshed that the Ivorians have endured during these last four months of post-electoral crisis .
Mr Gbagbo should therefore be brought to justice to answer for his acts .
The EU , through the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , has congratulated President Ouattara on his victory , but we are aware of the numerous challenges ahead of him .
He has won the war but must now win the peace .
Law and order must be restored so that those hundreds of thousands of people who have fled their homes and even left the country can now feel safe to go home again .
The economy must be relaunched to end the last ten years of recession and provide for growth and jobs .
The administration must start functioning again so that public services can be provided .
The EU has stood by Côte d 'Ivoire throughout the long years of crisis .
EU cooperation has provided for humanitarian assistance but also for post-conflict aid for reconstruction and reconciliation .
Some EUR 500 million has been disbursed since 2003 .
During the last dramatic months , the EU has taken a number of restrictive measures against individuals and entities supporting Mr Gbagbo , and this is recognised by our African partners as having substantially helped throughout the crisis .
The EU should continue to accompany Côte d 'Ivoire at this crucial moment .
An aid package is being prepared , to be launched at the earliest possible opportunity .
It is now time to start working to implement peace in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Mr President , the events of the past 24 hours in Côte d 'Ivoire have been bewildering .
We heard that Mr Gbagbo was set to surrender , a claim that was later denied .
Now , tired of waiting for the outcome of the interminable wrangling , President Ouattara 's Republican forces have launched an offensive on Abidjan .
Amid all this confusion , let us not forget what brought us to the current situation .
Let me remind you that over the last four months , there have been several hundred deaths and one million displaced refugees .
We must not lose sight of the bigger picture .
The reason that we are in this situation is that Mr Gbagbo has stubbornly refused to listen to the verdict of the ballot boxes and to accept defeat .
I think that the time has finally come , as his regime is collapsing in the wake of defections by his supporters , for Mr Gbagbo to cede power to the rightful President , Alassane Ouattara .
What is more , we must not forget the human rights violations and infringements of humanitarian law that have been committed in the country , which may constitute crimes against humanity .
No effort should be spared in bringing the authors of these violations to justice - and that includes international justice .
Lastly , I would like to praise the action taken by the United Nations Operation in Côte d 'Ivoire ( UNOCI ) , with the support of French forces , to enforce the United Nations Security Council mandate aimed at putting an end to the use of heavy weaponry and at protecting civilians .
Mr President , the end of the struggle for power in Côte d 'Ivoire is in sight , after more than 1 500 people have died , nearly one million people in the region have been made refugees , entire streets of houses have been looted and the economy has ground to a halt .
The country is experiencing a catastrophe and that is the price which Laurent Gbagbo has had to pay for refusing to admit defeat .
His relentless refusal to respect the voters ' wishes merits strong condemnation .
Many other things also merit condemnation : all the violence of the last few months , the many human rights violations , the threats , the violence against United Nations personnel , the speeches stirring up hatred and the kidnappings .
There are still some firefights going on , but Gbagbo 's departure is being negotiated , and that is good news .
However , there is an emergency situation in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Many Ivorians are now running out of food and water , because they have not dared leave their homes .
It is essential that President Alassane Ouattara receives every support during the process of return to the rule of law , under which people will be able to live in peace and without fear , and under which the freedom of the press will be restored .
A return to the rule of law is now the first thing that needs to happen .
In that regard , the President has a duty to prevent his troops using force against the population and it is good that Ouattara has ordered an investigation into the circumstances surrounding the shocking massacre in Duékoué .
Whatever means the Ivorians choose to restore the rule of law , through the courts or through a truth and reconciliation commission , one thing is clear : there is no statute of limitation on war crimes .
The International Criminal Court must be allowed to do its work .
The sanctions have had an impact : Gbagbo has been financially drained .
However , we must now ensure that we rapidly begin to dismantle the sanctions as soon as Ouattara takes up his rightful office because everything has ground to a halt .
Even programmes for the provision of medicines to people in Côte d 'Ivoire with HIV-AIDS are now at risk .
Mr President , those donating aid to Côte d 'Ivoire should not leave the country in the lurch now .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , as we speak , hopefully the end of the Côte d 'Ivoire crisis is imminent .
We would all like to hear that Mr Gbagbo has surrendered in the next few hours .
The international community has been very patient , the African Union has undertaken several rounds of mediation , and the United Nations chose not to intervene between the two sides for several months .
The United Nations Operation in Côte d 'Ivoire ( UNOCI ) has now taken action , with support from the French Licorne troops and in accordance with the Security Council resolution , but it has done so in order to protect civilians from the heavy weaponry used by the incumbent regime .
The crisis in Côte d 'Ivoire should now serve as an example to all those who refuse to give up power despite electoral defeat .
These individuals need to understand that , from now on , the international community is determined to enforce the law .
Yet in strife-torn countries , where the concept of nationhood is still evolving , we cannot be satisfied with declaring a victor .
We must strive for national reconciliation .
This is the message that we now need to send to Mr Ouattara , who will be responsible for establishing a national unity government .
As each camp has accused the other of massacres and crimes against humanity , investigations need to be initiated with a view to apportioning blame and dispensing justice .
Justice can involve vengeance , but it can also bring peace .
I would like to plead in favour of the latter option , if that will allow Côte d 'Ivoire to rediscover peace and stability and to see growth and development resume .
Mr President , I am confused now .
I heard the Hungarian Presidency say : Mr Ouattara has won the war ; now he must win the peace .
However , I have been watching television all day , keeping up with all the news , and it seems to me that Ouattara is still in the process of winning the war .
It looks like it is going to happen , but it is still some way off .
When he finally manages to take up his post as President of the country , he will leave behind him four months of misery , which have left the country in a state of collapse , the economy in smithereens , people dead and population groups played off against one other .
What a start to a new period of governance !
If we are using expressions such as ' a victory for democracy in Africa ' to describe elections which have resulted in wars , then it seems to me that we must be getting our words confused .
However , what is far more serious is the fact that the country has responded to the elections in such a way .
What should we , in Europe , do now , if Mr Ouattara gets the chance to take up his position ?
I think that , with the cocoa boycott , we have demonstrated that we are capable of taking rapid action and that we are able to use trade to promote democracy .
Côte d 'Ivoire is one of the ACP countries : as such , it receives development aid from us and , thus , a political dialogue needs to be part of the picture .
We have to enter into that political dialogue with a man who is able to show that he can bring all parts of the country back together .
He has to show us and the rest of the world , but , above all , his own people , that he is able to move beyond this violence and that he is willing to make amends .
Mr President , it is difficult to comment on the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire when it is constantly changing and incredibly uncertain .
Let me start by thanking the shadow rapporteurs , who spent this morning working on the motion for a resolution that will be presented tomorrow .
We have all worked together to ensure that the motion is balanced and forward-looking .
We know today that atrocities have probably been committed by both camps and that the culprits will need to be brought to justice , no matter who they are .
The Ivorian population has been the main victim of the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire .
The United Nations presence on the ground , in the form of the United Nations Operation in Côte d 'Ivoire ( UNOCI ) , has been unable to protect civilians .
What is worse , it has taken action , with support from French military forces , against one side , admittedly under the auspices of a UN resolution , but one that dates back to 1975 , making it 36 years old .
The Chair of the African Union , Mr Obiang Nguema , denounced it in no uncertain terms yesterday .
Fortunately , the UNOCI does not seem to be involved in the final attack that is apparently now being launched by Mr Ouattara 's troops .
In view of all this , we did not want to be associated with the resolution and will not be voting in favour of it .
We are all aware of France 's role in Africa .
Françafrique has caused a lot of harm and continues to do so .
What is more , the French authorities make no secret of the policy , claiming that they want to protect and maintain France 's interests .
( FR ) Mr President , the terrible thing about our modern societies and , in particular , European society , and , even more specifically , our Parliament , is the generalised flock mentality : our tendency to behave like sheep .
Apart from the last two speakers , everyone has simply parroted what they have read in the paper , heard on the radio or seen on the television .
Everyone tells us that Mr Ouattara won the elections , which is quite possible , but it certainly was not clear-cut .
Everyone tells us that the brutal military intervention yesterday was a means of neutralising heavy arms .
These things are presented in the rosiest terms .
Neutralising heavy weaponry is another name for a bombardment .
I myself have seen the effects of bombardments : I am a reserve officer and I can tell you that a bombardment involves killing people , burning people , blowing people up .
In other words , it is military action conducted in favour of one side and against another .
It may be justifiable , but here , among parliamentarians , among political representatives , we should be brave enough to tell the truth .
We are also told that these arms were to be used to terrorise the civilian population .
Yet at the end of the day , in a civil war , some civilians are armed , particularly when one camp has Kalashnikovs and the backing of half of the nation 's army .
So I think we need to put an end to this hypocrisy .
We took brutal action in favour of one camp and against another .
Was that action justified ?
Perhaps .

Let me conclude by saying that I do not see how Mr Ouattara can be innocent of the atrocities committed by his troops while Mr Gbagbo is always blamed for the atrocities committed by his troops .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )


( FR ) Mr President , I would simply like to ask Mr Gollnisch what he believes the outcome of the election signifies and whether it means that Mr Ouattara 's victory must ultimately result in him taking power .
This is purely a question of democratic legitimacy .
I went to Côte d 'Ivoire as head of the election observation mission and I can assure you that the elections were valid and that there was a clear and unequivocal winner .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Preda , I said that Mr Ouattara might well have won the elections , but I do not think it was as clear-cut as you suggest .
In any case , the Côte d 'Ivoire Constitutional Court did not take that view , although the court is drawn up along political lines , just like the French Constitutional Court .
For my part , I would be delighted if we were to focus on the French elections .
I represent a group that has millions of voters , with a leader who reached the last round of the presidential elections , but which does not have a single member of parliament , nor yet a single senator in our national parliament .
Yet you are completely impervious to this particular scandal .
( Calls of ' off the subject ' from the Chamber )
( PL ) Mr President , the former President of Côte d 'Ivoire , Laurent Gbagbo , is said to have indicated yesterday he is ready to surrender and to have asked the United Nations for protection .
Negotiations over Gbagbo 's surrender are in progress .
They are being conducted after forces loyal to the democratically elected President Ouattara took over the presidential residence in Abidjan .
In the opinion of Prime Minister Soro , the end of Gbagbo 's rule is a matter of hours away .
I am not certain of this , but I hope this is how it will be .
However , we do know for certain that civilians , including women and children , are also being killed in the armed conflict .
In the clashes between the supporters of the two politicians , around 1 500 people have been killed , and a million have had to leave their homes .
A few days ago , one of Gbagbo 's advisers said that even a possible massacre in Abidjan will not convince the former President to admit defeat in the presidential election and hand over power .
It is easy to foresee , therefore , what should happen in Côte d 'Ivoire : a quick end to the fighting , the departure of the former President from the country , which will stabilise the situation significantly , the administration of justice to all those who have committed war crimes or murders , and stabilisation of the country .
The European Union should support all these measures .
( FI ) Mr President , we certainly hurried to help Libya , but with Côte d 'Ivoire , we have remained inactive since November .
The sanctions imposed by the Council are a step in the right direction , but when will they be lifted ?
Why have they been used to block the Abidjan Port Authority 's export of cocoa beans and to shut down the oil refinery ?
If we are not helping , at least we should not cause more trouble .
The innocent victims will be the Ivorian economy and , in the long term , European consumers too .
Laurent Gbagbo must give way and there should be support for the speedy return of refugees to their homes .
The surrounding countries cannot cope with the current volumes of refugees .
The EU must help organise elections and the construction of democratic institutions .
Normal business should not , however , be prevented .
Côte d 'Ivoire is the most prosperous economy in West Africa .
Economic recovery and access to EU markets for exported products are the real key to restabilising the country .
I shall expect a response from the Commission .

( FR ) Mr President , unlike Mr Gollnisch , I am of the opinion that we cannot allow civilians to die amid general indifference as they are exposed to force and violence employed by an illegitimate Head of State .
United Nations Security Council Resolution 1975 authorises the international community to obstruct a regime which uses weapons against its own people .
In the current case , this constitutes progress , in that we are no longer compelled to look on helplessly as civilian populations are subjected to atrocities committed by their leaders .
However , although we should welcome the fact that we can now break through the wall of indifference under international law , we must also ensure that all due precautions are taken to guarantee that military force remains a last resort .
Unfortunately , in Côte d 'Ivoire , President Gbagbo has not taken any action to avoid this terminal outcome .
When all is said and done , I dare to hope that Resolution 1975 on Côte d 'Ivoire , together with Resolution 1973 on Libya , will serve to dissuade others from citing State sovereignty as an excuse for killing their own citizens .
The combination of the International Criminal Court and the recent stance taken by the United Nations Security Council means that barbarous acts committed with impunity will soon no longer be the rule , but should hopefully become the exception .
( DE ) Mr President , in a deeply divided country like Côte d 'Ivoire , can a lasting peace be brought about by violent means and can the winner of the presidential election be legitimised ?
This seems extremely doubtful , especially as the real causes of the conflict have not been resolved .
The country was destabilised as a result of economic problems brought about largely by the structural adjustment programmes of the World Bank .
The sanctions which were rapidly imposed with the aim of weakening the Gbagbo government have exacerbated the situation and given rise to a humanitarian crisis in Côte d 'Ivoire .
The legitimacy of both claimants to the presidency is in dispute .
The armies of both sides are responsible for massacring the civilian population .
Once again , the West has taken sides and now the United Nations ( UN ) is waging war alongside French troops to try to ensure the victory of one side in the conflict .
Will European powers once again be deciding the fate of African people as they did in colonial times , but this time with the support of the UN ?
What has happened to the principles of international law ?
Is this the concept on which the UN was founded ?
Instead of aiming for peaceful solutions to conflicts , the UN seems to be supporting civil wars or taking sides in them .
Whose interest is this in ?
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to emphasise that , setting aside the political crisis in Côte d 'Ivoire , we are facing a genuine humanitarian crisis that may well linger on .
The post-electoral violence has resulted in over one million internally displaced persons and refugees .
What is more , the flood of refugees may reignite simmering tensions in the region .
The humanitarian crisis , ladies and gentlemen , will not be resolved by the political agreement that is currently being hammered out .
We must be able to respond rapidly if we are to avoid a worst-case scenario .
Whatever happens , the chaos in Abidjan will last for several months .
I would like to congratulate the Commission for deciding to increase its humanitarian aid budget to five times the original amount , bringing European support to over EUR 30 million .
The European Union must mobilise all the necessary resources in order to help the most vulnerable population groups and monitor how their requirements evolve .
We must also ensure that the greater media coverage devoted to the situation in Libya does not eclipse the gravity of the humanitarian crisis in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Furthermore , the current security situation is preventing humanitarian workers from operating and reaching the people , which is terrible .
I would like to close by saying that there must be no impunity : we must do our utmost to ensure that justice is done .
( DE ) Mr President , firstly , I would like to express my surprise that Baroness Ashton is once again not here .
However , I am pleased that she is being represented by my friend , Mr Németh .
I would like to see him , Mr Füle or another person permanently coordinating the foreign policy of the European Union and not someone who is hardly ever here in the European Parliament .
On the matter itself , I would like to make it quite clear that Côte d 'Ivoire , of course , has many problems which need to be resolved .
However , President Ouattara was clearly the winner of the election and he is the person who has democratic legitimacy .
This is the view of the African Union and of many other bodies .
Therefore , we should be grateful that the United Nations ( UN ) and , above all , the UN Secretary-General and President Sarkozy , have prevented a massacre from occurring like those in other African states , such as in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
For this reason , we should not quibble over this .
Of course , this does not resolve the problems .
However , when Mr Putin starts to criticise the UN and to say that the UN Secretary-General has gone beyond his mandate , this destabilises the UN at a time when it is urgently needed .
The African Union should also not express its opinions so loudly , because it has completely failed to help in this crisis .
The African Union should have helped to bring about democracy in Côte d 'Ivoire .
We Europeans have made many mistakes in the past and we are continuing to do so .
However , in this case , the mistakes are someone else 's responsibility .
Our services have informed me , and I think it is important to know this , that at the beginning of the year , the Vice-President / High Representative 's office sent a list of the plenaries in which she would be able to attend .
It was known from then that she could not be here this time , so obviously if we have a debate that involves issues like that , someone else has to represent her , and that should be clear .
We now move on to the catch-the-eye procedure .
There are three speakers .
( FR ) Mr President , the violence is truly escalating in Côte d 'Ivoire .
Political conflict between two individuals has , unfortunately , resulted in a humanitarian crisis .
Clearly , the basic democratic principle of respecting election results must be upheld .
Mr Gbagbo 's departure is therefore inevitable .
The question is : what comes next ?
There is a danger that tensions between the two camps will intensify .
What do we plan to do if civil war breaks out ?
We should work towards achieving three things .
Our first priority has to be maintaining peace and stability , which is needed so that the people of Côte d 'Ivoire can resume their daily lives : eating , providing care , working and going to school .
An independent commission must be established to investigate the violence perpetrated since the conflict began .
Secondly , the United Nations Operation in Côte d 'Ivoire and the African Union must continue their activities .
However , we should also consider setting up a dialogue mechanism that will include all parties , both within the country and from the wider international community .
Lastly , let me remind you that the European Union sent an election observation mission .
The Union must now press for the recommendations it made to be taken into account and integrated in the post-crisis process .
Mr President , with the aid of modern technology , I am watching the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire unfolding as I sit here .
These pieces of equipment are playing their role in Côte d 'Ivoire , just as they have done in North Africa , with people texting for assistance and medical help .
Over the past six months , the patience of the friends of Côte d 'Ivoire has been sorely tried : it has been like a car crash in slow motion as we have watched the country slide into the situation in which it now finds itself - and it is always the most vulnerable who suffer .
We have been talking here this week about refugees coming from North Africa to Europe , but we have also heard reports of nearly a million fleeing to neighbouring countries which are almost as poor , or even poorer , than Côte d 'Ivoire .
Friends of that country must be on stand-by to help , as soon as we can , to restore it to normality and health and give the people there the prospect of good fortune in the future .
( PT ) Mr President , the civil war situation in Côte d 'Ivoire remains worrying , with the country paralysed economically , and with high levels of violence that have affected its people and turned it into a humanitarian crisis .
It is time to put a stop to this .
We know that there are longstanding reasons for the grave situation being experienced there , particularly the poverty and social inequality left there by former colonialism or by the structural adjustment plans imposed for years by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) .
However , these last four months of misery following the elections have shown how regrettable it is that the international community , including the European Union , has not made sufficient use of diplomatic channels for a peaceful and political solution to the crisis .
The role of France in this matter is also regrettable , as it preferred military intervention to persisting with diplomatic channels .
We therefore call for an end to the war and to violence by all parties , and we urge the EU to act accordingly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to quote the words of a famous Hungarian poet : ' Among murderers , he who remains silent is an accomplice ' .
When we are seeing that thousands are dying and people are fleeing in their millions , we must not comfort ourselves with phrases recalling the dove of peace , but must take action .
And before anyone draws parallels between the action in Libya and Côte d 'Ivoire and that in Iraq , I would like to remind everyone that the current action is not reminiscent of Iraq or even Afghanistan , but of Rwanda , and of Kosovo , and it is no coincidence that we have been talking so much over the past few weeks about having , as we formulated it , a ' right and responsibility to protect ' civilians , citizens .
Accordingly , I would like to repeat that yes , Mr Gbagbo has lost this fight , is alone in his bunker , and is awaiting his fate .
I would also like to stress that the legal grounds for this action is indisputable in the present situation .
The UN Security Council adopted Resolution 1975 , and this resolution provides a perfectly clear mandate for the action .
Thirdly , I would also like to emphasise that the crimes committed must no longer remain shrouded in obscurity and without investigation .
It is to my great satisfaction that legally elected President Ouattara , as well as the Prime Minister , have consented to and clearly support the UN conducting an international investigation of the massacres committed .
The investigation of these massacres is therefore already a part , and a very clear pre-requisite , of any settlement .

As far as the European Union 's contribution is concerned , ECHO has already at this point envisaged EUR 30 million in humanitarian aid and , as I have also indicated in my introductory speech , a package will be prepared by the European Union in the near future which will provide the European Union 's support to the economic and institution-building goals of the legitimately elected President and government .
I have received seven motions for resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 20 : 35 and resumed at 21 : 00 )

Request for the defence of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations
Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - Eastern Dimension - Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - Southern Dimension
The next item is the joint debate on the Commission statements on :
Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - Eastern Dimension
Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - Southern Dimension .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am delighted to have this opportunity to have an exchange of views with Parliament on the European Neighbourhood Policy .
In the context of the current events in the Southern Mediterranean , redeveloping this policy could not be more important .
In fact , over the past nine months , the Commission has undertaken a review of the policy .
I want to take this opportunity to thank Members for their input into the consultation , which took responses from partner countries , EU Member States , academics and civil society groups .
I have read both Mário David 's report on the south and Marek Siwiec 's report on the east and find them both significant and useful .
I am pleased that our thoughts are along the same lines .
You will have noticed that the results of our previous discussions on Neighbourhood Policy are already reflected in the communication on a partnership for democracy and shared prosperity of 8 March .
Now , we are preparing for the wider communication on the results of the review , which is due to be published in May .
A key outcome of the review is a new emphasis on differentiation of the Neighbourhood Policy , according to the needs and wishes of each partner country .
While the policy will continue to offer engagement to all partners , every neighbour is different and has different aspirations .
Some partner countries want to progress as far as they can towards the European Union - indeed as far as accession - but others prefer to make the most of other benefits of the Neighbourhood Policy .
So it will deliver more for more , in a specific and differentiated way , alongside stronger political steering of our relationship with our partners .

Nevertheless , as both Mr David and Mr Siwiec recommend in their reports , our shared values of democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights will be at the heart of the revised Neighbourhood Policy for all partner countries .
They should find their expression in stronger joint commitments to the elements indispensable to democratisation .
I am thinking , in particular , of free and fair elections , freedom of expression and association , judicial independence , the fight against corruption and security sector reform .
As highlighted in both reports , the revised Neighbourhood Policy will also recognise and act on the importance of the civil society .
Non-governmental organisations have the expertise and experience to deliver democratic and market-oriented reforms from the bottom up , based on shared values .
A thriving civil society gets citizens involved and helps to hold governments to account , so the European Union will complement its relations with governments with much closer engagement with civil society .
This is also important at a regional and sub-regional level where , for example , the Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum has been making good progress .
The forthcoming communication will offer more detail on the approach towards the two sub-regions of our neighbourhood .
It will spell out how we see the Eastern Partnership developing further in the wake of the summit under the Polish Presidency .
In the south , the Union for the Mediterranean has the potential to make a real difference but , frankly , it has not yet done so , and must be revitalised .
Its promise lies in developing concrete economic projects with a focus on employment , innovations and growth .
The Union for the Mediterranean Secretariat is best placed to act as a catalyst and bring together states , international and financial institutions and private companies to work on such economic projects .
I would like to mention briefly three other elements brought to light by the review , which will be key to the revised Neighbourhood Policy : first , the role of trade and economic integration to help advance stability and prosperity in partner countries .
The most significant vehicle to achieve this is the deep and comprehensive free trade area .
A successful DFCTA has a transformative power .
Regulatory reforms made by a partner country are encouraged through trade .
Next , the need for improved mobility between partner countries and the European Union since there is no better way to promote European values than through sharing experience person to person .
The Neighbourhood Policy will seek improvements to mobility without losing sight of security .
Finally , the desire expressed in the consultation by many partner countries for greater political engagement with the European Union .
Closer and more substantial political dialogue across all areas of our relationship will help us resolve difficult issues in a spirit of mutual confidence .
Thank you very much for your attention .
I very much look forward to the coming debate and I will take your views on board .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the historic times we are living through demand firm and determined action .
Like many of you , we have been watching the events unfolding in the Mediterranean region with a mixture of hope , concern and expectation .
I am , however , pleased with the proactive stance that Parliament is preparing to adopt on the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) - Southern Dimension , which I hope will lead to a greater EU presence in this area , not only as a customer , but also as a committed partner .
The absolute necessity of advocating our fundamental values in our relations with our neighbouring countries must be stressed from the outset .
We can no longer acquiesce in our defence of democracy , human rights and , especially , social justice .
We can no longer focus on short-term stability at the expense of the best interests of our citizens , of constantly defending them , and of their individual and collective freedom , with a particular focus on women 's rights .
In the future , the Union must favour a bottom-up approach to its Neighbourhood Policy .
It is vital that this happens .
Only greater involvement by local communities and civil society will ensure maximum effectiveness in implementing it .
However , I cannot help but voice my frustration : I regret the fact that Parliament and the Commission have not been willing to make the most of this opportunity to differentiate once and for all between the ENP to the east - with countries that could , in the future , potentially become our partners in the Union - and the ENP to the south .
I also challenge the Commission to show , in its review process on 20 April , the ambition that the current situation demands , namely , with a tailor-made Neighbourhood Policy adapted to each state , with clear benchmarks and careful assessment that could lead to a future Mediterranean economic area , incorporating the new democracies of the south .
To finish , Commissioner , we trust that the good atmosphere and cooperation that have characterised work on this subject will lead to Parliament being permanently involved in planning and evaluating this policy .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have reached the final , today , or rather the semi-final , of work in connection with a review of the European Union 's Eastern policy .
We might say that the Neighbourhood Policy was once designed as a kind of ' consolation prize ' for countries which were not going to accede to the European Union .
What is the situation like today ?
What are the countries like which are included in the policy ?
It can be said that the policy is a list of successes - different kinds of success - because it is not possible to say in a word what has been achieved in those years by Moldova in comparison with Ukraine and , for example , with the tragic situation in Belarus .
It can , however , be said that in these countries , more European values have appeared , more and better law is being made , greater concern for people is in evidence and economies are working much more efficiently - and we have played our part in this .
This is the effect of Eastern policy , which today is called the Eastern Partnership .
If we are talking , today , about the fact that we want to conduct a review of this policy , then it is crucial to say that we want to see that these countries , in a variety of ways and at different speeds , are going to move towards our values - towards what the European Union offers them .
If it is an à la carte policy , then let those countries show initiative , and let us respond well to those initiatives .
We want , to a greater degree , and this is written in the report , to make Neighbourhood Policy something for the citizens , the elite , journalists and young people .
We want them to see what our life is like , and that it is worth organising life in the way we do .
We want , in the long run , to make it easier to travel to the European Union - we want the visa system to be easier .
Let us also say , as we do in the report directly : yes , this policy needs money .
However , the money which the European Union allocates to this should be better spent , should reach those for whom it is intended , and should sometimes bypass states and any state administration which is capable of wasting that money .
Finally , let us say something about the conflict .
For there is a conflict in this Chamber about the fact that we are not able or do not want to say clearly what the wording is ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , always with a smile on your face , Commissioner , from the start of this term of the EP , if not before , we have had a very intensive and lively debate on the urgency of reforming the Eastern and Southern Dimensions of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
The need for such reform , which should lead to the interests in these regions being integrated more effectively , has , in fact , become topical and acute ; it has become a necessity following the dramatic changes and processes which have unfolded in the region .
The resolution , which was prepared by my fellow Member , Mário David , who is an excellent rapporteur , and which was supplemented by a large number of shadow rapporteurs and Members as the events unfolded , is today a complete document .
It emphasises our responsibility to develop relations with the countries in the region on the basis of modern values , democratic freedoms and human rights .
In this respect , it is no coincidence that we , in particular , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , have , more than ever , emphasised equal treatment of women , recognition of diversity and protection of all minorities .
All of this should become an integral part of the policy which the European Union promotes in its neighbourhood in the future , including through its diplomatic service .
We must be more efficient when supporting those who are fighting for the same causes in various countries : for freedom , for the right to participate in decision making and for a fair exploitation of natural resources .
The resolution draws attention to the urgent need for more operational financial instruments with which we can support economic development , the modernisation of infrastructure and investment in areas , where they are effective ... where the effects may be somewhat less visible , but which will be felt in the long term , for example , in education , integration of research and academic institutions and the introduction of new technologies .
Finally , it is no coincidence that the resolution calls attention to the urgency of reviving the Union for the Mediterranean with a view to development , a dialogue and resolution of outstanding problems in the region .
It is time , ladies and gentlemen , that we opened the box of outstanding issues and frozen conflicts , so that the wave of democratisation can remove any remaining political obstacles on the road to peace , reconciliation and a new development framework in the region .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Madam President , I wonder if Mr Vajgl has considered the cost to the EU taxpayer of these extra-territorial initiatives proposed in the report and which he is also endorsing ?
( SL ) Mr Dartmouth , if you are talking about the initiative as a whole , as covered by the report , I think that our investments , at any rate , will certainly be very , very beneficial when compared with the damage that might arise if we do not engage more in this area .
This is particularly true of the Union for the Mediterranean where it is evident that we need more elaborate instruments in order to develop some kind of effective policy on the part of the European Union .
Madam President , the Eastern Partnership is still very new .
Therefore , it is important for us to evaluate , as we do in this report , whether our Eastern European neighbours have come any closer to the objectives of democratic reform .
It is clear that there has been progress in this area , but we have also seen setbacks .
For Belarus and also for Ukraine , Russia 's autocratic system , which is characterised by a flexible approach to foreign policy and a tough approach to domestic policy , and by oppression and repression , is obviously more attractive and provides more guidance than what the EU has to offer .
However , the experiences and the mistakes made in the Union for the Mediterranean , where the aim was to achieve a state of security by supporting despotic regimes , show that we must rely on forces other than corrupt governments .
Our objective of an active civil society based on freedom and the fundamental values of the EU can only be achieved from the bottom up by promoting and supporting the self-organisation of civil society .
The Civil Society Forum , founded as part of the Eastern Partnership , is a good start .
It is also currently the only body in which the Belarus opposition is involved .
Unfortunately , the seats at Euronest will remain empty while there is no freely and correctly elected parliament in the country .
The Civil Society Forum needs our support , as we have described in paragraph 20 of the report .
However , it will remain a mere declaration of intent unless we back it up with effective measures .
Therefore , I am calling on you urgently to support Amendment 5 tomorrow which provides for continuous financial support and a secretariat for the organisation .
Please support Amendment 5 tomorrow so that we can make progress on developing a civil society .
This really is an excellent approach .
I have experienced myself in Berlin how people can achieve objectives of this kind by working from the grassroots upwards .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , the Middle East and North African countries of the Southern Neighbourhood clearly need the EU 's long-term political and - where appropriate - financial support .
In countries such as Egypt , Tunisia and Libya , we should concentrate our efforts on consolidating nascent democratic awakenings into a lasting legacy of stable , secular and enlightened governance .
In Syria , we should be more supportive of democratic opposition to President al-Assad , who is clearly no friend of the West , as we have seen from his efforts with North Korea to develop a nuclear weapon and his political support for Iran and for terrorism .
Inevitably , the ongoing turbulence demands a refocusing of ENP priorities towards the South .
However , this should not happen at the expense of our partners in the Eastern Dimension .
Some of those countries have also embarked on a long-term process of democratic transition , openness and reform .
It would be perverse to reward them for this progress by denying them the resources and support to maintain their pro-Western trajectory , simply on the basis that the Southern Dimension has more acute need of the EU 's attentions now .
On Libya , I strongly support the no-fly zone and the pressing need for regime change .
I support recognition of the Transitional National Council and the unfreezing of EU-frozen Gaddafi assets and releasing the money to the Benghazi pro-democracy forces to buy supplies and , yes , even to buy arms .
I believe that UN Security Council Resolution 1970 only specifically bans the sale of arms to the Jamahiriya and , therefore , not to the Benghazi rebels , though unfortunately the EU legislation appears to transpose 1970 incorrectly , with a blanket arms embargo .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , Mr Füle , Mr Siwiec , thank you for devoting yourself to this subject .

Parliament 's almost unanimous opinion is that Neighbourhood Policy has not produced the expected results .
I agree with that .
However , I do not agree with the analysis of the causes .
The results do not meet our expectations because we have not focused on the interests which we have in common with our neighbours .
Instead , we have concentrated on our own interests and on our ideas of how neighbouring countries should develop .
Quite obviously , what we need is a different approach .
We need a policy which makes cooperation between both sides a central principle and which respects the sovereign right of the citizens in the partner countries to shape their future without outside interference .
The content of the policy must focus on our common European challenges and transform partnership policy into a permanent tool for genuine cooperative discussions and for identifying solutions to joint problems .
We will not make any progress in our Neighbourhood Policy unless we change our views and develop new political approaches .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , in preparation for this debate , I reread the open letter which Svetlana Alexeyivich , certainly the most important intellectual voice in Belarus , addressed to President Alexander Lukashenko .
She writes , quote , ' Our people are afraid of a revolution , too .
However , nobody wants to carry on living like this anymore .
Before the election , the political dialogue in our society had only just begun , but you blatantly nipped it in the bud straightaway .
Our country has been paralysed by fear again . '
Unquote .
Alexeyivich urged Lukashenko to resume dialogue with the people .
Was that perhaps a naïve idea ?
At the end of the day , in an interview given to the Neue Zürcher Zeitung on 31 January 2011 , the writer referred to Lukashenko as holding the entire Belarusian nation hostage and as a dictator with small man syndrome over whom only the Kremlin could exert any real influence .
However , the point is that there is no evidence that Lukashenko is happy to place all his eggs in Moscow 's basket .
In view of that , the European institutions could provide a strategic opening , despite the current difficult situation .
I wish Commissioner Füle much wisdom , perseverance and , indeed , the full support of our Parliament in establishing and making the most of responsible contact with Belarus .
( EL ) Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for his comments .
It is true that the European Neighbourhood Policy and Eastern Dimension were decisive steps in efforts to deepen relations with our neighbours to the East .
Nonetheless , today , there is an urgent need to give new impetus to this effort .
The crisis which has broken out in the countries of North Africa , which are included in the Southern Dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy , are monopolising international interest , but the Eastern Dimension has faced , and still faces , similar challenges .
Events in Belarus are very clearly a message and wake-up call for the European Union in terms of the responsibilities which it must assume in such cases .
We need a long-term strategic plan for growth and stability in the region .
Consequently , the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - and the Eastern Dimension - must reflect an assumption of greater political obligation on the part of our partners .
It must be clear from the outset that the promotion of , and respect for , democratic procedures , the rule of law , fundamental human rights and the protection of minorities are important points in evaluating the progress made by our partners .
That is why we need clear priorities and quantifiable targets in advance .
Of course , this sort of evaluation should not be horizontal ; we need to differentiate our relations with our partners , as each country will need to be judged separately in terms of the progress it has made , based on clearly defined criteria .
Democracy and human rights brook no ambiguity ; the European Union was founded on the basis of these principles and , therefore , has a moral obligation to maintain them in the future .
Within this framework , the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy needs to give new impetus to efforts to promote a substantive political framework for cooperation with our eastern partners .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to say something very briefly in response to my fellow Member 's objection about the costs , despite the fact that he has disappeared again .
The two rapporteurs , who produced very good reports and whom I would like to thank very much , indicate relatively clearly what the costs would be if we did not have a Neighbourhood Policy .
They would be much higher in terms of human costs , if we look at the refugee crisis in the south , but also , of course , in terms of economic and social costs , if we look at all our neighbouring countries in the south and east .
I would like to say a few words about the Eastern Partnership .
Other Members will be speaking about the Southern Partnership .
It is true that the situation in Belarus is bad , but we must make every effort to contact unofficial bodies , individual citizens , young people and students to encourage genuinely positive and democratic development from the inside out .
In response to Mr Schulz , who earlier said that Belarus and Ukraine were in the same situation , I would like to explain that the differences between them are very great .
In Ukraine , we should look at the problems , but also at what is going well and at the positive changes .
A brief comment on the Southern Caucasus , because it is important for us to focus on this area , too .
The developments in Azerbaijan , where bloggers and demonstrators are being imprisoned , are alarming .
It is shameful for a country like Azerbaijan and for its President to do things of this kind .
We are concerned about a possible new conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia .
I would like to ask Mr Füle to keep a very close eye on this region and to help the region to emerge from the mess it is in and from this conflict situation .
Madam President , I would like to draw your attention to the frozen conflict in the Nagorno-Karabakh region , which is an inseparable part of the Republic of Azerbaijan .
Whenever the Neighbourhood Policies or other policies involving the South Caucasus region are being discussed , the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan , and also of Georgia , should always be kept in mind .
Parliament must respect the fact that the Nagorno-Karabakh region is internationally recognised as part of Azerbaijan , although it is occupied by the Armenian military forces and , as we know , supported politically by the Kremlin authorities .
This acknowledgement should always be reflected in documents and statements both in Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
All initiatives by the EU side to obscure this fact must be discouraged in order to move towards a peaceful and legitimate resolution of the frozen conflict in Nagorno-Karabakh and in the region .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , the popular movements in the Southern Mediterranean have clearly highlighted weaknesses in our European Neighbourhood Policy .
As I see it , the problem lies not so much with the Neighbourhood Policy objectives , which are set out in Articles 8 and 21 of the Treaty of Lisbon on promoting and respecting human rights and democracy - which are also social objectives - but rather in our flawed implementation of those objectives .
Consequently , we need to learn lessons for the future .
This is what is being done in the current work on reviewing the policy .
The first issue , which was raised by Mr Schulz , is our ability to provide real and effective support for civil society in all neighbouring countries , irrespective of their importance in terms of trade or strategy , or their political situation .
When neighbouring countries are in a state of transition , this is extremely useful and necessary .
It is also undeniably easier than when they are labouring under the yoke of an authoritarian regime , as is the case in Syria , but this is a challenge , an issue , that we need to learn to address effectively .
I believe that we will also need to learn to discuss these matters with our partners , not only in forums dedicated to human rights , such as sub-committees , but also at the highest political level .
Yet , at the same time , we must ensure that sub-committee agendas do not become disconnected from the situation , as has happened in the past , or fail to feed into other bodies , such as the Justice and Home Affairs Council ( JHA ) .
I support the communication on a partnership for democracy and shared prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean , which I believe is pivotal .
It seems to me that we should also add a separate target for social justice and combating inequalities .
Naturally , we will also need to rethink our understanding of mobility in the Mediterranean region .
I think that the mobility partnership is a positive feature , but we will also need to learn how to promote the benefits of this mobility for individuals who travel between the Northern and Southern Mediterranean and for both the host nation and the country of origin .
We will also need to factor these changing movements into basic rights for those who cross the Mediterranean and settle in Europe .
( PL ) Madam President , the present discussion is taking place at a time when we are adopting a new approach to Neighbourhood Policy .
We would like to bring to a definitive end the times when the concept of stability was used as a bargaining chip , when the concept of stability was used to gain concessions in the areas of human rights and the principles of democracy .
Therefore , I would like to take this opportunity to draw attention to the holistic approach to Neighbourhood Policy .
Let us not think back over just the last few months ; let us also remember earlier events , such as those which have taken place in Belarus .
Today , we are stressing the need to uphold the gentleman 's agreement concerning the allocation of one third of the funds available as part of the Neighbourhood Policy to Eastern policy .
We are not thinking about sharing wealth but about sharing security .
This is a matter of fundamental security and the future of cooperation of EU Member States with countries which , in the future , will perhaps also be Member States of the Union .
( FR ) Madam President , the Arab revolutions have given rise to a great deal of hope in the countries concerned and beyond .
They have demonstrated that democracy and human rights can be universal values .
However , the people of these countries remain very sceptical about the European Union .
I can understand that in the light of past history and of the support given to dictators .
I can also understand it when I learn that we are incapable of discussing democratic assistance without immediately linking it to an economic approach that ignores the choices made by these countries - and worse , when I see that some governments , including my national government , are still demanding that European aid be conditional on readmission agreements .
This is a strange understanding of mobility .
Commissioner , I wonder whether we could not give a strong signal with regard to Tunisia by calling for a moratorium on the country 's debt until a democratically elected government has been put in place , which is due to happen in July .
I would also suggest that we should help them to audit the debt and to cancel the illegitimate debt which benefited the Ben Ali-Trabelsi family at the expense of the Tunisian people .
I would like a detailed answer to my question , Commissioner .
( EL ) Madam President , I consider that Commissioner Füle is handling correctly the question of supervision of the European Neighbourhood Policy , the scope of which extends to 16 States , from the underbelly of Africa to the underbelly of Russia .
However , the European Neighbourhood Policy has been tested by recent developments in the Arab world , which have highlighted the dissatisfaction of the people with their autocratic regimes and , at the same time , the failure of the economic and social reforms in these countries supported by the Union .
The autocratic regimes in Libya , Tunisia , Egypt and other countries have been in place for years and we cooperate with them .
Now , all of a sudden , we are taking action against them .
We therefore need to review the European Neighbourhood Policy strategy by promoting democracy and human rights and controlling planned financing .
The main factor that needs to be evaluated correctly is that young people in these countries are more educated and , at the same time , unemployed ; unfortunately , 7 400 000 European citizens are in exactly the same position .
Madam President , developments in the Southern Neighbourhood have provoked a lot of criticism of the EU Neighbourhood Policy as pursued so far .
We should be critical , of course , but we should also be fair .
The Neighbourhood Policy has contributed a lot to the development of relations with those countries - and not only with those countries but also with their societies , which will be one of the main issues now to be added to the review of Neighbourhood Policy .
These developments , to some extent , follow the engagement of the European Union with those countries .
So , in that respect , we need to review this policy , and to adapt it , but we should not simply criticise what has been done so far .
As such , the EP reports are an important contribution to the ENP review and I hope they will be taken into consideration by the Commission .
I would like to warn against the attempts to oppose East and South , not only as regards refocusing attention , but also , maybe , as regards reallocating funds and resources .
We have to be very careful on this and to take into account the fact that , on the one hand , of course , the challenge is to assist democratic processes in Egypt and Tunisia , and to support democratisation in the South , but it is also to preserve the peace in the Southern Caucuses , for example , and to contribute to the peaceful solution of frozen conflicts and to consolidate democracies .
( FI ) Madam President , it is very important that , in addition to the Southern Neighbourhood Policy , we should also be talking about an Eastern Neighbourhood Policy .
There are very many internal administrative problems associated with it , and the administration of Russian programmes , at least , should be transferred to the DirectorateGeneral for Regional Policy .
The reason for this is that the authorities administering the programmes would be able to revise them to reflect more particular regional features and conditions .
This would also be a way to guarantee their continuity .
We have to remember that this change would not , in itself , require any special amendments to the legal basis of the programmes or the EU budget .
It would instead be more a case of an internal decision on the part of the Commission .
At present , there are very many problems within these programmes , and we should effect some structural changes to them .
This would constitute a clear message , and I hope that the Commission will also do what it can to back this decision .
( PL ) Madam President , European Neighbourhood Policy and , as part of this , the Eastern Partnership , is a key area and challenge for the European Union .
It is an important political framework for strengthening relations with the partner countries - countries with which we should be moving towards economic and political integration .
In the case of Ukraine , this process should end with the prospect of full membership of the European Union , of course , following fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria , and for this , it is essential for there to be greater political commitment from the authorities in Kiev .
Let us not forget the Europeans in Belarus , a country with a civilisation similar to our own , but one which is kept closed by the Lukashenko regime .
Let us do everything we can for Belarusians to see that Europe remembers them and supports their endeavours to gain democracy .
We can give real expression to our efforts by cutting the costs involved in obtaining Schengen visas , facilitating people-to-people contacts between Belarus and the rest of Europe and supporting community and civic initiatives in Belarus .
By facilitating travel and contacts between the Union and Belarus , we can undermine the Lukashenko regime much more effectively than with dozens of statements or resolutions .
Finally , I would like to point out that in many countries included in the Neighbourhood Policy , there are still serious problems in the area of respect for freedom of expression , particularly in the media , freedom of association and freedom of assembly .
As a Parliament in a free Europe , we must ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( CS ) Madam President , I hope there is no one here from the countries of the Eastern Partnership , as they might think , on the basis of our numbers here , that we are not interested in the Eastern Partnership .
I , too , would like to stress the importance of , and the need for a debate on , the Eastern Partnership .
It is important because the area to the East of the borders of the EU offers business opportunities which are irreplaceable in terms of maintaining the competitiveness of the Union in the coming decades .
The area also represents a vast wellspring of culture which plays a part in the creation of European traditions and without which it is not possible to understand European identity .
A debate on the Eastern Partnership is also necessary due to the fact that it is not entirely clear that we all accord the same importance to this project .
All of the multilateral initiatives connected with the Eastern Partnership - democracy , stability , economic integration , energy security and contacts between people - are undoubtedly useful , both for the EU and for the six neighbouring states .
Confusion has been caused by the statements of some politicians , who talk of a Black Sea synergy or of a democratic buffer zone .
At this point , the Eastern Partnership ceases to be an instrument ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Madam President , the credibility of the European Union as a global political player also depends on its ability and will to promote development and reforms for the stabilisation of neighbouring countries .
The EU 's cooperation with the countries of the Eastern Partnership creates an opportunity for these countries to make political progress towards the values of freedom and democracy .
In view of the varying political development of the individual countries , however , the EU must apply a variable approach and provide more help and EU resources to those Eastern partners that are prepared to go further and faster in fulfilling their obligations .
We could do more to encourage Ukraine and Moldova , in particular , to make headway in negotiations and to try and reach agreement on a broad and comprehensive free trade zone .
In my opinion , we should also continue negotiations with Armenia , Azerbaijan and Georgia .
Belarus will have to find a form of communications appropriate to the political situation .
The inhabitants of the country must not , however , become hostage to their political representatives , who have decided to implement their own version of democracy .
( NL ) Madam President , today , we are laying down an important foundation for the development of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) .
I would highlight just one point here , a specific point for the Commissioner on the programmes for external borders , the cross-border programmes .
We have 15 programmes with a budget of EUR 1.1 billion .
However , we keep hearing from all sides that they are not going well .
Development has been slow .
Flexibility is very limited and I understand , from what I have heard today , that the Polish Presidency intends to tackle this .
The Poles really want to move forward and see if any changes need to be made to bring these programmes back to cohesion , to Objective 3 , the INTERREG approach , which we have been familiar with for years .
My question to the Commissioner is : how are you going to address this ?
Actually , according to the ENPI Regulation , you were already supposed to have carried out an evaluation last year .
I have not seen the documents pertaining to that .
How are you now going to incorporate this into your publications in May and are you perhaps willing to hold a hearing , in conjunction with this Parliament , where we could invite the people most concerned and hear about their experiences ?
I have a feeling that some things really need to be modified .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with this review of the EU 's neighbourhood policies , we are setting forth on a journey that will not end any time soon .
The events in the Mediterranean signal a process of profound change and they will have lasting consequences , not only for the countries of the region , but also for Europe .
We must be aware that the transition to full democracy will not be easy and that these transitions are accompanied by many risks and uncertainties .
For this reason , there are numerous things we must do and these will take time .
Europe 's response must be characterised by a strategy based on immediate and long-term actions .
We must facilitate access to European markets and allow greater mobility .
We should organise a conference to explore the possibility of cancelling or renegotiating the debt of these countries which have chosen the road to democracy ; we must make adequate financial resources available and provide assistance to the democratic process by strengthening parliamentary institutions and political parties , ensuring the full participation of all citizens .
This should all happen within the framework of a revitalised Euro-Mediterranean dialogue .
At stake is the strategic , political future of Europe .
I believe that Europe must understand that we have to work to the east and the south , but right now , there is a special priority to the south .
These policies need fundamental change ; we must finally open a new chapter .
( PL ) Madam President , the Eastern Dimension is one of the most important areas for the European Union 's development under the European Neighbourhood Policy .
It includes such countries as Ukraine , Belarus , Moldova , Georgia , Azerbaijan and Armenia .
The Union has very important economic and financial interests in these countries , and these should not be forgotten , but most importance of all should be attached to matters related to energy .
It is through some of these countries that alternative energy routes to Russian pipelines , such as Sarmatia and the Nabucco gas pipeline , may be built .
In order to strengthen cooperation between the countries I have mentioned and the European Union , the EU trade area should be liberalised , which would allow more business to be done and would bring these countries closer to the European Union , and the Union is , after all , already the biggest economic partner of these countries today .
Ultimately , of course , we should think about a free trade area , which would naturally bring us together in a particular way .
Finally , we must not forget about easing visa obligations , stepping up people-to-people programmes and giving financial support to exchanges of young people from countries in the Eastern partnership with young people from the EU .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , we would all like European Union policy to be effective , but for it to be effective , it must be fully consistent both in terms of the Eastern Dimension of Neighbourhood Policy as well as the Southern Dimension .
As for the Eastern Dimension , I would like to draw particular attention to what are known as frozen conflicts , to the situation in Moldova and , in particular , to the situation in Transnistria and in Nagorno-Karabakh , and I would also like to say a few words - particularly as I am the standing rapporteur to the European Parliament for Georgia - about the situation in Abkhazia and in South Ossetia .
A consistent European Union policy is needed on these matters today .
A consistent Union policy must mean shared as well as consistent , a policy which is identical both as followed by the European institutions , including the High Representative in particular , and other members of the European Commission , and also by the Member States .
We must speak with one voice to Russia 's leaders , today , and tell them they are not meeting the commitments they made in 2008 and , for example , that the European Union Observation Mission should be given access to Abkhazia and South Ossetia as quickly as possible .
( PT ) Madam President , the popular uprisings in North Africa reveal the errors of European policy and diplomacy guided by a supposed realpolitik , which has supported dictators and devalued aspirations for freedom , justice and opportunity for all human beings .
As a result , the EU has redefined its priorities for the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) to the south .
I agree with the new orientations , dubbed ' the three Ms ' : ' money , market access and mobility ' .
I do so , however , on the understanding that the support that we offer to our neighbours must be conditional upon a demonstration of political will and concrete progress in democratisation processes .
There is no democracy without political parties .
Supporting the training of democratic political forces in terms of funding and organisation should therefore be a priority , as this will empower the young people and women who bravely began the Arab Spring .
In societies still dominated by the state 's religious outlook and run along patriarchal lines , the cornerstone of any truly democratic change will be based on the participation of women and respect for human rights .
This must be a fundamental orientation of EU political support for the Southern Mediterranean .
Finally , the EU should also promote the involvement of all emerging players in the political dialogue , including parties with religious agendas , such as those associated with the Muslim Brotherhood , who should not be isolated but rather invited to play the democratic game .
( PL ) Madam President , for the policy we are discussing to bring the expected positive result , it will need to have money .
We should , therefore , stick to the gentleman 's agreement over a one third to two thirds division of the money available .
This is necessary to be able to pursue the policy effectively .
Secondly , we need a clear diagnosis of the situation .
Therefore , comparisons must not be made of Belarus , which is controlled by a clear , transparent and one might say clinical example of a regime , with Ukraine , which is struggling with the problems of democratisation .
Thirdly , such a policy offers the prospect of membership to countries which are trying to achieve it .
The clear perspective of membership helps to create a self-fulfilling prophecy , and if societies and those who govern these countries have the impression that full membership of the EU is an attainable goal , then it will certainly be more likely to be achieved .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , I regret the Council 's absence in today 's debate .
With regard to the Southern Neighbourhood , I shall make three points .
Firstly , the European Union must support and facilitate the processes of democratic change .
In the past , neighbouring authorities used their concerns over stability as a way of justifying their inaction .
Secondly , I wish for economic prosperity for our southern neighbours ; this requires a great deal of reforms , investments , and financial and economic aid , as well as trade , not just with the North , but also South-South trade , which is currently non-existent .
I am concerned about the line being taken by the Commission and the High Representative , Mrs Ashton : in an article published in The New York Times on 18 March 2011 , she appears to be advising those countries to specialise in agricultural exports to European markets .
I disagree .
Commissioner Füle is well aware of this , although he seems to be shaking his head .
These countries need diversified economies and agriculture .
I repeat : diversified .
They also need to attend to their domestic food needs and not restrict themselves to a few export products which , in addition , cause concern for European farmers .
We therefore need common sense and prudence on this issue .
Thirdly , we need to revitalise the Union for the Mediterranean ( UfM ) and its projects , which can help in the economic modernisation of the Mediterranean countries .
Unfortunately , the UfM is still in deadlock , there is no General Secretary , and it cannot continue to be hijacked by the lack of progress between Israel and Palestine .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are facing a major challenge .
Madam President , the EU Eastern Neighbourhood could prove to be the best test for EU foreign policy .
The Union needs to abide by its own legal framework and particularly the EU security strategy , which underlines ' the need to have a wealth of well-governed countries on its border ' .
It should also implement this in its own comprehensive strategy in order to bring about positive change .
However , the most serious impediment for the formalisation of the ENP to the east remains the unresolved conflicts in Transnistria and the South Caucasus , which are the root cause of the region 's instability and political and economic problems .
It is enough to mention today 's blast in Transnistria , which severely damaged the gas pipeline .
There is an urgent need for the EU to support conflict settlement efforts , including through direct mediation , confidence building and humanitarian assistance to the millions of IDPs and refugees .
That is why the EU should ensure that its considerable financial and technical support in the region is accompanied by a reinforced political presence and a well-defined conditionality .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by congratulating the authors of both reports and , in particular , the author of the report on the Eastern Dimension of Neighbourhood Policy , Mr Siwiec .
These congratulations are not offered simply out of courtesy .
They come from my sincere conviction that at last we have reports which show that European Neighbourhood Policy should , to a much greater extent , be based on values which , for us , are the most important : respect for human rights , freedom of the media and democratic governments .
I will repeat what I said here in this Chamber on Monday : the lesson of the events in North Africa and the Middle East proves that the people who live there , particularly young people , are not only demanding more bread ; they are also demanding greater freedom and more respect for their rights as citizens and people .
The same is true of our neighbours in the East and , in particular , in a country which is an immediate neighbour of the European Union , Belarus .
I would like to tell you about the scandalous events which have taken place this afternoon in Grodno in Belarus , where a journalist , Andrzej Poczobut , who is accused of insulting the President in articles written for the international press in connection with his work as a journalist , has just been arrested by the KGB to prevent him from talking to us , Members of the European Parliament , at tomorrow 's sitting of the Belarusian delegation .
These are scandalous practices .
European Neighbourhood Policy should help us prevent situations such as the one which occurred this afternoon in the case of Andrzej Poczobut .
( SV ) Madam President , I am grateful that the Commission has chosen to present this review of the European Neighbourhood Policy 's Southern Dimension .
It is certainly needed .
We need to acknowledge that Europe has met dictatorships with tolerance rather than with tough demands for democracy .
That has cost us in trust for Europe .
We therefore need a new policy , a policy that will help to rebuild these countries after decades of misrule .
Europe can do a great deal in this respect , above all , as the region 's most important trade partner .
The best approach would probably be to invest precisely in this rebuilding and trade in order to regain the trust that we have lost .
I am therefore pleased that the Commission is talking about the trade dimension in this communication - that we should increase market access for our North African neighbours in order to help them to use trade to bring them prosperity .
However , it is currently the European customs barriers , particularly in the agricultural sector , that are a major obstacle to development .
Take , for example , the minimum prices of agricultural products that mean that the more efficiently that fruit and vegetables are produced , the higher the duties are that have to be paid on them .
That is an obstacle to development and prosperity .
I would therefore like to propose that the first step the Commission could take is to give those countries in North Africa that have begun the journey towards democracy free market access in Europe .
That is something we did for the Western Balkans following the war in Yugoslavia , and why not learn from this example ?
We are building Europe 's prosperity on free trade in Europe , so why not help our North African neighbours to build their prosperity on free trade with us ?
( EL ) Madam President , the European Neighbourhood Policy is , without doubt , a successful policy .
However , we need to make it more dynamic and more effective .
The adverse economic climate we face at the moment should not be used as an alibi or pretext for failing to strengthen it still further .
This should apply mainly to its Southern Dimension .
This is now urgently needed in the wake of the recent dramatic developments , the recent dramatic incidents in North Africa .
These societies need our support ; they need our essential but discreet support and I stress the word ' discreet ' for obvious historic and political reasons .
We need to support civil society in these countries , its democratic action and its demand for more freedom .
In addition , we must not forget that the Mediterranean is turning into an immigration time bomb ; this is another reason for us to support stability , democracy and growth in these countries through the Neighbourhood Policy .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on the communication on partnerships , which adopted a quick and far-sighted approach .
We are seeing a redesign of the Neighbourhood Policy and the Commission is the guardian of the holistic approach .
I find it fatal to oppose the Southern neighbourhood and the Eastern neighbourhood .
We are redesigning , and while there is good news about what is happening in the South , the importance of this redesign and rethinking goes beyond the South .
It also includes the East .
We should move from government-related or oriented policy towards society-oriented policy , and from short-sighted economic interest policy towards human rights and democracy-oriented policy .
We should become , in our policy , generous towards societies and much more demanding and severe towards governments .
Also , we should not mix up status quo with stability .
We should move into a kind of transitional approach .
Building this new paradigm for a Neighbourhood Policy brings with it the necessity to change the Eastern policy in the same direction .
We should pay equal attention to both South and East .
There should be symmetric financing , as there is a false dilemma in opposing both , and it should be smart financing .
There is structural under-financing here .
Each year , we are paying to the Neighbourhood Policy countries 20 % of what we are paying to the rest of the world .
I know how difficult it is to talk about financing today .
But this policy has to be redesigned and that also requires additional financing .
Madam President , at this time , it is important to consider carefully , and strike the right balance between , both the European Neighbourhood Policy factors .
The ENP should become more flexible , proactive and optimised .
If we want to create an area of stability , shared values and progress surrounding in Europe , we should , firstly , no longer limit ourselves with predefined quotas .
Financial assistance should be balanced according to political involvement and the will to move closer to EU values , freedoms and standards .
It should be result-oriented and tied to objective and clear criteria on democratisation and the progress achieved in reforms .
Secondly , we should consider creating a rapid reaction tool within the ENP for prompt and flexible response to political changes in partner countries , as has happened recently in the Southern neighbourhood .
Thirdly , the attractiveness of EU assistance is also important .
The simplification of EU fund allocation procedures and active sharing of expertise by the Member States at the early stages of programming would be an additional incentive .
( RO ) Madam President , I come from Galaţi , a Romanian city situated at the European Union 's border with the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine .
This is why I am going to mention specifically the review of the Eastern Dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
I must stress its importance both to the implementation of the European Union strategy for the Danube region and to the European Union 's energy security .
I call on the Commission and Member States to launch a comprehensive European Union strategy for the Black Sea and to provide sufficient financial and human resources to implement it effectively .
I welcome the accession of Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova to the Energy Community Treaty , which will make an important contribution to achieving the Union 's energy security objectives and to these countries ' security .
On the subject of the Union 's priority energy projects , I should emphasise the importance of the Southern Gas Corridor .
I think that the Nabucco gas pipeline , along with the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline , the Pan-European Oil Pipeline , the Turkey-Greece-Italy Interconnector or the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , I do support the European Neighbourhood Policy as a meaningful political framework for strengthening democracy in both the Eastern and Southern Dimensions , but I have now asked for the floor in order to pose the following question to all of us : whether the European Union 's moral right to show third countries the way towards real democracy is well justified .
Both motions for resolutions recall such ENP values as democracy , the rule of law , and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , including the freedom of the media , the independence of the judiciary and the fight against corruption .
Is the European Union itself a champion in all these fields , taking into account , for example , the situation of the media in Italy and Hungary , mass statelessness in Latvia and Estonia and the suspicion of corruption in our Parliament ?
I hope very much that we will maintain a ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , neighbourhood is the key word here .
Even in private lives , having good neighbours is a great asset to anybody .
A good neighbour is a person who is friendly , does not interfere unduly with one 's affairs , but is willing to extend the hand of friendship in time of need .
That is something that the European Union should practise as a policy .
It is easy enough when your neighbouring countries are equally friendly and stable and democratic .
If they are not , then one has more of a problem .
The suggestion that we should engage with civil society , particularly in these countries , is a very good one .
My colleague , Mr van Nistelrooij , pointed out that we are spending EUR 1.1 billion on border activities and that we need a more cohesive approach .
I agree with that .
Also , the suggestion that we should have regular hearings , especially with civil society from undemocratic regimes , is a good one , so that they can hear what we have to say , and we can hear directly from them .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , in your description of the outlook for the European Neighbourhood Policy in the Southern Mediterranean , you referred to potential catalysts .
However , you forgot to mention one group , to which I myself belong .
In Europe , people like me -immigrants and the children of immigrants - who come from the area that was once colonised by Europe , are still stigmatised .
Yet we are , and we could become , human resources : influential mediators between north and south at this historic time .
Commissioner Füle , what are your thoughts on that option ?
Will you take it into consideration ?
( LT ) Madam President , the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy is one of our most important tasks .
The events in Egypt , Tunisia , Libya , Yemen , Bahrain and elsewhere are remorselessly breaking down many stereotypes in our minds : that most people in the Middle East or North Africa do not care about human rights , and that they are used to living under dictatorial regimes .
The revolution in the Arab world has shown this to be a fallacy .
A few weeks ago , I visited Egypt on the day the referendum was taking place in the country on amendments to the constitution .
Everyone we met talked about freedom , justice and democracy .
Most stressed that they need a different kind of support from the European Union .
Support is needed to strengthen civil society , establish political parties and defend human rights , so that future parliamentary and presidential elections are democratic , free and fair .
The democratic processes taking place there are very fragile and vulnerable , and we must help them in a timely manner .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I appreciate one very important element , namely , that we , the Commission and Parliament , are approaching the review of our Neighbourhood Policy in parallel .
It is not a situation , as with many other policies , where we come here with a product that has already been finalised and then have a discussion .
We entered into the process some time ago and , through interaction , we have been able to take a number of Parliament 's good ideas on board already and to explain a number of our ideas .
The long list of speakers who have made a number of valuable suggestions and asked good questions is proof that this approach was the right one .
In the Lisbon Treaty , which was also agreed and voted in this House , we set high ambitions .
We agreed to have the European Union as a global player .
Catherine Ashton , Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , and I are both of the opinion that we could hardly deliver on this expectation without , first of all , playing a truly constructive role in our neighbourhood and that we could hardly play such a role without addressing the challenges of our neighbourhood , including the protracted conflict .
It was with that in mind that together , we started the review process in June last year .
At that time , our ambitions were , firstly , to reflect on the new instruments brought in by the Lisbon Treaty .
There are big changes with regard to external action with the substitution of the six months ' Presidency and its priorities in external relations by the consistent and coherent policy that is guaranteed by a person with a dual role , combining the CFSP Community instrument , and also having for the first time capacities in the External Action Service .
Embassies have also been upgraded in order to represent not only the Commission but also the European Union .
These are huge things .
I know that there are a lot of challenges , questions and even criticisms here and there , but I am confident that these changes will deliver on a more coherent EU policy on external action .
We wanted that to be reflected in our Neighbourhood Policy .
We also wanted to do one of the important things that we sensed was missing .
Looking at neighbourhood , we were lacking the feeling of ownership of these countries in the Neighbourhood Policy .
Some of our partners were saying that the Neighbourhood Policy had been imposed on them and that they had actually never been consulted .
So , they believe that their views were not being taken into account and that there was one scheme that was being applied to all , without taking the specificities into account .
But then the Arab Revolution came .
It has offered us a mirror - which , I think , was very much needed - for asking important questions , such as how ready we are to complement the aspirations of emerging democracies , how far we are ready to go to deal with the situations like the one we face in Libya , and how long we should make compromises here and there and associate stability with autocracy , accepting that we have not always had the values in the same place as our interests .
Our communication of 8 March was an attempt to answer some of those questions - to be absolutely frank with you , the easy questions - because we have actually answered only those that related to the emerging democracies .
We left the more difficult questions for the strategic ENP review .
Many of them still need to be answered .
In that communication of 8 March , we defined three basic pillars , which you will also see reflected in the strategic review .
The first one supports the democratic transformation and institution building in our neighbouring states .
In the second , the focus is on the relationship with societies and support for civil societies .
The third gives support to inclusive and sustainable growth among our neighbours .
Many countries in the South are changing , change which is not limited to those countries but to the whole region .
They are also changing us and the way we react to the situation - the way in which we will proactively react and pursue these new phenomena in our neighbourhood .
It will have repercussions in the East and there is a lesson-learned process in our joint thinking with our Eastern partners .
This reflection on the East is not taking place at the expense of the South and the events in the South and our current interest and focus on the South are not at the expense of our interest in the East .
The ENP review process will strengthen the need for a balanced approach to our neighbourhood , whether it is the East or the South .
There is a new momentum to substitute , sometimes , preferred real politics in our neighbourhood by an ambitious and much more proactive policy based on our values .
There is also a momentum to be clear on what we want to achieve with , or through , the instruments of the Neighbourhood Policy .
A couple of years ago , we referred to the peace , stability and prosperity zone .
It is an important concept , which is still valid , but the partners want more .
In the East , some of them are very clear as far as European aspirations are concerned .
Those in the South want to have a more institutionally defined framework for economic integration .
Should we shy away from offering our thoughts on these issues ?
I do not think so .
I think we should make it clear that the Eastern Partnership is not a way to keep EU membership from the countries in the East but it is a way for them to build more of the European Union inside their countries .
I think we need to make an offer to those most advanced countries in the South - a kind of framework for them to be a part , not of decision making , but decision shaping .
Do not expect a very technical straightjacket for bilateral relations with our neighbours .
Expect only very few , but very clear and very important benchmarks .
Expect , as a result of this ENP review , a flexible and individually tailored structure and an interaction which works well between political steering on one side and our programmes and technical and financial assistance on the other .
It is not going to be an easy process .
No change is easy but , compared to its predecessor , this is to be an ongoing process where the review capabilities or , if you like , a capacity for feedback or a reality check , will be an important quality incorporated in this review of the ENP .
Many of you talked about money .
The higher our ambitions are , the more resources they will require .
The logic here is very clear .
But is it only about money ?
Absolutely not .
It is also about our creativity , our coherence , taking seriously the interests of our partners and being ambitious as far as opening our trade market and tackling the mobility issue are concerned .
The Jasmine Revolution was very much about dignity and equity .
Let us then turn these two issues - dignity and equity - into the principles our policy will be based upon .
Parliament has a very important role to play in this regard .
I have received two motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 7 April .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - All European countries which fulfil the EU accession criteria should have the prospect of EU membership .
The ENP Eastern Dimension should clearly value this underlying principle as such , and ensure that our neighbours in Eastern Europe will be able to concretely see a reliable prospect of future membership .
The strongest incentive for democratic and political reforms and creating civil society is , and will remain , the prospect of EU membership .
While future applicants should do their homework in full , the EU has to prove without any doubt that our commitment to enlargement remains valid and credible .
To strengthen this credibility and to diffuse any doubts about double standards , the EU should make it absolutely clear that relations with our Eastern neighbours must be grounded , first and foremost , on democratic values , respect for human rights and the rule of law .
As each country should be assessed on its own merits , the basic values must be equally respected in every country , notwithstanding concrete economic and political interests of particular Member States .
The same principles should be applied to relations with Russia , where the rule of law and human rights situation is worse than in most ENP countries .
I have to confess that I was quite amazed on reading the resolution proposed by the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The bracketing of the demonstrations in Belarus , where the so-called protesters receive much support from abroad , with the storm of revolt in Egypt and Tunisia caused by rising food prices and unemployment , is quite beyond my understanding .
In my opinion , the absurd conclusion is typical of the absurdity of so-called politicians .
Mr Siwiec clearly did not notice the demonstrations involving dozens of deaths in the monarchies of the Arab world , or the war in Libya .
That is clearly just as it should be .
In point 12 , there is no statement on the negative developments in Moldova .
Some Members from the Group of the European People 's Party have become so enamoured of Yulia Tymoshenko that a Ukrainian government without her seems undemocratic , despite the fact that the government has managed to improve the economic and political situation of the country substantially over the past year .
In my opinion , the call in point 13 for multilateral support for the development of democratic parties in Belarus constitutes direct intervention in the internal affairs of another state .
It is a pity that we do not see similar efforts to develop democracy in EU states such as Hungary , for example .
I consider point 52 of the resolution to be another gross impertinence , in the same way as the support for various subversive activities such as Belsat or Radio Russia and European Radio for Belarus .
It reminds me very much of the Cold War period , as we know it from the history books .
In today 's debate in the European Parliament , we have held a further discussion about the Eastern Dimension of the European Union 's Neighbourhood Policy .
We must not forget that its objective should be a strengthening of relations between the Union and its Eastern neighbours , particularly with Ukraine , by the promotion of all kinds of civic , social and economic initiatives .
The young citizens of Ukraine expect support from the Union 's Member States and , most of all , they want the borders to be opened so they can move freely between countries , study and develop their passions and interests .
It is very important to ensure better implementation of agreements on simpler visa procedures and an EU-Ukraine free trade area .
We should also extend the stipend system for students from the Eastern countries of the European Neighbourhood Policy and encourage them to engage in greater social and political activity .
I welcome the joint discussion on the two reports on the European Neighbourhood Policy , insofar as we need to adopt a consistent approach to our neighbours in both the south and east .
I want to stress , first of all , that it is counterproductive for us to make both geographical regions compete with each other .
This is not about a competition for resources , but about channelling resources efficiently to those partners which make progress in relation to the common criteria forming the basis of our Neighbourhood Policy .
I am thinking , in particular , about respect for human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
This is why I believe that we need to be brave enough to acknowledge the positive results achieved by our Neighbourhood Policy , as in the case of Georgia and Moldova , but also the adverse developments , as has happened , unfortunately , with Belarus or Ukraine .
Differentiation must be the basic criterion , which also applies to the Southern Neighbourhood .
On the other hand , our demands in terms of our European partners ' respect for the Union 's common values must be consistent and very high .
When we review the European Neighbourhood Policy , it is important to assess the impact of this policy on migration .
No Neighbourhood Policy can be fully effective in this area without tackling the causes of instability that trigger migration .
This entails regional cooperation , potentially via bilateral agreements , with both the countries of origin and with transit countries .
We must cooperate with transit countries and with countries of origin for migration so as to prevent surges .
We must help the migrants ' countries of origin to democratise and attain good governance by giving them access to our values and our experience .
With regard to the European Neighbourhood Policy , we need an economic agenda which can increase levels of employment and trade agreements that can generate real , market-driven , economic development .
Commissioner Füle and High Representative Ashton support , with the ' more for more ' formula , the concept of conditions for aid which aim to reward the countries most active in terms of democratic reforms and respect for human rights .
This approach should be encouraged , as it is consistent with our values , effective for development , and does right by European taxpayers .
In the wake of recent events in south-eastern Europe , we must revise the European Neighbourhood Policy in relation to the southern partner countries by providing the means and assistance necessary for a genuine democratic transition and establishing the foundations for deep political , social and institutional reforms .
It is important that the policy review give priority to the criteria of an independent judiciary , respect for basic freedoms , including freedom of the media and the fight against corruption , but it is also necessary to reconsider and to examine carefully the EU 's Mediterranean strategy in order to strengthen political dialogue and to support all democratic and social forces .
The crisis of the Arab world has demonstrated that the direction pursued so far in the Neighbourhood Policy has failed .
Financing instruments must be made more transparent , and a result-oriented approach must be applied during the disbursement of aid .
This also holds true with regard to the Eastern Dimension of the policy .
The European Neighbourhood Policy of the future must be founded on cross-border relations between people ; this particularly applies to the Eastern Dimension , as the countries involved in the Eastern Partnership also have the prospect of obtaining candidate status .
The matter of the mutual visa exemption between Ukraine and the EU should be treated pragmatically and should not be used to exert political pressure .
The Ukrainian Government has much work to do in the area of reinforcing human rights and democracy .
However , the last people we should be punishing for this are the Ukrainian citizens .
If the European Council supports the Belarusian citizens while imposing sanctions on Belarus , it should not apply a different standard to Ukraine either .
Granting visa exemption as soon as possible - hopefully still in this year - could lay the foundations of the economic trust required for creating a free trade area .
I trust that the Polish Presidency will treat this matter as a priority .
It is unfortunate that the Eastern Partnership summit could not take place during the Hungarian Presidency .
Hungary could have treated the EU 's partners in the eastern neighbourhood far more objectively than the Poles , who , due to their historical experience , have been pursuing biased policies in several relations over the past years .
in writing . - The European Neighbourhood Policy should remain European , not French , Romanian or Polish .
A distinction between neighbours in the South and in the East , followed by a transfer of funds from East to South , could benefit the agenda of a sponsor state , but it would put an end to the European Neighbourhood Policy .
The pressure brought to bear by France to fund the South while starving the programmes for the East could set an unfortunate precedent .
Europe should deal with its neighbourhood , and not with prioritised neighbours .
A transfer of funds from East to South would send a disastrous signal to our eastern partners .
It does not make sense to support democracy in the South by weakening it in the East .
The European aspirations and democratic values of Eastern partners could be further damaged by an impulsive visa liberalisation policy .
There is no place for a ' Russia first ' policy in this domain .
Russian citizens have a right to free travel , but not before our partners in the East .
Granting a visa-free regime to Russia would transform the Russian passport into a golden document sought after in Georgia , Moldova and Ukraine .
It would internally destabilise these countries .
I insist that the EU should seriously consider these problems .
Use of sexual violence in conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East
The next item is the Commission statement on the use of sexual violence in conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , we must reject in the strongest possible terms any targeting of violence against women , from intimidation to sexual assault .
These are abhorrent crimes , often perpetrated against the most vulnerable and defenceless people .
Unfortunately , it is a fact that many countries across the world , not only in North Africa and in the Middle East , still lack a proper legal framework to protect women and girls from violence .
There is nothing to encourage the reporting of such attacks .
Much more must be done to deter perpetrators and to hold them accountable for their actions .
Women continue to endure discriminatory laws and deeply entrenched cultural inequality .
In the case of Egypt , for example , the national committee formed to write the new constitution is composed only of men , and even the new cabinet has only one female minister .
This is not sustainable , as was made clear by the courage shown by Tunisian and Egyptian women during the recent events in their countries .
If half the population is excluded from political and institutional reform , it can hardly succeed .
Against this backdrop , we strongly condemn the increasing reports of severe human rights violations including rape , sexual assault and severe humiliation of women activists .
The European Union is committed to strengthening the role of women in political , civil , social , economic and cultural spheres , as well as to fighting against discrimination and impunity .
This is why one of the EU 's eight Human Rights Guidelines explicitly aims to ' promote gender equality and combat discrimination against women ' .
And the Barcelona Declaration of 1995 , which established the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership , specifically reinforces this commitment for the Euromed region .
Gender equality is one of the five-year work plan priorities agreed by the Heads of State at the Barcelona Summit in 2005 , held to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
In view of these commitments , the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial conference on strengthening the role of women in society , held in November 2006 in Istanbul , started an innovative and pioneering process .
Ministers ( including those from Algeria , Jordan , Lebanon , Morocco , Occupied Palestinian Territory , Syria and Tunisia ) agreed to embrace a holistic approach based on the following interlinked priorities : first , women 's political and civil rights ; second , women 's social and economic rights and sustainable development ; and finally , women 's rights in the cultural sphere and the role of communications and the mass media .
Since the 2006 conference , work has been ongoing on implementation of a Common Framework of Action , in particular , through the pursuit of country priorities , with a follow-up mechanism and reports published by the European Commission .
The partners in the Union for the Mediterranean reaffirmed their commitments to this at the second Ministerial conference in Marrakesh in November 2009 .
Civil society was fully involved in the discussions .
Increasing awareness and visibility of the process was one of the big challenges agreed by almost all participants in the process .
Beyond this regional framework , the European Union 's bilateral dialogue , including through sub-committees dealing with gender issues , is an important method for addressing these pressing concerns .
Let me conclude , Madam President , by saying that the European Union will not tolerate violence against women in any form and we will use every avenue we can to prevent it .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , Commissioner , I really appreciate the Commission 's strong commitment to condemning violence against women as a weapon of war - used systematically in armed conflict for a variety of purposes including humiliation , intimidation , political terror , extracting information , rewarding soldiers , and even ethnic cleansing .
Violence against women in armed conflict is largely based on traditional views of women as property .
Because women in many cultures play the role of transmitters of culture and symbols of nations , violence against women is also used as a means of attacking a society 's values and its honour .
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court recognises sexual violence as part of an attack against civilians - against humanity - as being a war crime .
Various forms of sexual violence in armed conflict , including sexual slavery , forced marriage and forced pregnancy , are war crimes and should be considered as grave breaches of the Geneva Convention .
Too often , those responsible for acts of sexual violence in war go unpunished ; too often , violence against women is accepted as an unavoidable part of war ; too often , its perpetrators are granted amnesty as part of peace deals .
It is time to condemn these inhuman practices in any part of the world , and our message today should be that perpetrators of these war crimes can no longer go unpunished .
Madam President , in contrast with reports now reaching us from Libya , where we are seeing only men fighting on the frontline , the images of a month or so ago from the main square in Benghazi , from Tahrir Square , and from the demonstrations in Tunisia , Bahrain , Syria , Jordan and Morocco showed women of all ages calling for freedom , justice and democracy .
Women , and particularly young women , had , and continue to have , a key role in the uprisings in North Africa and the Arab world .
Their destiny in these countries , marked by strongly patriarchal and religious traditions , will not only be indicative of but also decisive for the path that these countries follow over the months and years to come in search of democracy and respect for human rights .
The EU therefore needs to prioritise supporting the women who bravely launched the protests of the Arab Spring , including through funding civil society organisations and through political , technical and financial aid for women who want to participate actively , encouraging their involvement in all democratic institutions and organs of political and economic power as members , candidates of political parties , and so on .
It is also imperative that the EU mobilise all its efforts at the highest level to combat attempts at intimidation , reprisals and sexual violence perpetrated against women who dare to raise their voice .
Examples such as virginity tests being forced on women who protested in Tahrir Square on 8 March or the rape and imprisonment of Iman al-Obeidi in Libya are utterly intolerable crimes , as Commissioner Füle has said .
We are expecting the High Representative and the Commissioner to demand an immediate and independent investigation into these cases , making examples of them so that they will not be repeated .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the ALDE Group proposed and initiated this debate , as we want to express our concern tonight at the situation of women in North Africa and the Middle East in the face of the current political change and turmoil .
During the past few weeks , we have witnessed severe violations of human rights in Libya and Egypt , particularly affecting women .
I am not going to enter into the details of all these cases , but let me mention just two symbolic and worrying situations that should be condemned immediately .
Iman al-Obeidi , a Libyan woman , has told the international press that she was gang-raped and subsequently detained by pro-Gaddafi soldiers and interrogated for 72 hours before being released .
In Egypt , as my colleagues have mentioned , several female protestors have claimed they were subjected to so-called virginity tests - and also raped by soldiers - and some of them are now being tried for ' failing ' such tests .
These cases have provided additional evidence that rape is still used as a weapon in times of conflict in order to terrorise and humiliate the civilian population .
It would be unacceptable not to raise our voices against these terrible atrocities being committed against women .
We call on the Commission and the Council strongly to oppose and condemn the use of sexual assault , intimidation and any other form of abuse of women taking place in the context of the current events in North Africa and the Middle East .
We also need to use all our available policy instruments in order to guarantee that , after the transition of these societies , women 's rights will be guaranteed and upheld .
Yesterday , we adopted our report on an EU policy framework to fight violence against women , and it would be unacceptable to have double standards when it comes to our policy action outside the Union .
In this regard , the promotion of women 's rights must be fully integrated into the European Neighbourhood Policy , its programmes and projects and , at the same time , specific policies for women 's rights and empowerment must be put in place .
Madam President , the forced so-called virginity tests inflicted by the Egyptian army on women protestors in Tahrir Square and the multiple rape of a Libyan woman by soldiers are horrific crimes which have given rise to today 's motion for a resolution .
We cannot rule out the possibility of more sexual violence being committed by all sides in the conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East .
Last November , we in the European Parliament called on the EU Member States and the EU itself finally to take seriously the situation of women in wars and armed conflicts .
At that point , the representative of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs , Baroness Ashton , reported on the progress that had been made .
There is now an improved international framework for preventing violence against women in conflict regions and several countries have also adopted national action plans .
The exchange of best practices is very important .
The EU has already provided EUR 300 million for measures including medical provision and a further EUR 200 million has been authorised for the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1325 .
There are plans to introduce local strategies in conflict zones in 2011 .
The training of staff plays a very important role in this respect .
Therefore , it is necessary for all these experiences and measures to be incorporated and taken into account in the implementation of the EU pact for partnership and democracy with the Southern Mediterranean countries .
You will definitely have the support of the European Parliament for this work .
Madam President , we know that women have been participating actively in the uprisings calling for more democracy , rights and freedoms in North Africa and the Middle East .
However , we also know that they are subject to a generalised and systemic practice of rape and sexual slavery , which are recognised as crimes against humanity and war crimes under the Geneva Convention .
In view of this , the reports emerging , whether from the Democratic Republic of the Congo , or from Egypt , from Libya or from other countries , are alarming .
We therefore call for effective diplomatic action that vigorously opposes the use of sexual aggression , intimidation and harassment of women in North Africa and the Middle East , or in any other place .
We would also highlight the importance of acknowledging women 's role in the revolutions , and stress the need to guarantee their rights , including their participation in the new democratic , legal , economic and political structures of these societies , bringing the centuries-old discrimination that they have suffered to an end .
( NL ) Madam President , the revolutions in North Africa and the Middle East have also brought opportunities .
The work of rebuilding the country and of establishing democracy in Tunisia and Egypt can really start now .
In the squares and streets of Cairo , Tunis and Benghazi , women have been , and continue to be , an important part of the revolutions .
There are so many opportunities , but there are also dangers .
The claims made on television by a young Libyan woman that she had been raped by Gaddafi 's troops shook the general public .
However , these were not the first such reports , and there have been others since .
Sexual violence is being used as a tool for oppressing women and for silencing them , for example , in Cairo , where women have been abused and subjected to virginity tests by the military .
In the war in Libya , violence against women is being used as a weapon .
In the power vacuum which arises in times of lawlessness , there is no control .
Women lose the protection of the law .
We therefore need to send out a clear signal , Madam President , that this cannot and should not be allowed to happen !
We need to send out a clear signal to the new leaders that crimes of this kind must be investigated and punished .
No one with these crimes on their conscience should be allowed to get away with it .
I would also like to emphasise that these women must be protected and that the role of women in the rebuilding of society must not be overlooked .
Women 's rights must be enshrined in law and , to that end , women should also be appointed to positions on constitutional committees , in parliaments and governments , so that things like education for women , their rights and the combating of harmful traditional practices are placed high on the agenda .
Economic independence is a key component of the empowerment of women and entrepreneurship should be encouraged , for example , through the use of micro-credits .
Madam President , sexual assaults against women - and , in some cases , also against men - in North Africa and the Middle East are a grave concern and need to be addressed promptly by the authorities in the region , both the new democratic forces and the older regimes .
I would like to call on the Vice-President of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , Baroness Ashton , to discuss the devastating situation with regard to sexual violence in this region with representatives of the target countries in the context of the Southern Dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy , with a view to bringing the perpetrators to justice and securing respect for the human rights of both women and men .
I consider that sexual violence is the worst sort of warfare .
It should be avoided at all cost and should be punished in the harshest possible way .
( GA ) Madam President , two months ago , we were talking about violence against women in Europe .
It was stated then that up to 25 % of European women had suffered violence .
Now we are talking about sexual violence against women in conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East .
It is a sorry tale and can no longer be tolerated .
Therefore , it is important that we discuss it and do something to prevent it .
Unfortunately , not just in war but also in peace , there is a very archaic attitude to women in the entire continent of Africa .
It is obviously exacerbated in time of war .
However , I agree with the Commissioner that we have to highlight these matters and , in particular , try and bring the people who commit these crimes to account .
In that way , hopefully , at some stage , we may get a change of attitude and an elimination of this abominable practice .
( SK ) Madam President , sexual violence does not constitute a violation of female human rights or male human rights .
Rights do not exist in this form .
Sexual violence is a crime against human dignity , which is a fundamental right of every human being , women as well as men .
This holds true not only in Europe , but also in Egypt , Libya , the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries in Africa and the Middle East referred to in this resolution .
Military conflicts cannot be a mitigating factor .
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo , it began with the rape of women , and now men are being raped as well .
Resolutions , however , are mere words .
We must also act .
The Commission must start to monitor worldwide human rights violations in detail and , at the same time , must propose instruments through which Europe can enforce compliance , in case of need .
Failing this , the partnerships in which we are investing so much may as well be called ransom payments .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would say to the honourable Members that the questions and specific cases that they have brought to our attention today are indeed very serious and are a black mark hanging over the developments which have taken place over the recent weeks in North Africa and the Middle East .
I have taken note of the issues they have raised in this debate and of the suggestions made .
As I said , the European Union has a number of instruments in place and will do everything to support greater participation of women in civil and political life , free from threats , intimidation and violence .
I would also like to bring to Members ' attention some positive recent developments , such as the creation of a Human Rights Office in the Gulf Cooperation Council secretariat .
We should welcome such steps .
Our support for international organisations , not least United Nations Women , and for civil society , will be instrumental in supporting change from within .
This also shows why our policy of dialogue and engagement is so important and must continue , not least with our new interlocutors .
I have received five motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 7 April .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Sexual violence is an exceptionally repulsive means of conducting a war and a hideous tool for fighting or humiliating the other side of a conflict .
In the case of North Africa and the Middle East , these practices are particularly cruel , because they reveal a huge scale of cynicism and demoralisation , for the dominant religion in the region has a very restrictive approach to sexual matters .
Those who commit acts of sexual violence break a great many rules and codes of behaviour .
War and conflict often bring unimaginable evil out of such people .
We will fight this and we will never cease our condemnation of this barbarity .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09 : 00 )
Documents received : see Minutes
EIB annual report for 2009 ( debate )
The first item is the report by Mr Cutaş , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the 2009 annual report of the European Investment Bank ( 2010 / 2248 / INI ) .
Mr President , the presentation of this report on the activities carried out by the European Investment Bank is part of an annual democratic exercise which comes under the responsibility the Bank has to the European Parliament .
Although this exercise is carried out on a regular basis , it must not be trivialised as it includes recommendations on important matters for the future of the European Union .
Once the Treaty of Lisbon came into force in December 2009 , the European Investment Bank became an instrument for supporting the European Union 's external policies , while also acting as an important partner for driving the Union 's economy .
I would like to thank my fellow Members for the improvements they have made to the report .
I would also like to thank the entire bank 's staff for their excellent cooperation , especially President Maystadt and Vice-President Kolatz-Ahnen .
We are all looking for a method of reconciling Member States ' growing debts and deficits with economic growth targets set out , for example , in the EU 2020 strategy , which require major investments in education , health , technology , sustainable energy and infrastructure .
I think that the solution to this problem is a European one , with the European Investment Bank having an important role to play in this situation .
I will present here two significant examples of the way in which the European Investment Bank has boosted and will continue to boost the European economy .
Firstly , there are the loans to small and medium-sized enterprises and then , project bonds .
We must not forget that 99 % of European businesses are small and medium-sized enterprises .
Investing in SMEs is a means of making a significant contribution to the innovation , research and development activities taking place in the European Union .
The European Investment Bank offered small and medium-sized enterprises funding above its annual target of EUR 7.5 billion in 2009 and 2010 .
The European Microfinance Facility was also created in 2010 , pooling funds amounting to EUR 200 million , assigned to those who need micro-credits .
However , we notice that difficulties persist at the point where entrepreneurs access the funds .
I think that we need to enhance the transparency of the procedures used to select the Bank 's financial intermediaries and for providing loans to them .
It is also the European Investment Bank 's duty to offer technical assistance and cofinancing to the convergence regions in order to allow them to absorb the funds available to them at a higher rate .
Another subject which I want to touch on is project bonds .
Are we entitled to place such great hopes on this financial instrument ?
I think that we are .
Its purpose is to increase the credit ratings of the bonds issued by companies , by attracting private investments , so as to supplement domestic investments and those made via the cohesion funds .
Thanks to this multiplier effect , the companies will obtain more money for implementing infrastructure projects in the areas of transport , energy , IT and sustainable development .
It is important to focus on certain key projects , such as sustainable development , the road and rail infrastructure , and connecting ports to European markets and those which will allow energy independence , like the Nabucco gas pipeline or the ITGI project .
As we are discussing today possible solutions for exiting the financial crisis , this brings us to the subject of transparency and tax havens .
The lack of transparency from financial intermediaries has taken the specific form of tax evasion and fraud and has contributed to the tough situation we are currently faced with .
It is the duty of the European Investment Bank , as a European bank , not to get involved in operations carried out through non-cooperative jurisdictions , as identified at the moment by various international bodies .
At the same time , these lists are still not enough .
The European Investment Bank can make its contribution in this area by carrying out proper assessments and publishing its results on a regular basis .
Last but not least , I would like to mention the role played by the Bank outside the European Union , in countries en route to joining the EU and those coming under the remit of cooperation and development policies .
In these countries , the European Investment Bank supports the European Union 's foreign policy objectives .
This is why I think that we need to both assign more specialised staff in this area and raise the participation level of local actors in the project .
I am happy to listen to the views of those of you in the Chamber and to speak again at the end .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , may I thank you for inviting me once again to take part in the debate on your report on the activities of the European Investment Bank - this is becoming a real tradition .
I should like to thank your rapporteur , Mr Cutaş , in particular .
He had the good sense not to look at matters only in retrospect , but provided guidelines for the future as well .
This is essentially what I should like to talk to you about , if I may .
You mention that our Board of Directors has devised a three-pronged approach to the European Investment Bank 's work over the next few years .
We will develop our work in three areas : the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy , the fight against climate change and support for EU external policy .
When faced with the financial , then economic , crisis that erupted in 2008 , the Member States provided a short-term response : the various national plans , which were intended initially to keep the banks afloat and then to stimulate an economic recovery .
Those national plans , as you know , were supported by the European economic recovery plan , adopted by the European Council in December 2008 .
The EIB played its part by increasing the volume of its lending from EUR 48 billion in 2007 to EUR 79 billion in 2009 , and by channelling that injection of funds into the real economy towards the areas described as a priority by the Council , in particular , support for small and medium-sized enterprises , as your rapporteur has just emphasised .
However , after that short-term response , which enabled us to avoid the worst , a longer-term response is now needed .
That is where the Europe 2020 strategy comes in , and the critical part of that strategy is the increase in the employment rate and productivity , which must be based on what is often called the knowledge triangle : training , research and innovation .
The EIB is ready to make a significant contribution to the implementation of that strategy .
Back in 2010 , it provided more than EUR 4 billion in finance for projects in the education sector and more than EUR 7 billion for RDI - research , development and innovation - projects .
The EIB intends to increase its financing in those areas and , to that end , it intends to continue to implement , together with the European Commission , joint financing instruments on the model of the RSFF - the Risk Sharing Finance Facility - for research , as instruments of that kind give the European budget leverage .
With the same amount of funds , the European budget can bear a much greater volume of investment and , at the same time , these joint instruments relieve the capital constraint on the EIB .
This means that , with the same amount of capital , the EIB can increase the volume of its lending .
I mentioned the RSFF , the Risk Sharing Finance Facility for research .
It is a good example .
At the end of 2010 , with a budget contribution of some EUR 390 million and an EIB capital allocation of some EUR 700 million , we were actually able to lend more than EUR 6 billion , which financed more than EUR 16 billion of investment in research .
You can therefore see the two kinds of leverage that such an instrument affords , and so it seems clear to us that the EIB 's contribution to the Europe 2020 strategy will be all the more effective because we will be able to rely on pragmatic cooperation with the Commission and with other financial institutions , too .
The second area : the fight against climate change and its sometimes tragic consequences .
This has become a priority for the European Union , and hence also for the EIB .
The Fukushima nuclear accident and the questions to which it gives rise further strengthen the need for huge investment in energy saving , renewable energies and new energy technologies .
In 2010 , EIB loans for projects directly contributing to a reduction in the volume of greenhouse gas emissions increased to almost EUR 20 billion , or almost 30 % of our total lending .
The loans for renewable energy projects accounted for EUR 6.2 billion of our total lending , and were used mainly for wind and solar power projects .
The loans for energy efficiency improvement projects increased to EUR 2.3 billion in 2010 .
They will increase further over the next few years , as there is huge potential for energy saving , particularly in public buildings and homes in many European towns and cities .
As for investment to develop urban transport , and hence to reduce pollution from individual means of transport , the EIB provided EUR 7.9 billion in loans in 2010 .
Consequently , we are going to continue this effort .
We are going to continue to support energy saving , energy efficiency and renewable energies , and we are also spearheading the development of a methodology - an inevitably complex one , given the technical difficulties - to evaluate more precisely the carbon footprint of all the projects that we finance .
This particular effort testifies to our will to make the fight against climate change a major priority .
Lastly , to conclude , the third area : no power can expect to conduct an external policy without financial support .
China has learnt that .
It intervenes financially throughout the world in order to support its external policy objectives .
If the European Union really does want to develop an external policy that has some influence in the world , then it too must have a financial arm .
If the European Union so wishes , the EIB can be that arm .
That is one of the conclusions of the Camdussus report on the EIB 's external mandate .
It remains to be seen whether the Member States , which are also shareholders of the EIB , will act on that recommendation and make a clear decision when preparing the financial perspective for 2014-2020 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there you have an overview of the EIB 's three-pronged approach for the years to come .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would first like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Cutaş , for his very good report .
I would also like to welcome Mr Maystadt to this plenary because it is very important that the Commission also congratulate him and the EIB for his continued forceful response to the effect of the global financial crisis .
EIB assistance was essential .
The EIB helped us to address the credit shortage in the market and this was crucial , not only for the EU Member States and the candidate countries , but also for our partners around the world .
The EIB was able to significantly increase its lending activity and , at the same time , to target the increase to the key growth-enhancing areas .
The Commission shares the Parliament 's view that support for the EU cohesion policy , as well as transition to low carbon economies , are core targets for the EIB .
Consequently , the Commission joined forces with the EIB Group to support convergence regimes with the joint financial instruments which we know very well - JASPERS , JEREMIE , and the new addition , ELENA - to fight climate change .
Moreover , we welcome the increase in lending volume to SMEs and we agree with your call for more qualitative measures to increase the value added and transparency of the EIB Group intervention in this domain .
In this context , an assessment of the optimal division of labour between the EIB and the EIF seems to be necessary .
The huge efforts undertaken by the EIB bring into focus the importance of optimising the use of EIB capital .
It is crucial to strike the right balance between higher volumes and high-risk activities which consume more capital but add more value to the EIB Group intervention .
I would like to say a couple of words on financial instruments .
We believe that the use of innovative financial instruments , together with the key financial institutions such as the EIB , should be extended .
Instruments using instant loans , equity and guarantees help maximise the effects of the EU budget by attracting additional funds from third parties .
In addition , an increased use of joint financial instruments and risk sharing with the EU budget could have the effect of freeing capital and permitting a higher leverage of the EIB own resources and enhancing its reach .
At the end of the day , this means more projects in support of a Europe 2020 strategy and better support for its goals and objectives .
The Europe 2020 Project Bond Initiative , which is currently in public consultation , is a very good example .
The EU 2020 strategy calls for large-scale cross-border investment to underpin the EU 2020 flagship actions and develop smart , upgraded and fully interconnected infrastructures .
The project bond initiative would support the financing of specific projects in the area of transport , energy and communications infrastructure , and potentially also in other sectors that can help lay the foundations for sustainable future growth and employment .
I am glad to see your support for this initiative in your report .
In the context of the preparation of the Commission 's proposals for the next multiannual financial framework , the Commission is carrying out a strategic reflection and analysis to ensure an optimised use of the new instruments , in dialogue with the EIB and other financial institutions , to benefit from their financial expertise and experience in the market .
To conclude , I would like to make a few remarks on the EIB 's external activities .
Regarding EIB financing outside the EU , the Commission supports the increase of the ceilings proposed by Parliament under the mid-term review of the EIB external mandate , in particular a EUR 1 billion increase for the Mediterranean region .
We know how important that is today .
This is essential in order for the EIB to pursue its intervention at a sustained level and support the democratic transformation of our partner countries .
In the same way , we also reiterate the importance for the EIB to reuse reflows from previous investment in the Mediterranean region in order to make risk capital investment in private sector SMEs in the region .
Moreover , we support a progressive reinforcement of the EIB 's development capacity because these additional needs would require a gradual increase of staff resources specialised in development aspects .
In line with the Commission 's proposal following the mid-term review of the EIB external mandate , the Commission will set up a working group to study the possible development of the EU platform for cooperation and development .
The objective is to optimise the functioning of mechanisms , blending grants and loans involving the Commission , the EIB and other multilateral and bilateral institutions .
The establishment of such a platform would help create synergies and foster cooperation between the EIB and other financial institutions .
In this context , I would like to mention that the Memorandum of Understanding between the Commission , the EIB and the EBRD was signed early in March .

Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to applaud the attention you pay to the MEPs , Mr Maystadt , because as the President of an intergovernmental bank , you are not obliged to do so ; we appreciate it .
My speech will deal with security and with the communitisation of the European Investment Bank .
On the subject of security , Mr Maystadt , you said that you wish to become the power behind , and the financial arm of , the European Union .
Yes , but with a triple A rating .
Moreover , we in the Committee on Budgetary Control have been saying for years that you should be subject to prudential regulatory supervision .
We propose that this supervision be carried out either by the European Central Bank , or , on the basis of a voluntary approach by the EIB , by the new European Banking Authority , with or without the involvement of one or more regulators , and we call on you , Commissioner , to make proposals .
I shall conclude , Mr President , by mentioning our proposal for the European Union to become a member of the European Investment Bank , so that that intergovernmental instrument can gradually become a Community one .

on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I would also like to speak , like President Maystadt , about the future , and would like to raise three points .
First , growth and restructuring is what Europe needs and that means investment and funding of investment .
The legitimate question today is to ask where that funding can come from .
The important element of the response to this question lies with the European Investment Bank and its family of institutions .
I also think that it is important to remember that in the years to come , we will have huge global competition for funding .
We will have national budgets in a mood of further cuts .
We will have also a banking sector with a lot of uncertainties when it resumes normal funding activities and , of course , we will have a European budget that will remain , as usual , too small to be efficient and to solve our problems .
So the EIB will be absolutely essential .

Mr President , my compliments to my fellow Member , Mr Cutaş , on his excellent report on the EIB annual report for 2009 .
Compliments also on the overview which he gave us here .
However , I would like to comment on one particular aspect , namely , the relationship between the Council and Parliament .
The European Parliament is a colegislator for the external mandate of the European Investment Bank , for all of the bank 's activities outside the EU , in neighbouring countries and in developing countries .
The Council , however , seems to be finding it extremely hard to take this Parliament 's proposals on the review of the external mandate seriously .
To my surprise , the Council is making quite a habit of coolly dismissing all kinds of new proposals put forward by this House as ' unacceptable ' .
I am talking , in particular , about proposals for the EIB taking an active role when it comes to measures to tackle climate change and for a greater role for the EIB in microfinancing .
Are these proposals ' unacceptable ' ?
Is it the Council 's job to define the scope of the topics which the European Parliament is allowed to discuss ?
No , the European Parliament and the Council are colegislators on an equal footing , and , together with and in close contact with the European Commission , should jointly determine the rules governing the EIB 's external activities .
That calls for consultation , for joint deliberations , for compromise , for an open attitude on the part of both the legislators .
It is nonsensical and counterproductive , then , to use the word ' unacceptable ' to describe proposals which a large majority of the European Parliament believe to be important .
Now , such an out-of-touch attitude on the part of the Council is what is unacceptable , if you ask me .
The fact that no one from the Council is present here is absurd and illustrative of how out of touch they are .
The EIB is an essential tool for the EU 's external activities throughout the world .
A public bank , a bank which can contribute to economic growth and the improvement of infrastructure with loans , is indispensable to the development of our neighbouring countries .
The same applies to our relationship with developing countries .
There , too , a public bank is vital .
Such a bank must observe the Treaty of Lisbon and its objectives .
Poverty reduction is one such objective .
The European Parliament wants to lay down that role for the Bank clearly in its external mandate .
I expect an open and constructive attitude on the part of the Council , which will enable us to arrive at that clarification together .

Mr President , Mr Maystadt , I wanted to stress one point .
When we started working on this report , there was already an obvious need for long-term investment because of what had happened in the European Union .
The crisis showed that we were too short-sighted in our work , as Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa would have said .
We genuinely need long-term investment , and your institution plays a major role .
Everything that has happened recently - I am thinking , in particular , of the Southern Mediterranean and of the awareness , perhaps , of a number of difficulties with regard to our energy choices - is all the more reason to encourage you in your work and to support you .
There will always be MEPs in this House who support the work that you do .
I agree , however , with what Mr Audy said : it is also very important to move in the direction of increased supervision , as we have done for a number of institutions .
What I mean is that , although I personally am in favour of project bonds and of many of the ideas that are circulating at the moment , I am very anxious to ensure that we do not rush into the solution of public-private partnerships without looking more closely at exactly how they are set up and what they will ultimately cost taxpayers and all those who are involved in them .
I believe that they could be a very useful tool , but there are also funds in place in Europe at the moment - I am thinking of the Marguerite Fund and of the work of the deposit and consignment offices that have taken initiatives across borders - and I therefore wanted to argue for greater long-term investment and monitoring that are suitable for what we are trying to achieve together .
I believe that that is the very least we should expect .
In any case , we support you and we would like to see all the recent events that have taken place encourage more far-reaching , broader debate .

Mr President , Mr Maystadt , Commissioner , as you know , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is traditionally very attached to the EIB .
We believe that it is an extremely important public policy instrument , and it is because we are very attached to it that we are also very demanding of it - the two go hand in hand .
Our view of the EIB is that , ultimately , it is a bank in its own right , and as such , it is subject to bank constraints , which must be taken into account .
Several of my fellow Members rightly referred to the fact that the EIB ought perhaps to take account of new constraints linked to the banking sector .
At the same time , it is a truly exceptional bank , because it is indeed funded by taxpayers ' money .
It is also there to do what the others are not doing , and to adopt rules that go beyond what the private sector can do .
I should like to stress one or two points on which I feel that the EIB could do even better , even though progress has been made in recent months .
The first point concerns the issue of tax havens .
This is an extremely important fight not only for us , but also , I think , for a very large majority of my fellow Members in this House .
The crisis showed that tax havens obscure , undermine and weaken the entire financial system and the world economy .
Therefore , in this report , the majority of MEPs support the idea that you should ensure an even greater degree of transparency with regard to loans that you grant to businesses and which pass through tax havens .
I believe that that practice should be stopped .
I am well aware that you have operational constraints on the ground , but there is a political point here , which is that , if you are the power behind Europe , you have to fight battles .
If you fight battles , then I think that the battle against tax havens should be one of them .
As for us , we would obviously like to go further ; in other words , we would like you to attach conditions to EIB loans to businesses that are not part of the entire value chain in tax havens and which are , at the very least , on the OECD 's blacklist , which is currently being revised .
The second point that we wished to raise concerns the issue of monitoring and governance .
Mrs Goulard spoke about this just now .
I believe that we should extend the choice , that we should increase the level of joint accountability so that the choice of projects involving taxpayers ' money is made as democratically and as transparently as possible .
The third point is about measuring the benefits of your action .
You measure them in financial terms too , of course .
As I was saying earlier , you are a bank in your own right , which means that you have challenges to meet in terms of the risk / reward ratio .
However , you aim to provide other benefits too , and that is why public money is used .
You aim to provide benefits in terms of social cohesion , in terms of the fight against poverty , in terms of environmental protection .
I think that you could make still more progress in reporting , in measuring these non-financial benefits , which are at the very heart of your action and of your legitimacy .
I think that , rather than setting the financial benefits against the non-financial benefits , you should carry out as broad an assessment as possible , and not limit it to monetary and financial issues alone .
Lastly , the final point of my speech will relate to climate change .
The report specifically states that you must pursue all the EU 's objectives .
One of the official objectives of the European Union is to ensure an 80 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 .
This will not be possible if we continue to finance coal-fired power plants , which have a 40-year life span and which emit huge amounts of CO2 .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , has Mr Canfin considered that the use of the EIB as a public policy instrument , which is what he and his party advocate , will be at the direct financial cost of EU taxpayers , and in particular British taxpayers ?
Has he considered this at all ?
( FR ) I have a very simple answer to that .
I believe that the EIB has cost UK taxpayers a lot less than other , completely private UK banks have cost them , and I believe that the general interest , just like that of UK taxpayers , is far better served by the EIB than by other UK banks that the taxpayer has had to bail out .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , Parliament has spent many hours in this Chamber discussing how to make the European Supervisory Authorities responsible for our financial services into the most transparent and accountable of organisations .
The result has been to establish ESAs , which are fully scrutinised by this Parliament .
However , in this new age of accountability after the financial crisis , and in the light of the changes brought about by the Lisbon Treaty , we need to establish comparable levels of oversight and scrutiny of existing EU institutions , including the EIB .
Given how central the role of the EIB has become in financing EU Member States ' strategies and EU overseas activity , it is now time to improve the level of accountability of its activities to this Parliament .
The loan book and the general banking and lending activities of the EIB need to be assessed in the same way as we would assess our commercial banks .
They need to be subjected to rigorous stress testing and all financial activities need to remain on the balance sheet .
When leverage or risk is employed , we should be sanctioning the risk limits , as ultimately any default means that it is the taxpayer who will pay again .
It is time for this Parliament to seek a closer role in scrutinising the activities of the EIB , especially as the Bank 's role increases in developing new financial instruments .

Mr President , Mr Maystadt , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the core task of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) is to promote the EU 's objectives through long-term financing of viable investments .
This also means that the EIB is bound by the EU 's values ; in other words , by social standards , transparency , high environmental standards , the development of a sustainable economy and the creation of jobs .
However , we are hearing from NGOs involved in the local implementation of EIB-financed projects that it is by no means consistently ensured that these standards are met .
This has already been mentioned by other speakers .
The NGOs criticise the lack of transparency as regards the way in which loans are monitored across the EU and worldwide , how they are used and how they are reported on by the EIB 's financial intermediaries .
To what extent is the EIB aware of these criticisms , and to what extent is the EIB actually looking into such criticisms ?
That is what we would like to know .
From our point of view , at least some of what NGOs are calling for from the EIB is quite plausible : greater transparency as regards the granting of credit by financial intermediaries and the elaboration of clearer financing terms for financial intermediaries as well as efficiency criteria for the granting of loans .
To improve transparency , NGOs further propose that environmental and financial information on EIB-financed projects be published before these are approved .
In particular , EIB projects in third countries should be subjected to independent sustainability assessments in order to determine the economic , social and ecological impact of the project in question .
However , there also appear to be other problems apart from transparency .
Monitoring of compliance with EU environmental , social and procurement standards has also come in for criticism from NGOs .
Strict monitoring of the meeting of such standards ought to be a matter of course in all the EIB 's financial operations .
Projects that do not meet these standards should be excluded from support .
Finally , I would like to make a comment on the subject of energy policy .
It is pleasing that the promotion of a sustainable and safe energy supply is already one of the EIB 's current objectives .
In view of the disaster involving the Fukushima reactor , the promotion of forward-looking , renewable , CO2-free and nuclear-free energy production , as well as the promotion of energy efficiency in all areas in which the EIB invests , must be given the highest priority .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Mr President , the President of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has stated that in his visionary view , the EIB could become a driving force in developing countries alongside China .
You have now raised some criticisms of this development cooperation .
Could you be somewhat more specific on this , and what do you think of the basic idea that the EIB could well be a suitable instrument to counterbalance or complement what the Chinese are doing in developing countries ?
( DE ) Mr President , I think it is difficult to go into detail on this right now in view of the time available .
However , I have a large number of reports from NGOs that I am happy to make available .
I believe that the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) is also familiar with these .
These reports talk of how development aid is supported locally by the EIB in African and Asian countries and also make some criticisms of this .
I am happy to make the reports available , but I cannot answer the question in detail right now .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , I rise before the House today to mention one or two things which might perhaps be of help .
I spent 35 years as an investment banker , investment manager , investment adviser and economic strategist , and I never bought a dud bank in my life .
I never bought a dud bank for my clients , but over the past few years , I have had the politicians and bureaucrats put a gun to my head , as a taxpayer , and make me buy more dud banks than you could shake a stick at .
These are not even British dud banks , they are foreign dud banks , and I hear today that the British taxpayer is being asked to fork out for Portugal .
If I want to invest overseas , I will buy an emerging markets fund .
I do not want a form of nationalised Mickey Mouse bank investing my money or that of my constituents by force .
I say ' Mickey Mouse bank ' , Mr Maystadt , because all I have heard from you so far is how you are going to invest money to change the weather .
I have never heard so much nonsense in my life .
I do not know where you get your advice from , but statistically , the weather has not actually changed for about 15 or 16 years , so what are you going to shovel all this money into ?
I do not want to invest in your bank and neither do the British people .
I would counsel you , if you want to keep your AAA status , to ignore the pleas of this House - full of eccentrics , greenies and bored housewives - in particular , in relation to paragraph 48 of the report .
Solar panels in the land of the wildebeest , giraffe and bongo drum will lose you your AAA rating in no time at all .
( DE ) Mr President , there is something of a reality gap when one listens to the comments just made by the British speaker and then looks at the actual developments that have taken place in recent years in the financial markets and banks in which we are supposed to invest so much trust .
To get back to my specific points : the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) is an important instrument in three areas .
I believe what Mr Klute says should form part of a strategy in the outside world .
It is appalling to see how Chinese investors , state investors , are increasingly undermining political systems on the grounds that they are involved in a couple of local bridge building projects .
When one looks for the contribution of the European Union , there is practically nothing to be found .
I think you should continue on this path .
My second point concerns small and medium-sized enterprises , which are being wantonly neglected by the traditional banks that are oriented solely towards maximising profits .
Thirdly , there is the change in energy policy .
While the disaster involving the Japanese reactor is indeed a tragedy , it could provide a following wind for you to do something in this respect here in Europe .

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Maystadt , Commissioner , after the remarks that I have just heard , which are unworthy of this House , I should like to tell you that the majority of us believe that the EIB 's action is very positive .
The improvements made by the Treaty of Lisbon provide new scope for action , which should help the EIB to become even more effective and to provide relevant solutions to the global financial crisis .
As you emphasised , the EIB provides real support to small and medium-sized enterprises and makes a crucial contribution to the EU 's cohesion policy convergence objective .
Those actions must be pursued and , if possible , increased .
The EIB must do more to promote strategic investments in Europe , and so I should like to invite you to support those who have taken initiatives to improve long-term financing and , in particular , deposit and consignment offices - the caisse des dépôts and cassa dei depositi - and KfW .
I believe that they should be supported , because the banking regulations and accounting regulations that are developed today do not encourage us to factor in long-term investment and penalise those who opt for it .
Moreover , contrary to what is often said , we need changes and not just adaptations .
Long-term financing is , as you also said , essential in order to open up a new horizon for Europe .
Outside the European Union , you are right to say that the EIB must act as a driving force and hence must propose initiatives , in particular , for the financing of the Mediterranean countries .
In the current turbulent conditions affecting a good many of those countries , the EIB can make a useful contribution to economic development within the context of the Union for the Mediterranean through its targeted financing , and can thus help to establish democratic civilisation in those countries whose future is still uncertain .
I have noted your willingness to make that contribution if the Union asks you to do so , which I hope it will .

( ES ) Mr President , Mr Maystadt , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I should like to congratulate Mr Cutaş for his excellent report .

The European Investment Bank needs to deliver more , better , faster results .
The importance of its role in funding projects across all sectors of the economy in the interests of the European Union has been even further amplified by the economic crisis .
The crisis has made it difficult to access credit , and it has also highlighted the need for a thorough rethinking of our economic model .
The EIB has a critical role to play .
To fulfil this role , it must maintain a high level of solvency and a financial position strong enough to enable it to access funding in capital markets on favourable terms .
It must also have instruments available to allow necessary projects to be undertaken which would otherwise gain no financial backing from commercial banks , and which would find it very difficult to obtain funding on favourable terms elsewhere .
The EIB achieved some positive results in 2009 , when its activity increased by 40 % , its funding for small and medium-sized enterprises increased by 55 % , its funding for less-developed regions increased by 36 % , and its funding aimed at combating climate change and promoting energy efficiency increased by 73 %
However , there is much to be done and accomplishment of the European Union 's strategic objectives still requires sustainable , long-term funding .
The availability of such funding has diminished as a result of the crisis .
We therefore need to promote Eurobonds .
We need to introduce new instruments and new developments in the field of financial engineering , and we also need to create a common platform to include other international financial institutions .
This must also be accompanied by an improvement in the EIB 's own governance and a review of its internal mandate .
In short , the EIB should be a bridge effectively linking investment to the needs of the EU .
Mr President , I rise as a British representative who believes we should be in the European Union and changing it .
Mr Bloom , on behalf of the UK Independence Party , does not represent the British people .
His party has no representatives in the House of Commons and no hope of putting any there in the foreseeable future .
( Applause )
I think that in this particular debate , we are looking at pragmatic politics and seeing how to obtain value for money for European citizens in relation to scarce resources .
I congratulate the President of the European Investment Bank on the work he has done over many years to build the credibility of that institution .
My questions relate to the matter of project bonds .
When the document arrives in June , will you be submitting a text separate from that of the Commission , so that we can have your views when we are preparing the multiannual financial perspective , or will everything be put together ?
Will these funds potentially be project bonds for purposes outside the Union , or will they simply be the project bonds for transport and other things that the Commissioner has mentioned ?
Lastly , and perhaps most importantly , will we be able to consider making savings in the structural funds and the Cohesion Fund , given that you are providing supplementary finance for infrastructure , because that will be a key question when we are dealing with a potential freeze on the financial perspective up to 2020 ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report on the activity of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) highlights some important and welcome points .
The first of these is the need to focus our efforts more and more on making it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to have access to credit .
I also welcome the reference to the project bond initiative , which I believe is a useful tool for growth and development in a sector as strategic as that of infrastructure .
I am somewhat puzzled by the reference to the EIB 's external activities , for which more financial and human resources are being requested .
The EIB report for 2009 indicates the countries benefiting from such loans , and I note with disappointment that Turkey receives the lion 's share with almost a third of the total granted to all non-EU states .
This figure is also just over a quarter of the amount granted to Italy , one of the main EIB shareholders .
Italy itself is also in need of substantial loans and grants .
I therefore consider this to be an absurd imbalance .
I believe it is unacceptable that vast resources should be granted to a country like Turkey , which is outside the EU and , in my view , should always remain so .
( BG ) Mr President , I would first like to say that such a short , precise and clear report on the matter in question is a rare sight in this Parliament .
The European Investment Bank undoubtedly plays a fundamental and very important role in Europe 's development .
However , I would like to make a few comments on the report and about what was said in this Chamber .
First of all , I support , from an internal perspective , the European Investment Bank 's policy for the development of small and medium-sized enterprises .
I think that this issue is much more important for Europe than climate change .
This is where the bank needs to focus its efforts , and not so much on the development of green technologies .
Though , this area will also be developed if small and medium-sized enterprises are supported .
Apart from this , from an internal perspective , I also agree with the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control on possible supervision by the European Banking Authority , which is the new body responsible for taking such actions .
Finally , the data which Mr Morganti just quoted is extremely alarming .
I agree , too , with the view expressed that , especially in the case of foreign investments , it is appropriate also to have parliamentary control because it is unacceptable for external countries to receive more European funds than European countries receive themselves .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree fully with Mr Gauzès .
The European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has always played a significant and key role in the development of the European Union .
Its role and activity are even more important at a time of crisis such as the present .
Recent reforms in economic governance linked to the effects of the crisis could lead to less funding being set aside by Member States for important projects such as the creation of infrastructures of strategic importance for the development of the Union as a whole .
One example is the TEN-T rail transport project .
I agree with the European Commission 's project bond initiative .
Project bonds represent an excellent solution for sourcing finance and underpinning the infrastructure Europe needs in order to modernise and to fully exploit the potential of the internal market .
The EIB 's role in issuing and managing these bonds is therefore crucial .
The report presses for an increase in funding for small and medium-sized enterprises , and I agree that the EIB 's activity must be focused and results-oriented .
Mr President , allow me to say that some critical issues have emerged in relation to the Bank 's activity .
In particular , I would like to point out that many small and medium-sized enterprises are often unable to take advantage of the opportunities on offer , as projects receiving funding require huge investment and organisation , which is effectively an obstacle to small and medium-sized enterprises taking part .
The time required for procedures is another problem .
These are often muddled and bureaucratic , and out of step with the activities and requirements of the industry in question .
I do not wish to reiterate the importance of these companies to our socio-economic fabric , and therefore I hope that a dialogue can be initiated with small and medium-sized enterprises that will help speed up procedures and eliminate as much red tape as possible .
The EIB can , and must , have an important role in managing recent events in the Mediterranean .
Europe needs to think beyond the emergency and to implement a long-term strategy in order to ensure that funding and investment is made in situ , based on shared decisions , to promote democracy and development of the social and market economy .
( SV ) Mr President , I would like to highlight two main points in this report .
Firstly , the European Investment Bank has a central role in the Europe 2020 strategy .
This relates , in particular , to investments in green infrastructure .
In order for it to be possible for the European economy to be strong and sustainable , more investments are needed in railways and ports .
These must also be linked to road networks in effective transport hubs .
The infrastructure must be made into a well-functioning whole .
The European Investment Bank should be even more active in these key areas .
This requires a new way of thinking when it comes to flexible finance solutions .
European project bonds are an excellent step in the right direction , but these should be supplemented with more new financing options .
Above all , I see an opportunity to develop a model in which there is more productive cooperation at European , national , regional and local level .
Secondly , the European Investment Bank has an important role in the EU 's development policy .
There is definite potential for improvement there .
The Bank 's activities should be made more transparent , they should be more locally based and be clearly focused on the main objectives of the Union 's development work .
Environmental , poverty-related and development aspects should always be taken into consideration in the European Investment Bank 's decisions .

Mr President , the EIB is providing up to EUR 1 billion for the construction of wind turbines and other renewable energy projects in the UK .
While this fits neatly within the strategy to fight climate change , I am alarmed that the current criteria governing EIB funding lack transparency and accountability when it comes to the examination and due diligence of these projects .
EUR 6 billion has been provided for wind farm developments across the EU , according to Mr Maystadt , but the EIB simply accepts the applications for funding from the governments concerned without scrutiny .
I do not think that is good enough .
Renewable energy companies in the UK claim that their turbines have a load factor of 30 % .
In fact , over the whole of last year , their load factor was only 21 % .
They do not work when the weather is coldest and demand for electricity is at its peak .
They are not economically viable and they will double or treble electricity prices for consumers while failing to cut CO2 emissions .
This is an unfolding financial scandal , and the EIB should stop funding wind energy .

Mr President , could I just thank James Elles for his observations in relation to the comments made by Mr Bloom and suggest to my UKIP colleagues that , if they do want to make a point or have a disagreement with colleagues , they do not need to insult us to make that point .
Mr Bloom described Members as eccentrics , greenies and bored housewives ; I would suggest that he tells us what category he falls into .
Now to my more substantive point about the European Investment Bank .
Ireland has benefited , through funding for SMEs , but perhaps the President would comment - or others may comment - on how accessible that funding is , because announcements are made and SMEs are enthused by these announcements , but when they go to look for the credit line , it can be extremely difficult to access it .
I do think this is an issue of practical importance to the SME sector and I would like a response on this matter .
( SK ) Mr President , the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) was established with the objective of supporting the aims and policies of the European Union , both within a Union framework and elsewhere .
The Bank is itself financed through bonds which are guaranteed by the EU Member States .

The rapporteur , Mr Cutaş , has pointed out to us that the guarantees for EIB activities in the EU budget amounted to almost EUR 20 billion by the end of 2009 , which is a lot even for the EU , and therefore Parliament is quite justified , in my opinion , in expecting an explanation of the risks associated with this obligation .
It would also be good to know more about how the interest from the loans provided is to be used , and about the administrative fees secured from the EU budget .
The EIB is answerable to the EU Member States , the Court of Auditors and OLAF .
The proposal to introduce possible regulatory supervision , which would involve monitoring the quality of the finances , the financial situation , the precise measurement of results and compliance with the rules of the best practices included in the Cutaş report , looks like a good idea to me , and I would therefore like to recommend that the Commission seriously considers setting it up in the interests of greater transparency in the management of EU resources .

( RO ) Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Cutaş for drafting this very well-structured report .
The European Investment Bank 's activities must be better targeted , selective and geared towards concrete results .
The Bank must partner accountable and transparent financial intermediaries .
Strategic long-term investments in Europe need to be increased .
We must focus on an infrastructure and cohesion at European level .
I welcome the Bank 's focus on the areas hardest hit by the crisis : SMEs , convergence regions and climate action .
With regard to the loans granted , the EIB must pursue an active policy of providing information via its website .
The spotlight must be on the amounts disbursed , the number of allocations made and the regions which have benefited from these funds .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the face of the economic crisis , the crisis in the Mediterranean and the energy crisis , with Japan as a case in hand as regards nuclear power , I think that in its capacity as the operational arm of this policy , the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has a crucial role to play .
I believe that the EIB needs to act both inside and outside of Europe .
Today , we have the Mediterranean at our disposal in an important new plan which needs to be launched as soon as possible .
How should we do this ?
Through new financial mechanisms such as project bonds , as we have often repeated .
Commissioner , please tell us more about the timing and implementation of these project bonds .
I would like to ask the President of the EIB what has happened to the fund created out of what was left over from the Recovery Plan we launched a few months ago .
As time is of the essence at this particular time , tell us something about this principle , as well as about the Marguerite Fund as I do not know what has happened to it .
With regard to these funds , which should stimulate and boost the economy , at this time the crucial factor is the timing of implementation .
( LV ) Mr President , in my opinion , the Bank 's annual report for 2009 should be both approved and adopted .
Speaking of the future , I agree with many speakers here .
For my part , I think that it would be worthwhile to carry out a strategic review and analysis of investment financing ( subsidies not excluded ) , repayment of capital contributions by Member States to the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , loans , innovative instruments , financial planning and management aimed at such long-term projects as do not yield immediate results , and improvements to guarantee schemes , the establishment of an investment section in the Union budget , financial consortia between Europe , national and local institutions , political and public partnership , and other possibilities .
That would raise the quality of the bank 's activities yet more . Thank you .
( RO ) Mr President , the focus of the EIB 's investments on convergence regions , SMEs and actions for combating climate change provides a response to the impact of the crisis in the hardest hit areas .
Convergence regions enjoy considerable support from the EIB .
The role of the loans for the structural programmes is to increase the level of absorption and make more effective use and increase the leverage function of European financial aid resources , especially in the areas faced with low access rates to funds .
The joint initiatives from the EIB and Commission in support of convergence have sought to encourage SMEs to access funding , develop micro-credits with a view to economic growth and create jobs , as well as provide support for sustainable investments in urban areas .
The financial instruments JESSICA , JEREMIE and JASPERS have provided real benefit .
Thanks to their successful use , I support extending their scope and identifying innovative financial products in the future .
I congratulate Mr Cutaş for the excellent report he presented .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Maystadt , this debate is of great importance for the economies of our Member States .
It has shown that those countries that have a healthy balance between large concerns and small and medium-sized enterprises have come out of the crisis best .
Looking at Germany , we have a situation in which 70 % of the economy consists of SMEs , and this is enabling us to provide appropriate numbers of jobs and training places .
We need to pass on the message to the various banks in the Member States that this makes it easier to make investments , that small and medium-sized enterprises can be expanded , and that the European Investment Bank provides support for this .
This is very important if we are to return our economies to growth and be competitive vis-à-vis America and South-East Asia in the marketplace .
I therefore consider this initiative by the European Investment Bank to be of the greatest importance .
However , it also needs to be effective in bringing about growth , to bring us out of the economic and financial crisis .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , several honourable Members referred to the issue of proper regulatory supervision .
I would like to assure them that the Commission is giving careful consideration to the question of EIB regulatory supervision .
Indeed , there is a need for an appropriate supervision framework to ensure that the EIB 's excellent credit standing can be preserved at all times .
However , the supranational nature of the EIB and the EIB statutory provisions , which form part of the Treaty , should be taken properly into account .
The EIB has recently taken concrete steps to address the situation , in particular , through the enforcement of its audit committee , which has significant banking supervisory experience .
In addition to this , since the EIB has been granted refinancing from the ECB , it complies also with the necessary reporting requirements vis-à-vis the ECB .
On the other hand , we believe that the European banking authority and the ECB cannot ensure the regulatory supervision of the EIB but , of course , we will not rule out the possibility for the EIB to fund other types of arrangements based on a voluntary approach by the EIB with other bodies .
As regards cooperation and the role of the Commission in cooperation with the EIB , here , I would like to underline that the Commission already has a significant role in the governance of the EIB in that it delivers an opinion on all EIB loans , on own resources , and has representatives sitting on the board of directors of the EIB .
I can assure you that cooperation between the Commission and the EIB is exemplary and excellent .
As regards the supervision of the external EU programmes and the related discharge procedures , apart from the EIB activities under the aegis of the European Development Fund , meaning mostly the ACP investment facility , which are carried out under the specific EDF financial regulation , we are not aware of any other EU budget activity carried out in combination with EIB resources which are not subject to the usual discharge procedure .
In response to Mrs Hübner , of course we fully agree with the calls to maximise the potential of the EIB by opening new leverages for increasing the potential to offer credits and help SMEs , especially at this time of post-financial crisis and pressure on credits .
Therefore , we are also looking for innovative approaches on how to do this .
I would just like to remind the House that the EU Financial Regulation has recently been modified to recognise explicitly this call for innovative instruments .
We are already using it , especially in the programmes that are oriented towards financing research and innovation .
I am sure that with the experience gathered from this project , the innovative financing tools can be used in other areas as well .
Mr President , I am grateful to all the speakers for their comments , even though I felt that one of them was particularly inaccurate .
Clearly , in the time I have available to me , I cannot respond in detail to all the extremely interesting issues that have been raised .
Some of them , I think , could be examined in more depth in committee .
In particular , there was the important issue raised by Mrs Hübner .
If you want the EIB genuinely to be able to make a significant contribution to the implementation of the Europe 2020 strategy , in particular , through the development of joint instruments with the Commission , then the regulatory framework obviously has to allow it .
Whilst you are currently debating the new draft financial rules , I think that you should be careful to ensure that the European Investment Bank will actually be able to make that contribution .
The proposal made by the Commission seems to us , from that point of view , to be wholly appropriate .
The Council and Parliament still need to accept it , though .
You therefore have a part to play in reviewing the financial rules .
I think that a more in-depth study would also be worthwhile for other issues that have been raised : the issue of tax havens , which Mr Canfin addressed .
I can confirm to him that the European Investment Bank has a stricter policy than the other international financial institutions on this issue , which also explains why we recently had to refuse to cofinance certain projects with the African Development Bank , the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development : they failed to meet the stricter criteria that we have in this regard .
Nevertheless , I can tell Mr Canfin that it is out of the question for us to finance a promoter located in a country on the OECD 's blacklist , but I am quite prepared to examine this issue in more detail , together with the issues raised by Mr Klute , which included loans to small and medium-sized enterprises and transparency in that regard .
I do not think that there are many financial institutions that are willing to give as much information about allocations to small and medium-sized enterprises , and I would stress that there has been a marked increase in the number of small and medium-sized enterprises that have benefited from loans granted by the European Investment Bank to intermediary banks .
More than 60 000 small businesses benefited from them in 2010 .
I should like to highlight three features that make the European Investment Bank a rather unique institution .
The first is that , contrary to what one of you said , we do not use taxpayers ' money .
To be clear , we do not ask the UK taxpayer for one single cent .
( FR ) We do not use taxpayers ' money ; we use the funds that we raise every day on the world 's financial markets .
Indeed , that is why it is essential for us to maintain our triple A rating .
We borrow in Asia and the United States , and with the resources thus collected , we can finance projects on favourable terms .
The only budgetary impact is the guarantee that is given concerning the political risk in implementing the external mandate granted to us by the Council and Parliament .
Here , there is , in fact , a guarantee that has a provisional cost for the European budget , since we set aside 9 % of all loans granted under the external mandate - we do so two years after the first disbursement - and , of course , this amount decreases as the loans are paid back .
Therefore , since we do not actually have to use that guarantee , there is ultimately no cost to the European budget .
None !
It is important to realise , then , that we are clearly not an institution that costs taxpayers money .
The second feature : we are the only truly European financial institution ; our shareholders are all Member States , and they are exclusively Member States of the European Union .
We are the only financial institution that is legally obliged , under the Treaty , to financially support the European Union 's political objectives .
Furthermore , we are the only financial institution that cannot finance a project unless it has already received the favourable opinion of the European Commission .
The European Commission delivers that opinion after an assessment by all the services , by all the Directorates-General , from the Directorate-General for Competition to the Directorate-General for the Environment .
We are therefore bound to strictly apply European rules and policies .
We are subject to audits by the Court of Auditors to the extent required by the tripartite agreement .
We cooperate at all times with the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) , and I would add that we are on the verge of agreeing to supervision by the new European Banking Authority .
In any case , as far as the European Investment Bank is concerned , we would be quite happy to submit to an official form of banking supervision .
We are supervised indirectly , for example , by people with experience in banking supervision who we involve in our audit committee .
However , I would confirm once again that we are completely open to proper supervision by this new European authority .
To conclude , the third feature that I should like to highlight is the fact that the European Investment Bank is also rather unique because of the kind of expertise it has developed .
We are an institution that permanently employs more than 100 engineers , plus a number of specialist consultants , which is rare for a bank .
Moreover , we have acknowledged experience and expertise in certain areas .
To give you an example , we are called on to provide technical advice for projects that we cannot finance because they are based in a region outside our mandate .
I therefore think that it would be a shame not to use that expertise .
In certain areas , such as urban transport , energy efficiency , the water cycle and support for SMEs , the EIB has clearly developed expertise that is rather unique .
I shall therefore conclude by saying that it would be a shame not to fully exploit that potential , through cooperation with the European Parliament that is perhaps more systematic and more structured .
Some very valid questions have been asked .
We are financing more in Turkey simply because that is our mandate , decided jointly by the Council and Parliament .
It has set us the task of financing more in the candidate countries , which means that we finance proportionally more in Turkey and in Croatia than in other countries .
We are here to carry out the mandates that are given to us by the European authorities , in particular , by the Council and Parliament .
I therefore believe that this justifies , perhaps , systematic and more structured cooperation with the European Parliament .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking all the speakers in this constructive debate .
I must admit , Mr Maystadt , that , in spite of a few critical comments , all my fellow Members who took the floor acknowledged the important role which the European Investment Bank can play during the current economic and financial crisis .
We clearly need investments and sustainable development projects in the European Union .
This is why I believe that we must implement and consider ambitious ideas and not be afraid to come up with and propose such ideas .
Last but not least , I want to emphasise the following point , by way of conclusion : do not forget about transparency and better communication with all European institutions .
Finally , Mr Maystadt , I believe that I can say , on behalf of my fellow Members , that you can count on the European Parliament 's support in the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at noon .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
We are aware of the importance that borrowing from the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) can have for development and social progress , given its low rates and long payment periods .
However , the options which it offers are neither transparent nor clear enough , and neither are the countries and regions that most need to borrow from it those that are most favoured with its loans .
This report , which we support , therefore contains some criticisms , suggestions and proposals .
However , we disagree with transforming the EIB into a mere tool for the EU to implement its policies , as well as addressing the problems of social and economic cohesion and social development , which should be considered in the EU budget and EU structural and cohesion funds .
Obviously , the EIB can monitor and improve these efforts , but it cannot be a substitute for EU budgetary policies .
The most important requirements are that the activities of the European Investment Bank be even more transparent for the European Parliament and that the financial instruments outsourced by it be used in an even more targeted manner .
We recommend for consideration the proposal that prudential supervision be introduced for this institution as well in the interest of the precise measurement of the quality of the EIB 's financial situation and its results , as well as compliance with effective and successful business practice .
I would like to stress that we are not making this proposal because we have doubts about the regularity of the EIB 's activity but because , in our view , as a general rule , as the G20 's London Declaration clearly stated two years ago , ' all systemically important financial institutions , markets , and instruments should be subject to an appropriate degree of regulation and oversight ' .
We suggest calling on the European Commission to provide the European Parliament with the legal analysis of the options for the prudential supervision of the EIB by 30 November 2011 , because under the effective legislation , no European institution has the right to supervise the EIB .
However , in view of the increased role of the EIB , and also because of the extension of EU guarantees to it , changing this urgently is warranted .
It would be justified to develop increased professional and social supervision , similarly to the practice which has evolved in recent times at other non-bank financial institutions .
The EIB 's lending activity needs to become more selective , more effective and more result-oriented in the future , particularly as regards financing SMEs .
To this end , information on loans granted must also be collected and published more systematically .
Vaccination against bluetongue ( debate )
The next item is the report by Janusz Wojciechowski , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2000 / 75 / EC as regards vaccination against bluetongue - 05499 / 2011 - C7-0032 / 2011 - .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , it is with great satisfaction that I can present my report to Parliament on amendments to the directive as regards vaccination against bluetongue , a disease which poses a huge risk to cattle , sheep and goat breeding in many EU Member States .
I am particularly happy since , three years ago in this Chamber , during a previous term of office , I had the privilege of presenting a report on a new strategy for animal health based on the principle ' better prevention than cure ' .
Today 's amendment to the directive as regards vaccination against bluetongue is a practical realisation of this very principle .
We are improving protection against this disease , and we are contributing to better animal health .
Costs relating to their treatment will be lower and the whole vaccination process will be better organised .
The amendment relates to the fact that the current directive from the year 2000 was adapted to conditions at the time and , in particular , to the vaccinations which were then available on the market .
Those vaccinations had to be and still have to be administered , but with certain restrictions due to the fact that there is a danger of the virus being transferred from vaccinated animals to those which have not been vaccinated .
This means that various restrictions are required during the vaccination process , for example , vaccinations being administered in specified areas and restrictions being applied to the movements of animals .
This represents quite a burden for breeders and , as a result , the efficacy of these vaccinations is limited .
Science has taken a step forward .
We have second-generation vaccinations which have been tested and can be administered without any fear of transferring viruses to unvaccinated animals .
As a result , they can be administered without applying the current restrictions .
Therefore , administering these vaccinations will be beneficial for breeders , as they will be less of a burden and certainly more effective .
It will be possible to administer them to a much wider extent .
Procedures are moving very quickly as far as this matter is concerned .
The Committee on Agriculture carried out its work shortly after receiving draft legislation from the European Commission , and is now presenting it to Parliament .
We are hoping that it will be possible to carry out mass vaccinations using the new vaccine during the summer season this year .
This is the reason for the amendments and this is why Parliament , in its amendments to the report which I have tabled , has included timescales within which the legislation of Member States should be adapted to the requirements of the directive , so that the vaccinations can be carried out this year and we will not have to wait until the next season .
I would like to remind you of the controversy which has surrounded the report and the amendments to the directive concerning the correlation tables proposed by the Commission .
In my report , we agree with the introduction of an obligation to include correlation tables which contain information regarding the transposition of the directive into national legislation and which specific provisions transpose provisions of the directive into national legislation .
This is considered to be a bureaucratic requirement by the administrations of certain Member States , but it should be viewed differently .
Thanks to the introduction of this requirement , European law will become more transparent .
It will be easier for citizens to check whether a directive has been transposed into national legislation , and in what way .
I think this is good practice .
As far as I am aware , this is the first , or one of the first , directives to be adopted which introduces this requirement , and I think it does so quite rightly .
This should become standard practice for our legislation .
Once more , I would like to thank you for allowing me to present the report and I feel that we are improving the lot of the breeders as well as reducing the suffering of animals in the EU .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is grateful to Parliament for its support for the proposal to further facilitate vaccination against bluetongue and for its recommendation in relation to this very important issue .
In particular , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Wojciechowski , for his commitment to this cause .
Bluetongue has been the cause of a great deal of concern to all farmers in the European Union .
Until the 1990s , bluetongue was considered exotic to the EU , with outbreaks only occurring sporadically in southern Europe .
However , recent years have brought several epidemic waves of the disease , affecting many Member States , including in central and northern Europe , causing significant losses to livestock production and disruption of the trade in live animals .
The past few years have seen a significant improvement in the bluetongue situation across the EU , thanks in no small measure to massive vaccination campaigns largely cofinanced by the European Union .
The EU cofinanced EUR 150 million in 2008 , and allocated EUR 120 million in 2009 and EUR 100 million for the following years .
Under current rules , vaccination is only allowed in areas that are subject to certain restrictions because of the presence of bluetongue disease .
The proposed amendments to the directive introduce the possibility of using inactivated vaccines everywhere in the European Union .
The amendment would allow a wider use of preventive vaccinations against bluetongue and this will ensure better control of the disease and lessen the burden it causes to the agricultural sector .
Parliament 's report is most timely and important for the animal health situation in the European Union .
The report rightly recognises the need for urgency in order to give Member States sufficient time to vaccinate animals before the next bluetongue season starts .
We must not lose sight of the fact that , although the bluetongue situation has improved greatly in recent years , the disease has not been eradicated .
The EU remains at risk for new epidemic waves of bluetongue in the future and it is important that Member States have the opportunity to protect animals against the virus when they are at risk .
Member States should be able to optimise their vaccination programmes with the aim of reducing the impact of future bluetongue outbreaks in the European Union .
Indeed , a number of Member States have already indicated that they wish to implement this measure at the earliest opportunity .
The rapporteur refers to the really very difficult issue of the correlation tables , which are very important for tracking the correct , appropriate transposition of EU legislation into national legal systems .
This is a longstanding issue and we have had many debates in this House on how to control and monitor the proper transposition of EU law into national legal systems .
We can see that the correlation tables are the best tool for doing this , monitoring it and assuring appropriate transposition of EU law .
At the same time , we are very aware that , especially with such urgent issues as the one we are discussing today , we need to work very hard to find a solution between Parliament and the Council in order to avoid unnecessary blockages .
I hope that the Council will demonstrate sufficient flexibility so that this legislation can be adopted on time before the start of the season in which bluetongue can break out .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as has already been said , the proposal for a directive on vaccination against bluetongue is a very important step towards eradicating this dangerous animal disease .
It is a disease that affects ruminants such as cattle , sheep and goats .
It can result in the animals dying .
The new inactivated vaccines enable the risk of infection to be excluded , so that this vaccine can also be successfully used in areas where the disease has not yet occurred .
This will allow the Member States to use the vaccinations more effectively , significantly reducing the burden on the agricultural sector as a result of this disease .
The new vaccines allow the disease to be combated on a genuinely broad front once and for all , and I hope that the Member States and farmers will take this opportunity .
It provides greater safety , and it is unquestionably a major improvement in animal health .
The more we contain the spread of bluetongue using the new vaccines , the greater the opportunities to export farm animals for the benefit of the economy .
In order that the directive may enter into force and the new vaccines may be made available , it is , in fact , important that we take a decision quickly .
On Monday , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development sent out a clear signal by unanimously adopting the report , and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will follow its lead in today 's plenary vote .
I support the rapporteur 's call to leave the correlation tables in the report .
After all , we cannot take decisions in Europe without the Member States providing information on how they are implemented .
We also need this transparency - and I say this to the Council very clearly - in order to strengthen the credibility of the EU .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his good work and constructive cooperation .
Many thanks !
The report will have our support .
Mr President , I have a statement rather than a question .
The vote was not unanimous because I did not vote in favour .
Mr President , bluetongue has been a constant threat to our livestock and , hence , to public health .
Hitherto , we used an activated vaccine to fight this disease , the use of which entails the need to restrict the movement of animals to certain areas in order to prevent the virus from spreading to non-infected animals .
Use of the vaccine , use of vaccination , was therefore limited to areas where infected animals had been detected in the past .
This was detrimental to the farmers affected , who suffered on two accounts : firstly , because of the disease , and secondly , because of the restrictions .
All these problems can apparently be avoided through use of a new inactivated vaccine , which , in addition to preventing potential disturbances in the internal livestock market , will also enable the development of new , further-reaching - which is what really matters - prevention strategies for combating this disease .
It is therefore vital for the livestock industry that we amend the directive to allow the use of this vaccine , and that we do this as soon as possible .
Ladies and gentlemen , adherence to our Treaties , particularly as regards correlation tables , should not be an excuse for not bringing this regulation into force before the summer .
Such a delay would only cause further damage to farmers .

Mr President , I would like to say a big thank you to Mr Wojciechowski for his excellent and efficient work .
Previous speakers have mentioned what this is actually about : a new effective vaccine .
I would therefore like to use my few seconds to point out that this is perhaps the first tangible proof of what will happen in our agriculture when the climate changes dramatically .
In Sweden , where I come from , the idea that we would have a disease like bluetongue in ruminants would have been completely unrealistic four or five years ago .
It was a sporadic disease in southern Europe .
Today , it is a reality and we have had our first epidemic .
It is therefore very important for us now to get going with the vaccination , but it is also extremely important , when we talk about climate , the environment and the future , to realise that it is not only aridity and precipitation that will change .
A major change in climate will also bring something quite different : disease epidemics and epizootics among both people and animals .
We must bring this into the equation when we discuss the Europe 2020 strategy , for example .
What direction do we intend to take ?
That is also important for us as legislators to understand .
We can only take decisions on the basis of the knowledge that we have today , but we must have the flexibility to be able to take new decisions when we acquire new knowledge and - in this case - new vaccines .

on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Wojciechowski for the speed with which he has been able to bring this report to the House .
He has worked extremely hard on this .
I want to go back to the area of the correlation tables .
The Commissioner said that he hoped it would be good enough , but I have to say to the Commissioner that ' hope ' is not enough .
This is a very serious disease that we need to get control of this summer .
It is carried by small flies , by what we call midges , and has to be brought under control this summer .
Mr Wojciechowski has done his bit and he cannot be blamed in any way for any delay .
It would be very unfortunate if infighting in Brussels or excessive bureaucracy were to result in a delay .
We certainly need action , because the disease travels extremely fast and we have to be able to vaccinate outside affected areas .
I have to remind the House that on many occasions , as Mr Wojciechowski and others have said , prevention is better than cure .
On this occasion , I think we have got to move , and I want the Commission to give us an assurance that bureaucracy will not hold us back .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , this is a disease in respect of which farmers should make their own decisions , based on their own particular circumstances .
As a UK farmer , I will rely on veterinary recommendation and not the opinion of bureaucrats in other countries .
I appreciate the support of the British taxpayer who funds my vaccines and I am frustrated that the EU needs to be involved at all .
You gave us this disease .
Please do not make matters worse .
We are now discussing this question despite assurances that the Lisbon Treaty did not constitute a fundamental change .
If that is so , why do so many measures , large and small , like this one , have to be recast to conform to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ?
We do not know how the issue of correlation tables is going to be resolved , and this topic perfectly illustrates the confusion that so-called codecision can lead to .
Whilst the British Government will spend what it takes to conform to your way of thinking , other Member States may view things very differently .
Mr President , my thanks to the rapporteur for this report .
While I am generally in favour of the principle behind this report , I would like to add that this vaccine should only be used when the competent authority identifies significant risk to the livestock population .
In Northern Ireland , both farmers and the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development have worked extremely hard to keep Northern Ireland a free area .
It is important that the Commission and the Council recognise free area status within the EU and put safeguards in place for these areas .
However , there still remains a significant risk within Europe that this disease may spread and , as a result , I believe it is necessary that Northern Ireland has the ability to use the vaccines .
It is imperative that the competent authority monitor movements and impose trade bans where necessary to stop the spread of bluetongue and that good practice is followed by all of the actors .
It is important that all Member States work constructively together to reduce the risk of the spread of this disease and protect the industry from a major outbreak .
Communication between Member States and the Commission is a vital part of monitoring and controlling disease outbreaks .
I would encourage this .
( RO ) Mr President , epidemics , like bluetongue , have a serious impact not only on livestock farmers , but also on consumers and the European economy in general , as a result of causing animal mortality and trade disruption .
Animal movement restrictions hit hard the economic resources of the locations or regions where they are imposed .
With a preventive vaccination campaign , for example , under current legislation , a restriction zone must be maintained , even if no incidence of bluetongue has been recorded .
This is why the measure proposed by the Commission is fair and economically beneficial to producers and consumers .
At the same time , the measure is in keeping with the principle of using every scientific advance in agriculture .
I should also mention the important contribution which the European funds have made so far to improving the situation with regard to bluetongue epidemics .
The Union has cofinanced major vaccination campaigns , amounting to EUR 370 million in the last three years , as also mentioned by the Commissioner .
I think that cofinancing of the vaccination programmes should also continue in the coming years , given their effectiveness and the new , much simpler legislative framework which we are debating today .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Wojciechowski and all the shadow rapporteurs for the work carried out on this report , which aims to make the rules on vaccination against bluetongue more flexible .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has made every effort to approve the text as a matter of urgency in order to allow the vaccination campaign to go ahead before the summer .
The European Commission had presented a proposal which did not take into account the approval of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In other words , it left decision-making power solely with the Council , totally excluding Parliament .
After intense discussions , for which I would like to thank Parliament 's Legal Service and the secretariat of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , we managed to reach an agreement to change the legal basis , in accordance with Article 43 ( 2 ) of the Treaty ; in other words , within the framework of the ordinary legislative procedure .
Now we expect the Council to be equally efficient in accepting our position and including the correlation tables , in order to give a prompt response to European livestock farmers .
Mr President , due to a combination of vaccinations and restrictions on animal movement , the number of outbreaks of bluetongue has fallen significantly in recent years .
The disease causes intense suffering and death amongst the affected animals and has a measurable negative impact on the rural economy and the farming community .
I welcome measures allowing Member States to use inactivated vaccination against bluetongue in areas not affected by the disease , and thank the rapporteur for his work on this issue .
Member States should be allowed the flexibility to be proactive and draw upon technological advances in vaccine production , thus reducing the burden on the agricultural sector posed by this disease and preventing occurrence without negating the disease-free status of the Member States , as was previously the case .
Vaccination represents an effective veterinary measure in response to bluetongue which , when accompanied by further measures such as surveillance , means that eradication of the disease in Europe is a real possibility .
Vaccination in controlling and eventually eradicating the disease will result in reduced economic losses and would be of benefit to European livestock .
Mr President , this legislation will give farmers flexibility , choice and hope , I am glad to say .
For too long , our vaccination strategy has been held back by the fact that we have not developed sophisticated enough products to allow vaccination of animals outside exclusion zones .
Being in an exclusion zone can be disastrous for a farmer 's livelihood .
It can also be disastrous not to protect your animals from disease , especially one as damaging and virulent as bluetongue .
The development of new vaccines and the rules changes which I hope the Parliament will agree today will allow the UK to move to bluetongue-free status .
It will allow freer movement of animals and save money in rural areas .
However , it is vitally important that these rules are brought into force as soon as possible .
Farmers in the West Country need to be able to vaccinate before the end of May to ensure that animals are fully protected .
All of us here understand the background to the interinstitutional battle raging over correlation tables , but I can tell you that the farmers I represent do not understand it and they rely on us , their elected representatives , to sort it out for them .
This is an urgent issue and common sense must prevail .
Let us get on with this now , agree a fast track for urgent issues of this kind , and get on and get our livestock vaccinated .
( DE ) Mr President , bluetongue is an animal epidemic affecting ruminants that has already caused great damage throughout the livestock and production sector .
Since the break-out of epidemics in a number of Member States in 2000 , considerable economic damage has been caused .
As always , whenever economic losses occur , the financial damage affects those at the bottom of the production chain most .
In particular , the flourishing trade in breeding cattle collapsed .
Despite vaccination , exports were completely paralysed in some countries .
In Austria , too , where cattle breeding has a long tradition , many farmers had their livelihoods threatened .
We must take the time now to take preventive action .
The disease has not been eradicated and could re-emerge at any time .
We need to learn from experience and be able to offer assistance quickly .
What was true ten years ago no longer applies .
The old directive on measures to combat bluetongue from 2000 needs to be improved and updated .
The rules on vaccination that applied at that time need to be adapted to technological developments in order to combat bluetongue more effectively and reduce the burden on farmers .
The rules of that time were designed for the use of live attenuated vaccines , which were the only vaccines available at the time the directive was adopted 10 years ago .
Today 's vaccines are more advanced .
We need to take account of this fact .
I welcome the rapid action on the part of the Commission and of Parliament and advocate the rapid implementation of the new directive .
As a representative of the farming community , I know how important it is to think in terms of the annual cycle .
Making a decision quickly will allow us to have a usable and uniform ruling by the autumn , which is in the interests of the Member States and , above all , of breeders and farmers .
Many thanks to the rapporteur .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have no real objections to the proposals in this legislative resolution , and I would like to congratulate the Commission for this initiative , which seeks to recognise scientific developments and permit the use of vaccines against bluetongue outside areas subject to animal movement restrictions , as this type of vaccine does not present any risk to the undesired circulation of the virus .
I would also like to congratulate and express my thanks for the work undertaken by the rapporteur for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Wojciechowski , and its President , Mr De Castro , which has allowed the Council and the Commission to come to a swift agreement with regard to the legal basis of this proposal .
Unlike what was initially proposed , therefore , legislative powers are shared by Parliament and the Council under the ordinary legislative procedure introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has discussed and approved its report in a short space of time so as to allow today 's vote here to take place , and so that the next step towards the agreement with the Council can be taken as soon as possible and thus allow the new provisions of this directive to enter into force .
I would therefore like to call upon the Council to come to a compromise with the Commission and Parliament 's position , which I am sure will be approved here today by a large majority .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , adapting the rules on vaccination for bluetongue is in accordance with the new EU vaccination policy as expressed in the Animal Health strategy 2007-2013 under the slogan ' Prevention is better than cure ' .
A more flexible procedure for the vaccination of livestock is necessary if we are to be able to combat epidemics such as bluetongue more effectively and reduce their impact on farming .
Greater flexibility and prevention would undoubtedly be desirable for a number of animal epidemics .
A strict policy of non-vaccination such as we have long pursued in the EU is no longer relevant .
Consequently , I am of the opinion that we are taking the right step here .
I would also like to support Mrs Paulsen , who said that we must expect to see other animal epidemics in the near future as a result of climate change .
This , in turn , suggests that we need a clear strategy , and here of course , we can correctly practise this .
In this context , I would also like to reiterate that there should be no further discussion of culling in the Commission either .
In the case of bluetongue , we have , of course , benefited from the fact that we supported research and now have an inactivated vaccine and are able to carry out comprehensive vaccination , which was previously very dangerous and very difficult .
We are therefore in a new situation here .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur for having worked so quickly .
Experience has taught us to expect the first outbreaks in late summer and autumn .
The countries therefore need to elaborate vaccination strategies and also implement these .
To Mr Agnew , I would like to say that if you have a good vet , then he will recommend vaccination , because that is what is wanted by the vets that I know and it is what I have heard repeatedly during the discussions .
Naturally , that is not the end of it .
The Commission needs to draw up implementing regulations and adapt these to the new process , and that needs to be done just as quickly as here in Parliament .
I therefore call on the Commission to work quickly so that we can put this scientific progress to use before the end of the year .

( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to our fellow Member , Mr Wojciechowski , for his report , which reminds us of the importance of appropriate legislation on this matter .
However , whether the vaccine is live attenuated or inactivated , given the current state of our knowledge , blood tests do not enable us to identify how the pathogenic organism entered the animal 's blood - in other words , whether it originated in a vaccine or in the wild .
Therefore , unless a marked inactivated vaccine - that is , a vaccine of which the pathogenic organism is of vaccine origin - is developed , it will be impossible to distinguish between a vaccinated animal and an animal infected by the virus .
Yet that is an essential condition if a region or a country is to be declared safe from any contamination .
There is a great risk , therefore , that countries that are protected from any contamination will put up trade barriers between themselves and countries that use that inactivated vaccine .
Hence , the European Union has a duty to encourage ongoing research into a marked inactivated vaccine so as to ensure greater biosecurity within the Union , something which will enable us to combine our health and trade approaches more effectively .
Mr President , it is worth recording the Commissioner 's comment that the instance of bluetongue is on the decline : from 48 000 cases in 2008 to 120 in 2010 .
That said , we are still not sure what the trend will be in the future , so the development of this inactivated vaccine and discussion of the technicalities around its use are very welcome .
It would be useful if the Council were in the Chamber so that we could address the issue of whether it is willing actually to provide the correlation tables that Parliament and the Commission believe to be essential - and perhaps this is something on which the Council could come back to us quite swiftly .
The prevention of all diseases , and of this one in particular , centres on animal husbandry , on the restriction of animal movement , on protection from vectors and on the issue discussed this morning - namely vaccination .
( CS ) Mr President , the problem with using inactive vaccine for vaccinations outside the closed zone is that animals will show positive results in serological tests , and in order to determine whether animals have been vaccinated or are actually sick , it will be necessary to perform a virological test , which is more expensive .
This will create problems as regards trade in , and transfers of , animals .
In view of the fact that it involves the transposition of the directive into national law , the deadline of 30 June 2011 will , for procedural reasons , also be difficult to achieve .
Personally , I also disagree with changing the date of entry into force of the directive from the earlier date of 20th to the day following its publication .
We should also understand that drawing up correlation tables will add further to the administrative burden .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we are taking a step forward in understanding that this is not a problem linked to some areas of Europe , Southern Europe or North Africa .
However , my view of the measure is a positive one .
I would like to ask Mr Tarabella whether he or the Commission does not think that the problem of application to veterinary services should also be tackled immediately , so that there could be a measure which would make it possible to eliminate the problem throughout the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , improving the vaccination arrangements for bluetongue is an extremely important matter .
The new inactivated vaccines allow producers , for the first time , to exclude the risk of infection with this potentially highly dangerous disease , because the vaccines can now also be used in areas in which bluetongue has not previously been found .
In view of this , we must repeatedly emphasise that agriculture - including exports of breeding animals - is an important factor in all the countries of Europe .
Farmers therefore need to be able to take advantage of the latest knowledge in animal health , which has been used to develop these vaccines .
There are two things that we now particularly need .
Firstly , we need a rapid solution concerning practice in the European Union .
Secondly , in my view , we just as urgently need an obligation for the measures introduced in the Member States to be notified ; in other words , an obligation on the Member States to report to the Commission .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would first like to thank the House for its strong support for this proposal and also for its recognition of the urgency of the matter and the very speedy procedures .
Several of you referred to the problem of correlation tables .
I would just like to remind you that the Conference of Presidents injected fresh impetus into tackling this issue , and has accorded it greater importance , notably in recognition of the problem of the transposition of EU legislation into national law .
I would like to ask whether it is really so difficult for the Member States to notify the Commission of the legal basis on which they transposed the EU regulation into their national legal order .
Is it really so difficult ?
I am sure that when they are considering how to transpose legislation , they must do some preparation and decide how they intend to transpose it .
I think we all recognise the fact - and we have had several debates on this issue - that the European Union suffers when the transposition of EU law is uneven .
In particular , on an issue as important as the one we are discussing today , incorrect transposition could have detrimental effects .
At the same time , as I said in my opening remarks , I would emphasise that the Commission is clearly against unnecessary hold-ups .
We are fully aware of the urgency of this matter .
Therefore , I hope that , through increased flexibility and intensive negotiations , we can find a solution to this problem .
The Commission will try to be as helpful as possible so that we can adopt this legislation before the beginning of the season for a potential bluetongue outbreak .
Concerning the Commission 's readiness to implement this measure , I would like to assure Mr Schnellhardt and Mr Uggias that the Commission has done its part .
Our implementing measures are almost complete .
What we need is approval of this proposal by the legislator .
Once we have that , we can proceed very quickly .
Once again , I would like to thank our rapporteur and to thank the House for its strong support for this measure .
Mr President , I would like to thank all the Members who took part in the debate and expressed their support for my report .
Thank you to all the shadow rapporteurs and members of the Committee on Agriculture , thanks to whom we were able to proceed so rapidly and effectively with the report .
It does not often happen that we are so unanimous in adopting a positive document which is obviously aiming to improve the current situation .
Regarding the correlation tables which were referred to in the discussion as a possible source of problems , I think that it would be difficult here to sympathise with the administrative bodies or governments of the Member States .
Creating the tables and sending them to the Commission will really not be much of a problem .
What is certain is that citizens who want to check whether their Member State 's legislation accords with European Union law will have greater problems .
They are the ones who will have to put in the effort and research if there are no tables , as has been the case until now .
It is very often difficult to find one 's way around EU legislation .
I think and hope that this instrument will be available to anyone who is interested , not only the Commission , and that it will be a readily accessible document which will be available when needed .
It will also be a very useful document .
I appeal to the Council not to take issue with the correlation tables , and if it must , not in this case , so that the new vaccinations can come into force during this season , as expected .
We cannot allow any delays because this would negate our quick and efficient work .
Thank you all once again for your cooperation on this report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
EU tomato imports from Morocco ( Petition 1565 / 2009 ) ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on EU tomato imports from Morocco ( Petition 1565 / 2009 by José Maria Pozancos ( Spanish ) ) , by Erminia Mazzoni , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions - B7-0211 / 2011 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question we submitted as the Committee on Petitions shows that our Committee was not satisfied with the answer that the Commission gave to the issue raised by the Spanish Federation of Associations of Producers and Exporters of Fruits , Vegetables , Flowers and Live Plants .
In fact , the Commission focused its attention on the responsibility of Member States in setting prices , without considering the specific point made by the petition , which was to report irregular imports of tomatoes and other vegetables from Morocco .
These alleged irregularities have , in fact , already been noted for some years by the regulatory body OLAF , which has pointed to the abusive application of the method for deduction provided for by Regulation ( EC ) No 3223 / 1994 , which establishes three different methods of calculation .
The consequences of this situation are lower revenues for the European Union , unfair competition and breach of market rules , as well as the gradual impoverishment of European producers and exporters , with seriously alarming situations reported , in particular , in Spain , Greece , Portugal , France and Italy .
The Commission is negotiating a new bilateral agreement with Morocco , and once again this agreement seems to not be taking these alarming facts into consideration , but to be continuing along the path towards implementation of a flow of exports from Morocco to the European Union which is totally unregulated and does not comply with European law .
I think this is a subject we should focus on .
It is a subject which relates to and touches on a currently sensitive nerve , which is that of migration flows .
In fact , this great mass of people coming from the countries along the North African coast , including Morocco , to the European Union often involves farm labourers , as the recent events in Rosarno show .
We are struggling to receive them .
Above all , we are struggling as the European Union , and particularly as Italy , to offer them a livelihood .
Further reducing the potential for agricultural production in our countries , and therefore in France , Spain , Italy and Portugal , which are having serious problems at the moment , would cause all kinds of damage .
I would like to know what the Commission intends to do .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , if you will allow me , I will try to answer several questions that were raised in this petition .
I would like to thank Mrs Mazzoni for bringing up this question so we can clarify our position on this matter .
First , I would like to assure the House that the Commission monitors the quantity of tomatoes imported from Morocco closely , attentively , using a cross-checking system based on designation of quantities imported by Moroccan operators and daily import records kept by national customs authorities .
The Commission , until today , does not have any proof of systemic fraud or systemic failure of the system that was put in place .
We have the information concerning one case , to which I will come back a little later .
This is related to the year 2007 , when OLAF indeed emphasised that the system as it stands at present could result in opportunistic behaviour but not necessarily involving irregular behaviour .
It is recalled that the application of the entry price system and the levying of possible import duties in connection with this mechanism are the exclusive competence of the customs authorities of the Member States .
Another aspect to this question , which is quite important , is the international context of this matter , something that is really dominated by the Doha Round , which has not yet been completed .
Any change to the entry price system and its current application mechanism could have a detrimental impact on the results achieved so far .
The new bilateral agreement with Morocco preserves the interests of the European producers by maintaining the system of monthly tariff quotas of tomatoes and strict control of the quantities imported .
In addition , the agreement provides for improved cooperation and greater transparency in terms of market data in the fruit and vegetable sector .
The quantitative increase in the tomatoes quota has been limited to 52 000 tonnes , which is well below traditional trade levels , and the increase is progressive and staggered over four marketing years , thereby preserving current market shares and the traditional supply to the European Union .
The Commission therefore considers that any change to the current entry price system must respect the terms of the relevant international agreements .
The Commission ensures that the regulation is properly applied and therefore has carried out the investigation through OLAF .
This is probably the case Mrs Mazzoni is referring to ; whether there are irregularities as a result of incorrect interpretation of the implementing regulation .
However , it is the responsibility of the national customs authorities to follow up on the results of the investigation .
Recuperation is in progress but the publication of the data is strictly the responsibility of the competent customs authorities .
As regards the organisation of surveillance ; this was one of the items that was raised by Mrs Mazzoni .
Here , I have to say that the Commission , as I said , monitors tomato imports from Morocco using a cross-checking system .
The quantities imported and reported by the Moroccan authorities on a weekly basis are monitored .
The data is then compared with the data provided by the national customs authorities , who survey the system , and also by Eurostat .
I think that we have very good and precise information and , if there were some systematic fraud and systematic irregularities , we would definitely spot it and take action .
Mr President , I would firstly like to express my gratitude to the Committee on Petitions for its hard work following the complaint brought by the Spanish Federation of Associations of Producers and Exporters of Fruits , Vegetables , Flowers and Live Plants , based on the report published by OLAF , the European Anti-Fraud Office , in 2007 .
I believe this report 's conclusions are extremely clear and justify only too well action on the part of the European Commission - which should have addressed this matter a long time ago - to clarify the operation of the entry price regime , at least in relation to the tomato sector .
However , not only having failed to take any action to prevent the different types of fraud made possible by the current Entry Price Regulation , the Commission has negotiated a new agriculture agreement with Morocco without having first resolved the shortcomings of the import regime currently in place .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is time for the European Commission to take its responsibilities seriously , to start investigating where and how fraud is being committed , and , potentially , to demand payment of any unpaid customs duties .
I believe that there is no way that a new agreement with Morocco should be ratified until all the details we have set out are resolved .
Our aim is not to hinder new international agreements , but to ensure that such agreements will not seriously damage the interests of European producers , and that the rules laid down in those agreements will be adhered to .
Where the new agreement with Morocco is concerned , all the European fruit and vegetables sector is demanding is a guarantee that the terms agreed will , in fact , be observed .
This will only be made possible by reforming the entry price regime .
We cannot have a new agreement with Morocco until we have a new system for entry prices .
We will not be able to ratify the agreement that the Commission has already concluded .
Moreover , if this supervisory role is to be played by the Member States , they should be required to make a significant financial contribution .
However , it is also true that we have long been calling for a European borders and customs system similar to that of the United States , so as to ensure effective control .
According to the Spanish farmers who presented a petition to the European Parliament , underpriced imported Moroccan tomatoes pose a threat to European food producers .
They are referring to the underpriced minimum rate which was set at approximately EUR 46 per 100 kg in a preferential import-export agreement between the EU and Morocco .
According to EUROSTAT , Morocco exported over 70 000 tonnes of tomatoes in December 2010 , which is over double the quota foreseen in the agreement between the EU and Morocco .
This is what has caused heavy losses to European producers , never mind the losses from customs payments .
OLAF has already commented on this matter , stating in its 2007 report that there may be irregularities in the importing of tomatoes from Morocco in connection with the underpricing of tomatoes in comparison with the initial price agreed by the EU , which , in effect , allows for the non-payment of additional customs duties .
In adding my voice to that of other members of the Committee on Petitions , I would , however , like to ask whether the Commission has any intention of revising rules of this kind , and of possibly recovering the unpaid customs duties .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , last October , I tabled a written question to the Commission concerning the discrepancies between the figures in the different EU services on the EU import of tomatoes from Morocco .
In 2008 , there were about 100 000 tonnes in difference between DG TAXUD and Eurostat .
The Commission answered that it had observed the problem and was solving it , but it is not clear to me whether the Commission will achieve what European citizens and European producers deserve .
In the European Union , we import tomatoes not only from Morocco but also from other third countries .
We should find a way for negotiations to be very fair to everyone and not at the expense of the European agriculture sector .
We should also find a way to control what we are importing from other countries outside the EU , especially in some northern European ports .
Without effective border controls , the European agriculture sector will have a very difficult future .
If European production of tomatoes is damaged by the EU-Morocco Agreement , it will be very difficult to regain production on EU soil .
The rules and the obligations should be applied to everyone , which means fair competition .
What we cannot accept is the application of different rules and duties to a European producer and an agricultural producer outside the EU .
Accepting this means accepting the loss in competitiveness of our agricultural sector and a huge effect on the labour force in Europe .
I am in favour of free trade , but under symmetric conditions of production and information .
If they do not exist , free trade is not fair trade and competition is not fair competition .
Finally , I do not think that Parliament should ratify the EU-Morocco Agreement without the inclusion of clauses concerning the labour market , the social dimension and the environment in Morocco .
If this does not happen , we may lose our European farming activity and our food chain industry .
Mr President , we raised several warnings during the debate on trade agreements on agricultural produce between Morocco and other Mediterranean countries , such as Egypt and Israel .
We warned that if these were concluded , they would further increase the pressure faced by farmers in the EU to lower production prices , especially in countries like Portugal , and exacerbate the additional difficulties in disposing of their products .
We condemn the liberalisation of trade in fruit and vegetables , which are typically Mediterranean products , as this would lead to large supermarkets stocking lower priced products , which are often exempt from the same rules and standards as those imposed on farmers in the EU .
We would like to point out that the liberalisation of trade for agricultural produce promotes models of intensive production for export which favour big agribusiness at the expense of small and medium-sized farming , family farming , and supply for local and regional markets .
All this has negative consequences on the sovereignty , security and quality of food , and on the environment .
This situation was the reason for our warnings , which the Commission has regrettably ignored , and is continuing to do so .
It has ignored the need to defend the interests of EU producers , ensuring fair prices for production and business continuity , especially for small and medium-sized farming .
Moreover , we now know that the Commission also ignored the report by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) , which denounced irregularities in the importing of tomatoes from Morocco , in a report acknowledging the impact of these imports on lowering tomato prices in the EU market .
Not content with this , in the new agricultural chapter in the Association Agreement with Morocco , the Commission has decided to further increase tomato imports to the EU .
When will this liberal fundamentalism , which sacrifices everything to the interests of a few major European corporations and multinational exporters , finally be curbed ?
How does the Commission intend to make amends to European producers for the damage that it has clearly caused them ?
We will leave you with these questions .
( ES ) Mr President , the tomato growers of the Canary Islands , Murcia , Andalusia and the Community of Valencia , all of them European Union producers , need the Commission to take robust action with regard to an unfair situation which is causing them serious damage .
Fraud is being committed , and you know it .
Thanks to its agreement with the EU , Morocco benefits from an entry price to which it does not adhere .
In addition , we should not only look at 2007 , but also at 2010 .
The Commission is well aware that Spanish tomato growers have to compete with Moroccan growers under unfair conditions , as they must bear much higher production costs stemming from the strict European standards on quality , food safety and workplace safety , as well as restrictions on pesticides which are not required of third countries .
Even so , our growers , with great effort and commitment to quality , continue to work hard to save their crops .
Thus , it is unacceptable for the Commission to ignore the malfunctioning of the entry price regime , whose complexity encourages fraud , as the European Anti-Fraud Office itself does , and for the Commission to look the other way when the tomato quotas agreed with Morocco are being contravened .
It is not enough for the Commission to tell us that surveillance is the responsibility of the Member States .
If they fail in their duties , the Commission must act .
It is intolerable for regulations on Moroccan import quotas to be breached , and for the applicable customs duties to go unpaid , without the Commission taking any action .
The Commission would have us approve a new agreement with Morocco .
Unless we are given assurances that the price system will be modified to prevent unfair competition between Moroccan and Spanish produce , we will certainly not be supporting that initiative .
It is your obligation to ensure adherence to agreements , but it is also your obligation to defend the interests of growers in the Canary Islands , Murcia , Valencia , and Andalusia .
Do it before it is too late .
( ES ) Mr President , calls for the Entry Price Regulation to be modified began in 2003 .
This Parliament , the Member States , Spain and France , with the support of Italy , Greece , and Portugal , have all requested it .
The reason for this lies in the fact that the regulation is not being properly applied , with certain duties being left unpaid and a biased calculation method being used .
As a consequence , the sector suffers , we have unfair competition , and the Member States receive less revenue from customs duties .
The Special Corps of Fruit and Vegetable Inspectors has verified this , pointing out that Article 5 of the regulation allows a biased application and , as has been said earlier in this House , OLAF , the European Anti-Fraud Office , has stated that the calculation method used enables non-payment of additional duties .
It is up to the Commission to resolve this issue .
A solution must be provided , to the production system and to the Member States .
This situation has been going on for 16 years .
The sector is suffering .
The European fruit and vegetable sector , along with the Spanish fruit and vegetable sector in Valencia , Murcia and Andalusia , are all suffering , and a solution is needed .
Consumers are also affected by this situation .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the petition under discussion today has arrived at a time when Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and its Committee on International Trade are debating the new chapter on agriculture in the agreement with Morocco .
The European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) confirms that there have been irregularities in the calculation of duties on tomato imports and that this has been damaging to European producers , the very same producers who are expressing their concern at the expected increase in tomato and fruit and vegetable imports in general that will take place if the agreement is signed .
We are obviously sensitive to the concerns brought about by bilateral agreements where the agricultural element is often sacrificed for the sake of broader industrial interests .
It is not a good way to proceed , and we will continue to repeat this to the European Commission .
However , I would like to point out that the current economic and political crisis throughout the Maghreb area should lead us to consider this agreement carefully and with greater solidarity .
( ES ) Mr President , as requested by the petitioners from the Spanish Federation of Associations of Producers and Exporters of Fruits , Vegetables , Flowers and Live Plants , the Commission needs to modify - and here I am repeating the request put forward by Spain and other Member States - some of the articles of the regulation to which we are referring .
Focusing on the calculation method for establishing entry prices , one of the three methods currently used , must be removed , specifically the one known as the ' deductive ' method .
This is the most necessary change , bearing in mind that importers choose the method that , at any given time , allows them to avoid paying additional duties .
Now that the new agreement with Morocco is pending adoption by this Parliament for its entry into force , the Commission would certainly prove its worth by correcting the system once and for all .
We are calling for this once again today , as properly working entry prices are the compensation that our growers can reasonably expect when its entry into force is agreed upon .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that today 's debate following the petition presented by the Spanish Federation of Associations of Producers and Exporters of Fruits , Vegetables , Flowers and Live Plants is apt and well-timed , in view of the fact that the commercial agreement with Morocco is being discussed in Parliament at the same time .
It is clear that the petition raises an issue to which the Commission does not yet seem to have provided an answer .
This House strongly calls for the answer to be given before the new agreement is signed , because it is not acceptable that European farmers should continue to pay the price of this desire for free trade that is pervading Europe .
We need to defend and safeguard our farmers , not only with regard to tomato production , but also with regard to all fruit and vegetable production , which would be severely affected by this indiscriminate opening up of the market .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the criticisms that we have heard here this morning in connection with the petition presented are understandable .
I think there is still a long way to go before we can ensure that a possible general agreement on agricultural products with Morocco receives consensus approval .
On the one hand , the agreement must respect the need for balance , and not cause serious difficulties for European agricultural producers .
On the other , it must respect the need for clear and transparent rules of competition on agricultural markets .
This is the path to follow in order to ensure that the relationship between the European Union and Morocco is a positive one .
I therefore invite the Commission to look for suitable solutions that do not lose sight of the producers ' interests , but which also do not lose sight of a renewed policy of generosity towards Morocco , particularly in view of the events taking place in the Maghreb .
It would be very useful to understand , and I do not want us to end up effectively importing tomato pickers , instead of agricultural products and tomatoes .
It is therefore important to carry out a thorough investigation in order to create a new European policy .
( ES ) Mr President , I believe that the ' business as usual ' policy has already been the cause of many misfortunes for us in the past .
Therefore , we must be very cautious , particularly with regard to the current situation in North Africa .
Precisely because of this , I would like to join in with those who have said that , under the current circumstances , it is scarcely appropriate to move forward with the trade agreement with Morocco .
As rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries , I believe we need thorough clarification of the progress being made in the current framework .
We must also clearly demand that any tomatoes - or any other produce - entering the European Union arrive under the same conditions as are demanded of local growers .
In the absence of this assurance , we should - indeed must - rethink the entire framework , and this is what I hope this House will also do .
Rather than adopting a protectionist policy , I believe there is a need for firm commitment to fair trade .
We must also be free of any doubts as to what the framework is , so that we are able to know and to act as responsibly as possible .
( ES ) Mr President , I must thank all my fellow Members who have understood the problem of the Mediterranean region , the Spanish delegation , and all those who understand that we in the Canary Islands , Murcia , Valencia and Almeria , in addition to being frustrated at the Commission 's failure to honour its agreements , and to having seen many companies forced out of business , remain the entry point for immigrants from sub-Saharan Africa , the entry point for Moroccan immigrants , and a buffer against the crisis .
This is because we are currently supporting , at a time of utter economic penury , people who come to work and are able to send money home to their families .
Therefore , I believe that the Commission must also behave responsibly with regard to the competences granted to it by the Treaties .
I believe the Commission has not given any thought to the need to defend the interests of the public , or to the need to prevent an indiscriminate policy which , moreover , makes us import produce grown in extremely dubious phytosanitary conditions .
( DE ) Mr President , one of the reasons the internal market was established was so as to provide European consumers with better protection .
Consumers have a right to be able to buy healthy , fairly produced products throughout the European Union .
Opening up the market - in other words , a controlled import quota - must therefore be subject to at least three requirements being met .
Firstly , there must be clear control of the quantity of imports permitted .
This relates mainly to the quantitative aspect .
Secondly , the quality of the products must also be controlled .
This also relates to production standards .
Thirdly , the impact on farmers in the European Union needs to be taken into consideration .
Business that harms third parties - and here , this generally means business that favours industry to the detriment of agriculture - must be prevented .
I therefore ask the Commission to subject the agreement with Morocco to further careful scrutiny and not to sign it until it has undergone a further review .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Spanish producers who submitted this timely petition to us .
Indeed , for months now , we in Parliament have been warning the Commission of the danger to our internal market of a number of bilateral agreements .
Clearly , we are sensitive to the issue of Morocco 's development .
Clearly , we know that creating stability for the Moroccan people in their own country is the best possible solution , and that it will stop us from having to solve numerous immigration problems in the future .
However , when the Commission tells us that a new agreement will simply ratify a situation , we can plainly see , through the reports by the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) , that the situation to which the Commission refers is not the real solution .
Furthermore , I should like to alert the Commission to another point .
We are told that the negotiated - the renegotiated - agreements will enable us to support Moroccan producers .
Which producers are we talking about , though ?
The exporters are primarily large agri-food companies that have set up huge farms in Morocco .
Small Moroccan producers are not the ones who benefit from our agreements , as they do not have the capacity to produce in conditions acceptable to the European market .
Let us not confuse the issue , but do not mislead the MEPs either : that is my request to the Commission .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , if you will allow me , I will start with some figures because they were referred to by several speakers in their statements .
I will use the Comext data for this .
EU imports of tomatoes from Morocco grew from 185 000 tonnes in the 1999-2000 season to 295 000 tonnes in 2009-2010 , following the normal trend of fresh fruit and vegetable imports from all over the world .
At the same time , total additional EU imports of tomatoes increased from 242 000 tonnes to 493 000 tonnes .
I have to underline that Morocco 's share of total EU imports actually decreased from 76 % to 59 % .
EU tomato production varies between 16 and 18 million tonnes per year , of which 6.5 to 7.5 million tonnes are destined for the fresh market .
I think that it is very good to bear these figures in mind so that we can keep this discussion and the size of the problem in proportion .
Regarding the new agreement with Morocco , we in the Commission believe that it is modest and balanced .
If it is adopted , the Commission will , of course , ensure that all its conditions and rules are fully respected .
Additional quantities under the tariff rate quota will be kept below the traditional average of supplies to the EU .
The current average annual level is 300 000 tonnes .
With an additional 52 000 tonnes , there will be 285 000 tonnes within the tariff rate quota , so there will still be scope for 15 000 tonnes of imports under the usual erga omnes regime .
Turning to another problem raised , namely , the claim that we failed to act , I really cannot accept that because we did not find any systemic failure in the system .
There was one case that was also presented here today in which OLAF investigated the problem and referred the whole file with the findings to the French court , which did not support the full extent of OLAF 's findings , but nevertheless , the partial recovery of unpaid duties has started .
I would also like to assure this House that , regarding control of phytosanitary standards , the Commission is assuring the highest possible control and the highest possible level of standards for every import of fresh fruit and vegetables to the European Union .
At the same time , I have to say that I understand the vigilance of the Members of the European Parliament and the vigilance of the agricultural sector on these very pertinent issues .
I would like to assure them that , if the organisations have concrete evidence of fraud , they are invited to bring this to the attention of the Commission , which will carefully analyse it and take appropriate action if needed .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 11 : 35 and resumed at 12 : 00 )

1 .
Vaccination against bluetongue (
Before the vote :
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to speak briefly just to underline the importance of the Wojciechowski report on bluetongue for an institutional issue which concerns us all .
As far as the content is concerned , there is no conflict between the Commission , Parliament and the Council .
However , the inclusion of the correlation tables in the text remains a very sensitive issue .
Despite the fact that the Council was totally opposed to it , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development decided to vote for a text that includes the correlation tables , which oblige Member States to report on transposition of the directive .
It is now up to the Council to decide whether to accept the correlation tables and conclude the agreement at first reading , or to answer to European farmers for causing the bluetongue vaccination campaign to be missed this year in order not to give way on this point .
I believe that this report can act as a precedent in future negotiations with the Council .
We must be united and determined in calling for maximum transparency from Member States and in defending total compliance with EU law .
I believe the rapporteur would also like the floor .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Madam President , in principle , Mr De Castro has said what I wanted to say .
I would merely add my voice to the appeal that the Council should not throw up obstacles to the rapid implementation of the new directive .
The correlation tables are a start and a precedent which , in my opinion , will create best practice for the future , and will help to monitor more easily the compliance of European law with national law .
2 .
Lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan (
3 .
Situation in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen (
4 .
Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries (
Before the vote on paragraph 16 :
Madam President , I would like to include , after ' climate change risk assessment ' , the words ' which does not harm trade ' .
5 .
2010 progress report on Iceland (
Before the vote on Amendment 2 :
( RO ) Madam President , I would like us to replace :
' Urges the people of Iceland to support this agreement ' with ' Encourages the people of Iceland to support this agreement ' .
Mr Preda , I am sorry but I think you have read the wrong oral amendment .
You have two , could you try the other one .
That would be helpful .
( RO ) Madam President , I would like us to replace in Amendment 2 :
' Enter into constructive talks ' with ' Continue the constructive talks ' .
Madam President , I urge all Members not to adopt the amendment , and I urge Iceland to protect its fish stocks ...
( Interruption by the President )
( Heckling )
6 .
2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (
Before the vote :

( EL ) Madam President , I wish to submit a motion in accordance with Rule 177 to adjourn the debate , because Mr Zoran Thaler , who acted as the rapporteur for this report , is no longer with us , following the serious allegations made in the Sunday Times .
In my view , he enjoys a presumption of innocence ; however , in light of the accusations against him , the present report on FYROM does not enjoy a presumption of credibility .
At best , this report will harbour a seed of doubt .
I therefore move that the debate be adjourned , that a new rapporteur be appointed , and that it be re-tabled in three months ' time , in order to maintain Parliament 's integrity .
We indeed have a new rapporteur who has taken over the report .
Mr Vigenin , if you care to take the floor , I will allow you to do so briefly .
Madam President , we should not enter into this propaganda exercise .
This report has been discussed .
( Applause )
There was broad agreement between all political groups on this report .
It was adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs by an overwhelming majority .
We had a good debate yesterday , and I would ask you to continue with the vote now .
Madam President , I want to propose that the final vote on this resolution be a roll-call vote .
Let us wait until we get to the final vote and we will see if the House wishes to do that .
Madam President , it says that roll calls may be taken with 24 hours notice .
If there is another rule which supersedes this and says a roll call can be decided by Parliament , would you please tell us what the number is .
Otherwise , we could all request roll calls when we felt like it .
I have the power as your presiding Vice-President today to decide whether we take a roll-call vote or not .
It is Rule 20 that gives me the power , but I am going to ask the House nevertheless .
Let us have a show of hands .
Do you wish to vote by roll-call ?
It is clear that the House wishes to vote by roll-call in accordance with my wish also , so I open the vote on the final motion for a resolution .
( Parliament agreed to the request for a roll-call vote )
7 .
Situation in Côte d 'Ivoire (
8 .
Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - Eastern Dimension (
9 .
Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - Southern Dimension (

( PL ) Madam President , I would like to ask whether a small correction could be made to the Amendment I tabled . This correction has , in fact , already been set out in full at the end of the voting list .
The general point is that we should not only refer to the events in Libya , in order not to create the impression that this correction , that our work , has only a specific application .
We should also refer to all the events in North Africa and the Middle East and stress the importance of the fact that two thirds of funding ( with a split of two thirds to one third ) has been earmarked as a gesture of goodwill and as an expression of the fact that the Southern Dimension is important to us .
10 .
Use of sexual violence in conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East (
11 .
EIB annual report for 2009 (
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
*
Madam President , under Rule 110 of our Rules of Procedure , the Commission may , at any time , request permission to make a statement on an urgent issue .
Overnight , we have had the economically calamitous , but unsurprising , news that another country has bitten the dust and that Portugal is going to have to be bailed out .
Can I ask whether you have received any request from the Commission to make a statement on Portugal today ?
If not , would the Commissioner say why not ?
Does he think that the bailing-out of Portugal is not important enough for this Parliament to discuss , or is he just burying his head in the sand ?
Mr Farage , you have made your point and I am sure that Commissioner Šefčovič has heard .
It is the prerogative of each institution to react .
You have been heard and we will see what happens .
Madam President , I ask : is the answer yes or no ?
Have you received a request from the Commission to make an urgent statement on the Portuguese situation or not ?
Mr Farage , it is the Commission 's prerogative and you have had the chance to be heard .
We will now proceed with our votes .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( FI ) Madam President , I think it is very important that we voted in favour of this report with a clear majority .
This is just the sort of work that the European Parliament needs to do to preserve the faith of the public in this system .
Why , though , did I want to raise this subject again , now that the vote is over ?
Like the rapporteur , I would like to stress that this is an important matter , especially between the institutions , and these correlation tables are an important start .
I hope that this will function until the end , with no quarrelling between the institutions , so that this can be implemented as speedily as possible .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is an important measure for the agricultural world .
However , the measure needs to be followed up immediately by a commitment from the Council and national governments to adopt it forthwith , before the end of the season , in order to solve this problem which does not affect just the southern part of Europe , but the whole of Europe , as today 's vote has shown .
Bluetongue affects the sheep and cattle on our farms .
Therefore , taking action to totally eradicate it is a health policy objective which national governments can best contribute to through this measure by being flexible .
It also needs to be immediately adopted through transposition of the directive .
( FI ) Madam President , this was an extremely important subject for debate , and I think that it would have been important if Parliament had sent a clear message that we are very worried about what happened .
We want to show the public that we are doing all we can to make nuclear power plants in Europe and in the world generally as safe as possible .
We also , however , want to show that we can continue with nuclear power when there is greater certainty over the issue .
It is a pity , however , that the majority here voted against this , and that the clear message was therefore not sent today .
( DE ) Madam President , I am somewhat disappointed that Parliament was unable to approve this by a majority today in order to learn sensible lessons from the reactor disaster in Japan .
I consider it beyond question that this must mean organising a clear shift in energy policy away from nuclear energy - in order words , the beginning of a phase-out - at European level .
Secondly , it should also be obvious that if we carry out stress tests , then any nuclear power plant that fails these tests is required to be removed from the grid .
Neither of these proposals received a majority in the vote .
I was therefore unable to support the resolution .
I hope that we will soon succeed in organising a uniform energy policy that provides us with safe and sensible energy in the future , which means movement towards energy efficiency and renewable energies .
( SK ) Madam President , no one surely doubts that the accident in Fukushima showed the need to tighten up assessments of existing nuclear power plant operations and the construction of new plants .
It will be necessary to review and adjust legislation , as well as the parameters of the stress tests on European nuclear plants , based on common criteria applied throughout the EU .
In view of the fact that this is a global problem which knows no borders , there could even be an intercontinental agreement covered by global authorities .
However , we must not rush into this , as we might throw out the baby with the bathwater .
It is a matter of resolving purely professional problems , the politicisation of which can only do harm .
We witness many demagogic claims that have no professional basis whatsoever every day in the media and also here in the European Parliament .
Since the conclusions of the European Parliament debate fully reflect this conflict of opinions , I have abstained from the final vote on the position of Parliament .
( FI ) Madam President , I could not vote in favour of this resolution either , at least not in its present form when we came to vote on it .
In Europe , our citizens fear for their safety , and with good reason .
This should be a priority for us now .
We need concrete measures to increase people 's feelings of safety .
This resolution divided opinions right across Parliament .
It should not be a matter of whether we are against or in favour of nuclear power : we insist on minimum standards of safety for Europe as a whole .
The stress tests proposed by the Commission will not be enough on their own to pacify the public .
The Commission should investigate alternative energy solutions for the future , at the same time taking into consideration the different energy needs of the EU Member States .
In my opinion , investing in nuclear power should not mean that there is less research or product development in the area of renewable energy sources .
( SK ) Madam President , the disaster in Fukushima has given rise to justified public fears over the use of nuclear energy , and it is therefore appropriate to think about the current situation in the EU , and to take decisive steps to improve safety , with which I agree , as well as transparency in the operation of nuclear plants and the protection of human health .
In the current situation , it is not possible , with the best will in the world , to imagine a functioning , competitive electricity market without the contribution of nuclear energy in a balanced energy mix , whether we like it or not .
The EU and the Member States have a duty to create an energy policy that will ensure the sovereignty , political independence and economic security of every state .
The instruments for achieving this objective include a suitable energy mix , an adequate level of production capacity , a balance between supply and demand , reductions in the energy intensity of the economy and so on .
I am not afraid of emphasising that nuclear energy is an important resource for electricity generation , because it contributes to greater energy security , particularly for states with limited reserves of solid fuels .
I abstained from the final vote because it included a proposal to put through a moratorium on new reactors .
I certainly disagree with that .
Madam President , I voted in favour of the amendment insisting on a nuclear-free future for Europe .
The tragedy of Fukushima underlines the huge danger that nuclear power represents for humanity and for the environment .
The potential for massive catastrophe and the lack of a safe way to dispose of spent nuclear fuel means that nuclear power does not represent a safe means to develop energy production .
The tragedy also underlines the fact that private profiteers cannot be trusted with the vital task of energy production and energy distribution .
Ultimately , the capitalist pursuit of profit , without regard for human life , human safety or the environment , is responsible for this crisis .
I call for the nationalisation of the energy sector under democratic worker control and management .
On that basis , we could develop a rational and sustainable plan for energy production , distribution and use , to provide cheap and safe energy for all , while protecting the environment .
At the centre of that plan , there must be a long-term programme of investment in renewable energy sources leading to the progressive replacement of oil , gas , coal and nuclear power stations .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , after the tragedy of Fukushima , we all need to stop and think .
Nuclear power is once more in the spotlight , and I believe we need to think above all of the future , of our children 's future .
It is true that we need energy , but we need clean energy and safe energy .
Safety is all well and good , but it is not enough .
A moratorium is not enough ; we need to go further than that .
The tragedy of Fukushima tells us that there is no such thing as zero-risk nuclear power stations .
Above all , it tells us that we need to organise a rapid exit from nuclear power and to focus our attention on renewable , alternative power sources .
Europe needs a new energy policy in order to halt the construction of new nuclear power stations because of the terrible impact these power stations could have on safety , the environment , the climate and future generations .
A radical change of perspective is necessary , for a safe future based on saving energy and the use of renewable sources .
( PL ) Madam President , I voted in favour of adopting the resolution .
The resolution was meant to be an expression of solidarity with the victims of the natural disaster and the nuclear accident which followed it , and also an expression of gratitude and recognition for all those who are risking their own lives to prevent an even greater catastrophe .
I , too , am full of admiration for the solidarity , courage and determination with which the people of Japan are reacting to this disaster .
I agree with the conclusion that the European Union must comprehensively review its approach to nuclear safety , but we cannot force Member States to abandon activities aimed at ensuring their own energy security , so I am pleased that we have rejected the unrealistic and dangerous provisions in our resolution .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Italian delegation from Italia dei Valori voted against the text of the resolution on nuclear power , because it was not clear enough to indicate a clear no to nuclear power .
Unfortunately , all the amendments that could have improved the text and chosen a Europe free of nuclear power , immediately free of existing nuclear power stations and with no future nuclear power stations , were rejected .
A Europe free of nuclear power is the only possible route if we want to guarantee that our children and future generations will have a future protected from the repetition of catastrophes like Fukushima and Chernobyl .
These lessons tell us that there is no such thing as theoretical safety .
That is why we have to say a clear no to the nuclear option and invest in research and innovation in other sources that are truly green , renewable and clean .
( DE ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution and I find it deeply regrettable that Parliament has not succeeded in reaching a uniform position today .
I particularly address this to those Members who were demanding more .
I think it would have been better to vote for the compromise , because I am aware that the European Union contains very differing views on the issue of nuclear energy .
It is precisely because environmental effects and the impact of disasters know no national boundaries that I would consider it important to adopt and accept the minimum requirements .
In the first place , we need a uniform safety standard in the European Union .
Secondly , we need to make provision for any future incidents or disasters ; in other words , we need a European disaster recovery plan .
Thirdly , we should not continue to neglect research in the area of renewable energies , but also in the area of nuclear fusion and into the establishment of storage facilities and the recycling of carbon fuels .
Madam President , I also am disappointed that this House was not able to send a balanced and reasonable message .
There is no doubt that the damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant is a disaster , but the final death toll will not be counted in thousands or hundreds , and perhaps not even in tens .
As a result of the world 's most severe earthquake recorded in that area , there will be an estimated 30 000 to 40 000 deaths due to destroyed roads , bridges , railway lines and buildings .
Should we demolish all similar structures in the EU , just in case ?
That is my question .
Nuclear technology is not at fault in Japan ; the location is .
A panic reaction in Europe is therefore not only ridiculous but it could also damage the environment because there is no credible supply of a low carbon alternative to nuclear energy , and fossil fuels will prosper .
Do we really want that ?
( FI ) Madam President , everyone in Europe must be concerned about safety , and that is important .
We have to build systems that are safe .
Of course , it has to be said that there has been something of an overreaction since Fukushima .
On the other hand , that is only natural .
I remember the time when the Estonia sank : some were of the opinion that all ships should be banned , because they are dangerous .
Well , individuals can have such thoughts .
Now , though , we need to remember that just one out of 54 nuclear power plants did not get through the test to which the tsunami and earthquake subjected them .
Despite that , however , we now need to examine things calmly and remember that you cannot generalise on the basis of an individual case .
In fact , 300 000 Europeans die each year from the effects of fossil fuel emissions , and that is something we should look into first .
It is very important to ensure that nuclear technology is safe , and I know that in Europe , we will also construct plants safely in the future , and attention needs to be paid to this .
Nevertheless , there is absolutely no cause for misplaced hysteria on this scale .
Madam President , can I say I abstained on the votes all of the way through on this .
This was not because I am not concerned about the issue , as I really am concerned about this issue , but I realise that it has to be nuanced and there are no easy answers .
I live in Ireland , I represent Dublin , which is on the east coast of Ireland .
Along the west coast of Britain there are five active nuclear plants ; I have no objection to them .
However , I do think that in the area of nuclear safety and in the interests of good neighbourliness , it would be a good idea to have some form of joint British / Irish - when I say Irish , I mean North-South Irish - safety overview of the workings of those plants so that we would be informed about the risks , if there are any .
Furthermore , in the event of an accident , we could participate in any evacuation that there might need to be for people in Wales or England , so that we could play our part as a good neighbour .
Within Member States , where there are neighbour Member State countries with facilities of this kind , there needs to be good neighbourly cooperation .
That is the reason why I wished to make this explanation .
( FI ) Madam President , in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen , people have tried to stand up for human dignity , transparency , fundamental rights and the right to democracy .
The European Union has shown willing and ability in protecting Libya 's civilian population and supporting the democratic revolution .
We must avoid double standards and show that we will act in accordance with our values in European Union foreign policy .
The situation in North Africa and the Middle East is a real acid test of Europe 's new External Action Service .
A viable , fair society needs genuine dialogue and interaction between civil society and the political decision makers .
The people have to be listened to , and this is something of which we want to remind Syria , Bahrain and Yemen .
We are not fomenting revolution .
The satisfaction , safety and welfare of the people are the priority of a state that respects justice .
With this resolution , we are showing that Europe , in its foreign policy , stands by the values for which it was also established .
Madam President , I abstained on the vote on the situation in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen .
The revolutionary movements that started in Tunisia have inspired and encouraged millions of people across North Africa and the Middle East to engage in popular uprisings against the brutal regimes that have dictatorially ruled those countries for decades .
Those uprisings have once again proven the potential power of the working class and the poor to stand up and defeat their oppressors .
I denounce the hypocrisy of the leaders of the EU and other Western countries who today condemn the brutal repression that is used by these dictatorial leaders , but who yesterday supported , and provided a lifeline for , their regimes .
It is now vital that the masses unite across ethnic and religious lines to clean out the corrupt elites and build genuine democratic societies that can provide decent jobs , decent education and end poverty .
To achieve that , the working class and poor must take control over the economy and wealth that exists in the region and use it in the interests of the majority .
( PL ) Madam President , we have recently witnessed mass demonstrations in countries such as Syria , Bahrain and Yemen .
The protesters are demanding democracy in public life , the resignation of dictators and also , especially in Syria , the lifting of the state of emergency .
However , the authorities in these countries are using brute force against the demonstrators , killing many people .
It is particularly worrying that the whole region is threatened .
Using force against your own citizens is a violation of every law .
Using live ammunition is indefensible and demands categorical condemnation .
I appeal to the governments of these countries to stop the repression , in the name of human rights , including the right to peaceful protest and freedom of speech .
I call on European institutions and the relevant international organisations to set in motion diplomatic measures in order to protect the demonstrators .
I hope that , in adopting today 's resolution , we will also contribute to the protection of fundamental human rights in these countries .
( FI ) Madam President , the European Union obviously knows that it has to implement its own fundamental values in its policy .
Human rights are one key area ; they must be exported to the Middle East .
We really need to present a concept and understanding of what human rights mean .
That is not easy , because Middle Eastern culture is based on different values .
We in Europe have been brought up in a world of Judaeo-Christian values , whilst theirs come from Islamic thinking .
In both , people are treated differently , and the notion of a human being is different .
In any case , Syria has been under emergency law since 1963 .
This has allowed the execution of people without trial .
Now , this uprising shows us that in Europe , we really need to open our eyes and see that the only success story in the Middle East is its sole democratic state : Israel , where there are human rights , freedom of opinion and democracy .
We should now exert more of this type of influence on Syria , Bahrain and Yemen , so that they might accept human rights for all and , furthermore , the rights of women and children , thereby , perhaps , taking the path to democracy .
I am not naïve , however , and I know that in the Islamic world , it is difficult to take these values forward .
Nevertheless , as Europeans , we should try to export and promote them .
Madam President , I abstained on the 2010 report on Iceland .
As a result of the financial and economic crisis , Iceland went from being the fifth richest country in the world to being a country racked by crisis , with the collapse of its banking system , where 40 % of households could not pay their bills and pensioners lost their life 's savings .
Last year , 93 % of the Icelandic population , in a referendum , rejected the notion of paying more than EUR 3.5 billion to the governments of Britain and the Netherlands .
Despite some modifications , they are faced with essentially the same deal in the vote to be held on 9 April .
They should not be bullied into accepting this deal ; the deal should be rejected .
It is not the responsibility of the Icelandic people to pay for the crisis .
Workers , pensioners and poor people have not created this crisis and must not pay for it ; not in Iceland , not in Greece , not in Portugal , not in Spain , not in Ireland nor elsewhere .
Those international speculators who profited massively from the deregulation of the financial markets must pay .
( DE ) Madam President , I am always pleased when new members join the European Union , which is why I also voted in favour of this motion .
However , I would like to see all issues being placed clearly on the table during the accession negotiations and being discussed and dealt with beforehand .
Problems that are not dealt with out of misplaced amicability do not go away .
It is often a harder , more protracted process to resolve them subsequently and the result is mutual disappointment .
Let me reiterate : I am always pleased when a new member joins the EU , but every member has not just rights but also responsibilities .
( FI ) Madam President , I apologise for the incident before the vote .
You were quite right .
The European Union has promised the Balkan countries an opportunity for enlargement .
I consider that to be the only guarantee of peace there , as Martti Ahtisaari also said before me .
For the second consecutive year , the Commission is recommending the commencement of membership talks with regard to Macedonia .
The European Union cannot hide behind the dispute over Macedonia 's name in its accession process .
The formal membership requirements must , of course , be met , and reforms need to be carried out .
The dispute over Macedonia 's name would not be the first time a new Member State brought insoluble problems with it .
We should all take a look in the mirror .
Why should we treat Macedonia any differently ?
Macedonia 's progress , first and foremost , depends on Macedonia itself , but the EU should not shut the door in its face for political reasons like the dispute over its name .
( DE ) Madam President , I also voted in favour of this report and of this resolution - in favour of Macedonia .
However , if we are being honest about this , then there is one detail that must be mentioned .
We cannot tell people and ethnic groups in other countries to rename their language because other countries do not like what they call it .
That is laid down in international law , and as Europeans we must be sure that we remain honest about this .
I was consequently very annoyed that unfortunately , one amendment was passed that I voted against , which stated that Macedonian should not be allowed to be called Macedonian .
Macedonia is a country with great prospects in Europe mainly because it also has great economic prospects in the Balkans , a region that has genuine difficulties , is prospering economically , and is conducting the negotiations with élan - which is very positive .
In view of this positive attitude , I would like to thank all the Members who voted for this resolution , as well as all those who worked with the parliament there as part of the European Parliament delegation .
We should make these prospects clear to the people there who want to be part of Europe .
Let us work together to that end .
( PL ) Madam President , the brutal battle for power between the outgoing and the newly-elected President of Côte d 'Ivoire which has been raging for over four months is in contravention of every principle on which the modern world functions .
Bloody battles have led to the deaths of several hundred people living in the country .
Over a million inhabitants of Côte d 'Ivoire have had to leave their homes , and many refugees are still seeking shelter in neighbouring countries .
Everything should be done to bring those guilty of crimes to justice .
Above all , it should be investigated whether genocide and crimes against humanity did take place .
It is also becoming absolutely vital to ensure order and the safety of citizens by bringing all forms of violence to an end .
Intimidation of the local population and of foreign observers cannot be allowed to happen .
The results of democratic elections must be complied with in full .
As a result , the actions of the former president which contravene the will of the nation should be condemned .
Usurping power , inciting violence and violating human rights demand judgment by the relevant international authorities .
( FI ) Madam President , I willingly voted in favour of this resolution .
I think that it is very important , in particular , that we adopt a clear and tough position on Belarus , which is an obvious blot on the map of Europe .
We have to implement measures that allow Belarus to find a path to democracy .
In particular , however , and with regard to the vote , I would like to go through Amendment 1 to point 10 tabled by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , where they stated that the EU 's partner countries have a longterm opportunity to join the EU .
I voted against that , because I do not think that we should make it automatic , or flirt with the idea that any state can become a member as long as it is a partner .
We know what the public think of hasty enlargement , and , for that reason , proposals of this nature should not be adopted .
That is why I voted against this .
( PL ) Madam President , the Eastern Dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy is a strategic element of the European Union 's international relations .
Further expansion will take place in this direction .
Therefore , it is essential to increase expenditure in order to develop the democratic structures of these countries .
Support for initiatives such as Bielsat have a not inconsiderable significance for the independence of the media in Belarus , at the same time as withdrawing assistance for the state-controlled media .
I would call for active support to be given to local democratic authorities in these countries through partnership programmes .
Association agreements remain an important tool in stimulating reform , and the more funding and technical support they can provide , the better their results .
Widening the intellectual base through scholarship programmes also requires additional funds .
I appeal for an increase in funding to support human rights and the development of civil societies .
Deepening social integration will help to influence social and political change , and is a vital investment in the future .
Therefore , I support the resolution .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , 21 documentary references , 21 explanatory comments and 63 points summarising Parliament 's requests in the motion for a resolution , making a total of 105 points .
That seems far too many to be effective .
On this issue , however , there is no proposal as to how the development of international trade could help achieve stability , and with it tranquillity and peace in the Southern Mediterranean areas .
International trade has become a form of new foreign policy , and could help to create better living conditions throughout the region .
The European Union must not neglect anything that could favour the development of proper trade relations , stimulating production in the various industries .
Any progress in this field will help to promote democracy and human rights , safeguarding the dignity of women , increasing security , stability , prosperity and a fair distribution of income and wealth , and avoiding the tragedy of thousands of people fleeing hunger and emigrating without any real hope .
Written explanations of vote
I am in favour of this report , which amends Directive 2000 / 75 / EC .
Both the Council and Parliament agree on changing the legal basis due to the fact that the Commission 's proposal had been submitted before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In my view , these amendments are justified due to the spread of the disease , and because the scientific discovery of a vaccine does not pose the risks that the previous one did .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Wojciechowski which , through a series of interesting amendments to the Commission 's text , seeks to update and make more flexible a dated piece of legislation that is no longer in step with contingent needs .
This would help Member States to make more efficient use of vaccination against bluetongue , thereby reducing the incidence of the disease in the farming sector .
I am pleased with the amendments set out in this directive , which makes the rules relating to vaccination more flexible .
Thanks to the new technology , ' inactivated vaccines ' against bluetongue are available , and do not pose any risk to non-vaccinated animals .
It is now agreed that vaccination with inactivated vaccines is the best tool for controlling bluetongue and preventing clinical disease in the EU .
The widespread use of these vaccines during the 2008 and 2009 vaccination campaign resulted in a significant improvement in the health situation .
I would like to call for the amendment of the existing rules on vaccination set out in Directive 2000 / 75 / EC , in order to take account of recent technological advances in the production of vaccines , to ensure that the spread of the bluetongue virus is better controlled , and to reduce the burdens on the agricultural sector caused by this disease .
in writing . - I voted for this report .
However , whilst I believe in the principle of enabling the competent authority , i.e. the Member State , to vaccinate against bluetongue , I am opposed to the principle of including in legislation the requirement to provide tables on transposition into national law .
In the past , vaccination against bluetongue was carried out using live attenuated vaccines , which called for a series of restrictions on vaccination so as to avoid the spread of the virus to unvaccinated animals .
However , scientific advances have allowed the creation of new inactivated vaccines .
Unlike ' live attenuated vaccines ' , these can be used safely and without any restrictions , as they pose no risk of circulating an active virus .
Given the serious consequences of bluetongue for livestock faming , all measures that make vaccination easier and more effective should be taken in order to protect farmers from the loss of animals , and , ultimately , in order to protect food security .
Bluetongue is a disease that mainly affects ruminant animals such as sheep , goats and cows , and may take the form of an epidemic if the environmental and climatic conditions are favourable to it , particularly in late summer and early autumn .
Although there is no record of any human being infected , it is vital to recognise this disease and seek to implement measures that will eradicate it .
At EU level , this disease was first seen in the south , and then in the centre and north of Europe .
Thanks to successive vaccination campaigns cofinanced by the EU , the use of certain vaccines may not eradicate the disease , but allow it to continue to circulate .
A type of vaccine was therefore developed that ensures the control and prevention of this disease in the EU , but the use of which is restricted under current rules .
A change to the current directive is therefore needed .
Given that this proposal for an amendment to the Parliament and Council Directive 2000 / 75 / EC complies with the Animal Health strategy ( 2007-2013 ) and points towards a more flexible approach in the vaccination system , thereby contributing to improved control of major animal diseases , I am voting in favour .
This report aims to update Directive 2000 / 75 / EC , which adopts certain provisions relating to measures for combating and eradicating bluetongue .
Over recent years , advances have been made in the field of animal vaccination .
The risks of the so-called ' live attenuated vaccines ' are no longer a threat , as new inactivated vaccines are now available .
These inactivated vaccines , unlike ' live attenuated vaccines ' , do not pose the risk of an undesired circulation of the virus from the vaccine , and can be used safely outside areas subjected to restrictions .
This is noted in the report .
We believe that greater flexibility in bluetongue vaccination , taking account of the technological developments in producing vaccines , will contribute to better control of the disease and reduce the burdens that it brings to bear on the agricultural sector .
We also believe that the amendments to this directive need to be implemented as quickly as possible , in order to benefit the agricultural sector .
I voted in favour of this report , because bluetongue is a disease affecting ruminants ( such as cattle , sheep and goats ) .
Since the early 2000s , several epidemic waves of disease have occurred in many Member States , including central and northern Europe , causing significant losses in terms of morbidity , mortality and disruption of trade in live animals .
Hitherto , the provisions for the control and eradication of bluetongue have been based on experience of the use of live attenuated vaccines that were the only vaccines available .
Those vaccines may lead to undesired circulation of the vaccine virus in unvaccinated animals .
In the last few years , however , new inactivated vaccines have become available .
Unlike the ' live attenuated vaccines ' , these inactivated vaccines do not pose the risk of undesired vaccine virus circulation and can therefore be successfully used outside areas subject to animal movement restrictions .
This proposal would relax some restrictions , which have become unnecessary in light of the recent developments in vaccine production .
The new rules would help Member States to make more effective use of vaccination to control bluetongue and reduce the burden on the agricultural sector posed by this disease .
As a result of technical innovation , newer vaccinations against bluetongue have appeared on the market which were unavailable when the Commission was drawing up its directive .
This is why I am supporting the rapporteur 's view that the regulations governing vaccinations should be updated , which will make it easier for animal breeders to produce healthy animals .
Making the regulations more flexible and liberalising them will allow for more effective breeding , and , above all , will make the protection of animals against unwanted and dangerous diseases more effective .
I also fully support this initiative from the point of view of its nature , as , in order to make the legal system more effective , we should simplify it as much as possible and make it more flexible , and the above report fulfils this aim .
Bluetongue is a horrible animal epidemic affecting ruminants that has caused great damage throughout the livestock sector .
The economic damage and the losses resulting from the trade coming to a standstill are hitting the farming sector hard .
In Austria , too , where cattle breeding has a long tradition , many farmers have found their livelihoods threatened .
It is now important to implement supporting measures and revise the old regulation before the next epidemic breaks out .
The rules on vaccination that applied at that time need to be adapted to technological developments in order to combat bluetongue more effectively and reduce the burden on farmers .
I welcome the rapid action at EU level and advocate the fast implementation of the new directive .
As a representative of the farming community , I know how important it is to think in terms of the annual cycle .
Making a decision quickly will allow us to have a usable and uniform ruling by the autumn , which is in the interests of the Member States and , above all , of those that keep animals .
Bluetongue is a disease affecting ruminants .
Since the early 2000s , it has caused significant losses of animals affected by the disease .
Europe intervened with Council Directive 2000 / 75 / EC to deal with the problem through provisions regulating the use of ' attenuated vaccines ' , in order to effectively combat the consequences of the phenomenon .
The vaccines used hitherto , which were those to which the aforementioned directive applied , led to the risk of transmission of the virus to unvaccinated animals , which is the reason why vaccination was only allowed in specially designated zones .
Unlike the ones on the market at the time Council Directive 2000 / 75 / EC was introduced , the new vaccines available are ' inactivated vaccines ' , and do not pose this kind of risk .
I voted in favour of this report because the new provisions will allow Member States to control the phenomenon , thus reducing the negative impact of this disease on a large number of European livestock farmers .
I hope that this will help enable the urgent measures to be adopted as soon as possible within the next few months .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution .
I support the substance of the Commission proposal .
It would relax some restrictions , which have become unnecessary in light of the recent developments in vaccine production .
The new rules would help Member States to make more effective use of vaccination to control bluetongue and reduce the burden on the agricultural sector posed by this disease .
Vaccination against bluetongue was carried out using live attenuated vaccines , which called for a series of restrictions on vaccination so as to avoid the spread of the virus to unvaccinated animals .
However , recent technological advances have led to the discovery of new vaccines without the live virus .
These new vaccines can be used more safely and without any restrictions , as there is no longer any risk of circulating an active virus .
Given the serious consequences of bluetongue for livestock farms , all measures that facilitate good practice in vaccination should be adopted so as to protect farmers from the loss of animals , which can cause damage that often proves fatal for such farms .
Animal epidemics can still destroy the livelihoods of farmers .
One of these is bluetongue , of which there have been repeated epidemics in Northern Europe since 2000 and which can cause particularly great damage .
Cattle and sheep are particularly badly affected by the disease , which is caused by a virus transmitted by the gnat , a type of midge .
An illness has also been observed in goats , but the course of the disease is far less dramatic in these than in the case of other species .
The possibility of vaccination was first permitted in 2000 , but was subject to strict rules since untreated animals could also have been infected by the viruses through the vaccine .
However , now there is a new vaccination method that does not pose this risk , allowing more flexible forms of vaccination to be carried out .
I voted in favour of the report because I consider it right and proper to protect our livestock from epidemic diseases .
The flexibility called for will allow farmers to protect their animals .
For some years , there have been repeated occurrences linked to bluetongue , particularly in Northern Europe .
This is an animal epidemic affecting ruminants such as cattle , sheep and goats .
The consequences were serious , both for livestock and for farmers .
I voted in favour of this report because it advocates the introduction of an innovative vaccine which , unlike its predecessor , carries no risk of healthy animals being infected as a result of vaccination .
The Commission 's proposal on vaccination against bluetongue , which is improved in this report , aims to make the rules on vaccination against bluetongue more flexible , in particular , by allowing the use of inactivated vaccines outside areas subjected to restrictions on the circulation of animals .
The new rules will help the Member States to make the use of vaccines to control bluetongue more effective and to reduce the burden that this disease places on the agricultural sector .
Indeed , since 2004 , measures to restrict mobility and marketability have necessitated major constraints on the products affected , affecting the normal trade channels within the area subjected to restrictions and resulting in increased costs for producers .
For this reason , I voted in favour of the report on vaccination against bluetongue .
in writing . - I voted in favour .
Bluetongue is a disease affecting ruminants such as cattle , sheep and goats .
Since the early 2000s , several epidemic waves of disease have occurred in many Member States , including in central and northern Europe , causing significant losses in terms of morbidity , mortality and disruption of trade in live animals .
Council Directive 2000 / 75 / EC of 20 November 2000 lays down specific provisions for the control and eradication of bluetongue , including rules on vaccination .
These rules were designed for the use of ' live attenuated vaccines ' that were the only vaccines available when the directive was adopted a decade ago .
Those vaccines may lead to undesired circulation of the vaccine virus in unvaccinated animals .
For this reason , Directive 2000 / 75 / EC allows vaccination only in specially designated zones in which the disease has occurred and which have been subject to animal movement restrictions .
In the last few years , however , new inactivated vaccines have become available .
Unlike the ' live attenuated vaccines ' , these inactivated vaccines do not pose the risk of undesired vaccine virus circulation and could therefore be successfully used outside areas subject to animal movement restrictions .
In order to ensure a more effective fight against bluetongue and reduce the burden it poses on the agricultural sector , the current rules on vaccination need to be updated .
The report voted on today aims to make the current rules more flexible , as inactivated vaccines have now become available .
These can be used successfully outside areas subject to animal movement restrictions .
The proposal is in line with the new Animal Health strategy for the European Union ( 2007-2013 ) ' Prevention is better than cure ' , as it involves both a more flexible approach to vaccination and an improvement in the current measures for combating the principal diseases in animals .
in writing . - The EPLP wholeheartedly supports the report aimed at amending Directive 2000 / 75 / EC with a view to allowing the use of inactivated vaccines against bluetongue outside areas subject to animal movement restrictions .
The new law ushers in the use of a new bluetongue vaccine for the first time , which takes advantage of developments in science since the previous rules came into force .
The new vaccine will be an ' inactivated ' jab and will allay farmers ' fears over the traditional ' live ' vaccines .
The EPLP is delighted that the EU has brought in this new law , which has real benefits for farmers in the UK .
It reassures farmers who are concerned by the deadly disease and the existing vaccination as the bluetongue season approaches with the warmer weather .
Farmers will now have a new and safer vaccine available and will be given greater powers over their own vaccination programmes .
Until now , farmers would have lost the right to vaccinate their animals if the UK was declared entirely free from bluetongue .
But under the new law , farmers are given the power to keep vaccinating for their own peace of mind , whilst profiting from easier exports .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report which will assist in the fight against bluetongue disease within the EU .
in writing . - I voted to change the rules on vaccination against bluetongue disease in order to allow the use of more effective vaccines and to reduce red tape for farmers .
The new law will have real benefits to farmers across Europe and especially in Wales .
The UK will be granted bluetongue-free status , but farmers will still be allowed to vaccinate their animals against the deadly disease .
Giving farmers greater powers to make their own decisions concerning vaccinations is a welcome boost to the farming industry in Wales and will ensure that livestock can be exported without the current restrictions .
I am in favour of this resolution because its main aim is to ensure the highest level of security for populations following disasters like the one that happened recently in Japan .
The technical aspects of safe energy trapping should be very carefully considered because a situation like the one that we are seeing now can have even more severe consequences in terms of both human health and the environment , in addition to its material impact .
I voted against the resolution on the lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan .
I voted against the resolution because when voting on the fifth subparagraph , the majority of the European Parliament approved its second part , which calls for a moratorium on the development of nuclear energy and the construction of new nuclear power plants in the European Union .
This provision was adopted , although my group - the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - voted against it .
Having lost the vote on this important issue , I could not vote in favour of this resolution .
I therefore voted against it , otherwise I would have been voting against my own country Lithuania 's energy strategy , the main objective of which is energy independence .
For some years , Lithuania has been gearing up for the construction of a new nuclear power plant and preparations have been taking place for several years .
The Fukushima nuclear disaster has had a series of repercussions on European political life .
The first lesson that the EU has drawn from the Japanese catastrophe has been to take prompt action to tighten safety checks at nuclear power installations by means of stress tests .
Every nuclear power installation , whether inside or outside Europe , has the potential to be a weapon of destruction .
I believe that none of us would wish to relive the Chernobyl disaster of 26 April 1986 .
The second lesson is that science and technology may make giant leaps forward in all areas , but they always have to take into account a major constraint , which is nature and its unpredictability .
It is precisely because of events outside the control of humans that we should diversify our energy sources , including by leveraging the renewable energy sources available to us .
However , if nuclear power were to be chosen as a source of energy , people should first be informed about the costs , benefits and consequences of such a choice .
It is important not to forget that this choice of technology must be endorsed by popular consensus , and that the opinion of the people must be listened to and respected .
in writing . - I voted against this report because of its several flaws , starting with its approach to the nuclear issue .
After the Japanese tragedy , it is no longer possible to deal with the nuclear argument solely in terms of safety .
The title of the report is ' on the lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan ' , but there is no special lesson to be drawn except that confirming the practical impossibility of controlling both the risks and consequences of a major nuclear accident .
A resolution on this subject cannot be centred around the issue of nuclear safety without addressing the most important nuclear safeguard , which is an exit strategy from nuclear energy itself .
We must react to the nuclear accident in Japan .
That does not mean that we should draw any hasty conclusions .
We must hold calm , objective discussions on the state of nuclear power in Europe and on the means to ensure maximum security .
Hence , I support the intention to make European nuclear power stations undergo extensive stress tests , included in the joint resolution .
As regards the broader issue of energy sources in Europe , may I remind you that we need to bear in mind the target of a 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions by 2020 , as well as the protection of the EU 's energy independence .
I voted in favour of this resolution , although not all of the amendments proposed by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats were adopted during the vote .
The resolution text contains particularly important provisions on the nuclear power plants planned for the Kaliningrad region and Belarus .
The resolution notes that there are major problems with the constructions mentioned concerning nuclear safety standards and compliance with appropriate obligations in accordance with international conventions .
These problems are not just relevant for Lithuania , which shares its borders with Belarus and the Kaliningrad region , but for the whole of Europe .
The document also contains important proposals to ensure compliance with the highest nuclear safety requirements and to undertake comprehensive testing in nuclear power plants already operating in the EU , so that it is possible to assess the true safety status of such power plants .
The EU 's response to the disaster in Japan has been the right one : we have responded rapidly , without panicking .
We have immediately cleared the way for a thorough investigation under European supervision .
It is crucial that 1. the stress tests are carried out by independent experts and that 2. the results of those tests are acted on rigorously .
That means that nuclear installations which do not conform to the standards , which continue to fail to make the grade , should be closed down .
Obviously , power plants elsewhere in Europe , outside of the EU , should be subject to the same independent testing , under the aegis of the International Atomic Energy Agency .
Any state which refuses to participate in this will be making itself an international pariah , even in terms of international trade .
Nuclear power has been , and remains , a transitional technology , a technology which we will , unfortunately , have to hang onto for decades to come .
We will even have to make new investments in order to meet our energy needs and , at the same time , consolidate our climate ambitions .
During that time , we must do everything possible to reduce the risk of accidents to a level that borders on zero .
The pro-nuclear lobbies still have a bright future ahead of them !
There is no point in going over the context of this resolution , it was totally obvious .
Yet the European Parliament does not have a position on nuclear power .
That is a real pity .
Several clearly identified issues were on the table : that of a moratorium on the construction of new nuclear power plants , the conducting of independent stress tests , the development of renewable forms of energy , and the efforts in the key area of energy efficiency .
However , the initial good intentions of a joint resolution were quickly smashed to pieces : since each parliamentary group took a position for or against , it became impossible , in the end , to vote for this draft , which has no political message .
Let us be clear : I had come to expect much more of the European Parliament .
It is clear that the pro-nuclear lobbies still have a bright future ahead of them and , at the same time , that many MEPs still fail to understand the public 's thoughts and feelings on this issue .
It concerns me that the European Parliament ( EP ) has today failed to approve the compromise form of the resolution on nuclear safety in Europe , following the nuclear accident in Japan .
I consider it shameful that the EP is incapable of offering the public its opinion on nuclear power .
As a result of this disunity , it may be the case that in the forthcoming talks between European bodies over the form of the stress tests for power plants , the EP will be ignored .
The greens and socialists were evidently unable to accept the fact that their proposals to stop using nuclear power , or to close nuclear plants built before 1980 , did not go through .
I voted against this joint motion for a resolution .
The compromise resolution was a good starting point , and I supported the amendments in favour of a carefully planned and prepared phase-out of nuclear power , reflecting the fight against global warming .
I also voted in favour of the amendments calling for investment in research and innovation , in order to promote energy saving and greatly increase the number of renewable forms of energy .
However , the outcome of the vote - the incoherent vote - forced me to vote against the amended resolution .
It is now vital to hold an in-depth debate on all these issues and to carry out an energy transition in a spirit of solidarity , taking into account the situation in all the Member States .
in writing . - I am disappointed by the voting on this resolution .
We are debating the lessons for nuclear safety in Europe following the crisis in Japan .
However , my firm conviction is that there is no such thing as safe nuclear power and that the stress tests taking place this year are a distraction from the real issue - the transition to a Europe powered by renewable energy .
Given the most recent studies , it is clear that it is technically possible that 95 % of our energy supplies could come from renewables like wind , tidal , wave , solar and biomass by 2050 .
With that target in mind , and as we are now making long-term energy choices , we should be phasing out nuclear plants over the coming years across Europe .
I regret that Parliament has not drawn any lessons from what has happened in Japan .
Continuing to deny the great risks of using nuclear energy is not the best way to serve the public .
The plenary in Parliament was not able to adopt a resolution , with the unedifying spectacle of groups cancelling each other out and rejecting one another 's proposals without being able to adopt anything in common .
More should have been made of the transnational nature of the risks and consequences of these disasters , and the safety of the people .
The obvious conclusions should have been to step up nuclear security , test weaknesses , freeze nuclear expansion projects in the EU and invest more effectively in clean energy and in energy conservation .
Closing one 's eyes to what has happened in Japan and pretending that nothing has taken place is insensitive and dangerous .
Chernobyl and Fukushima have only heightened the call for greater transparency and more information about the risks and the disasters .
in writing . - I wish to place on the record the fact that I did not participate in the vote on the individual paragraphs of , and amendments to , the joint resolution .
Even though I have consistently opposed nuclear power , I feel that the discussion was used by extreme opinion on both sides of the nuclear argument and this ensured that a common ground could not be found in Parliament .
I believe that we must ensure that all facilities are checked to allow for the maximum protection of facilities and , more importantly , for the safety and security of the populations in their locations .
Obviously , we must ensure security of supply of power in a sustainable way and we have an opportunity to look at alternative sources of power which we can exploit whilst , at the same time , helping the environment .
This ideological debate , however , must not take away from the immediate concern of assisting the Japanese people in every way possible to recover from this disaster .
This is why I abstained on the final vote .
I deeply regret the exploitation for partisan ends of the disaster that has struck Japan .
The European Parliament has missed an opportunity to send a strong message to the Member States and the European Commission with the aim of improving the safety of nuclear power plants in Europe and in neighbouring countries , in particular , through stress tests .
For that should be the focus of today 's debate , so that we can ensure , on behalf of the public , that a form of energy that is still the main component of the energy mix in most European countries - and will certainly remain so over the next few years until a sustainable , renewable and non-CO2 emitting energy source can replace it and meet our society 's electricity needs - is as safe as it can possibly be .
On 11 March , Japan was hit by a massive earthquake , followed by a tsunami , that has caused the greatest nuclear crisis in the country 's history , with the Fukushima nuclear plant suffering serious structural damage and having been in imminent danger since then of triggering a nuclear disaster of major proportions .
These events led to a wave of reaction in Europe , with Commissioner Oettinger requesting the convocation of an extraordinary meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency , the German Chancellor deciding to suspend the decision to extend the lifetime of nuclear plants in her country by three months , and the Austrian Minister for the Environment , Mr Berlakivich , demanding that tests be carried out on European plants .
It is vital that all possible lessons are learned from the Fukushima disaster , particularly with regard to the safety rules imposed on EU nuclear power plants , in order to ensure their safety and , ultimately , that of the European public .
Again , at this difficult moment , I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere condolences and my solidarity to those affected by the disaster in Japan .
The problems that occurred in the Fukushima nuclear power plant have put the discussion of energy from nuclear fusion on the agenda , since 30 % of energy consumed in the EU has this origin , and there are countries where domestic production is 80 % , such as France , and also countries without any nuclear power plants , such as Portugal and Austria .
It is therefore imperative that the EU promotes a programme to check security in its nuclear power plants , especially by carrying out so-called ' stress tests ' .
These assessments should be based on a model of rigorous and harmonised evaluation , covering all the types of possible risks in a realistic scenario at European level , and they should be conducted by the end of this year , in an independent and coordinated way , encompassing all the existing and planned nuclear facilities in the EU .
At present , nuclear energy is vital for ensuring the supply of energy with low carbon emissions in Europe .
However , we must move towards greater energy efficiency and an increase in renewable energy .
The Commission and the Member States should invest in the modernisation and expansion of European infrastructure in the field of energy , as well as in the interconnection of networks , in order to guarantee a reliable energy supply .
Ensuring the safety of nuclear installations and preventing the risk of accidents in every way possible are important issues addressed in this resolution , which also calls on the Member States to impose ' a moratorium on the development and commissioning of new nuclear reactors , at least for the period during which the stress tests are conducted and evaluated ' .
However , we need to ensure that the tragedy that occurred in Japan is not an opportunity for the advancement of lobbies , or for progress to be made today only to be reversed in the future .
Lessons need to be taken seriously and we must learn from this experience in order to diagnose failings and shortfalls in design and operational terms , which could lead to accidents at other facilities .
This experience also needs to be taken into account as part of future energy developments .
Experts from specialist bodies within the Member States and also from the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) must be part of this assessment , while retaining their role , authority , autonomy and independence .
As a technical , autonomous and independent body , recommendations regarding this subject should come from the IAEA with the proper support from the EU , and not the other way round .
It is regrettable that this resolution is being used as a pretext for safeguarding the so-called common energy policy and its objectives of liberalising the energy sector .
This motion for a resolution was not the best .
That is why it was rejected , although it had some positive aspects , which is why we abstained .
Ensuring the safety of nuclear installations and preventing the risk of accidents in every way possible are important issues addressed in this resolution , which also calls on the Member States to impose ' a moratorium on the development and commissioning of new nuclear reactors , at least for the period during which the stress tests are conducted and evaluated ' .
However , we need to ensure that the tragedy that occurred in Japan does not serve as a springboard for economic interest groups to open up new avenues , to the detriment of the interests and safety of the public .
Instead , it is important to diagnose failings and shortfalls in design and operational terms , which could lead to accidents at other facilities .
Experts from specialist bodies within the Member States and also from the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) should be part of this assessment , while retaining their role , authority , autonomy and independence .
Lessons need to be taken seriously , and the results of an analysis of this experience incorporated into future energy developments .
We do not agree with interference in the energy policies of Member States or third countries : as a technical , autonomous and independent body , recommendations regarding this subject should come from the IAEA with the proper support from the EU .
Japan is facing its greatest post-war disaster .
The leaders of the country have described the destructive earthquake , combined with the giant tsunami waves and the subsequent nuclear threat , as the worst crisis since the US military dropped the atom bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
Nature has wrought enormous and irreplaceable losses , especially in terms of human life and property .
However , the situation in the Fukushima nuclear plant remains a threat .
In an attempt to avert similar threats in the future , it would be right to consider implementing so-called stress tests of nuclear plants in EU Member States .
These should show the extent to which the power plants are capable of withstanding similar disasters .
A similar situation to the one in Japan could happen anywhere in Europe .
It is therefore also desirable to have more stringent monitoring of safety systems at nuclear power plants , strengthening their weak aspects and eliminating any deficiencies .
It is in the interest of individual countries , and also within their capabilities , to look for a solution to the nuclear issue - whether through safety improvements , or complete decommissioning .
Cooperation at the European level , however , is essential .
Although Europe is not threatened by giant tsunami waves , there is the threat in the 21st century of , for example , terrorist attacks , attacks by computer hackers on nuclear power plant systems and so on .
From a security perspective , the extent to which power plants can counter such potential threats is very much open to question .
I did not support the resolution , firstly because it did not contribute anything positive in addition to bans , restrictions and a general aversion to nuclear technology .
Secondly , it does not indicate any way out of a completely new situation for energy policy as a whole .
For example , points 19 , 20 and 21 could have introduced new ideas and orientations in terms of integrated thinking about energy efficiency , especially efficiency with regard to energy from primary sources , of which we have the greatest reserves , especially fossil fuels .
Thirdly , the radical suggestions it contains require a national referendum , which , in my country , is to take place at the initiative of the left-wing parties .
Maybe such a referendum ought to be carried out at EU level .
Fourthly , my country , as a result of the EU 's misguided regulations to date , has been forced to halt essential investments in coal power stations , and now the same lobby is saying that we need to halt investments in nuclear technology .
So what is left ?
The resolution points only to energy from renewable sources .
In my country , the total capacity of these resources would cover 13 % , to a maximum of 20 % , of essential needs .
Maybe in Sweden the situation is different , as it has large reserves of hydropower , but not in Poland .
The case of Fukushima requires a review of the whole of the European Union 's current energy policy .
The excitement that overcame certain political groups following the Fukushima nuclear accident , because they hoped to score political points off the back of it , is unacceptable .
I do not remember the communists being so virulent after 1986 's Chernobyl disaster .
It is true , then : there is no such thing as ' zero risk ' where nuclear power is concerned .
There is no such thing as zero risk in life full stop .
We must do all we can to minimise that risk .
For the moment , however , we do not have any credible alternatives .
Forcing the Member States urgently to abandon that energy source , to stop building new plants and to shut the others , is completely at odds with the outright rejection of fossil energy , on the pretext that its use would contribute to global warming .
Nuclear energy or fossil energy : you may favour one over the other , but you cannot rule them both out .
Neither hydropower nor today 's alternative energy sources are capable of meeting our supply needs .
Those countries that have stopped using nuclear power - but not preaching to the others - are , in fact , very happy that their neighbours , from whom they obtain their supplies , have not made the same choice as them !
Stop the hypocrisy .
The parliamentary resolution on the lessons to be drawn from the nuclear accident in Japan contained some very positive points with regard to the safety of power plants , recommending , for example , ' stress tests ' carried out in a coordinated manner at EU level by independent bodies working in accordance with the most exacting standards and completely transparently .
Furthermore , like everyone else in the French socialist delegation , I supported the amendments in favour of a carefully planned and prepared phasing-out of nuclear power , reflecting the fight against global warming .
That phasing-out of nuclear power will have to go hand in hand with increased investment in research and innovation , in order to reduce our energy dependence and increase the number of renewable forms of energy in the energy mix of the EU Member States .
I did , however , vote against the motion as a whole , because it was merely a juxtaposition of viewpoints forming an inconsistent motion .
After such a disastrous event as Fukushima , the question of the future of a sector as sensitive as nuclear energy requires more than a hastily put together resolution .
We will now have to take the time necessary to organise a genuinely constructive debate , addressing all of the associated issues while enabling everyone to voice his or her opinion .
This resolution cannot cover every aspect of the debate on nuclear energy in detail .
However , I remain convinced that it must be our aim to progressively phase out this source of energy and to use renewable energy to a greater extent .
Amendment 10 also proposed that in the case of nuclear power stations in border areas , the local and regional bodies must be involved in the decisions on both sides of the border .
This amendment was not adopted .
While some aspects of the resolution are indeed positive , Amendment 10 was decisive for me .
That is why I decided no longer to support this resolution and to abstain .
I am pleased that the European Parliament rejected this resolution .
The lessons that we must draw post-Fukushima include recommending the introduction of stress tests , laying down new common safety standards in the EU , and protecting ourselves from every possible scenario .
However , the introduction of a moratorium on new nuclear power plants for the period during which the stress tests are conducted in the EU is unacceptable .
It will hinder the development of much safer new-generation plants .
The aim here is not to establish whether the merits of this energy source should be called into question , and neither is it to succumb to the idealistic , obscurantist values of those who would like to ban it .
To abandon nuclear energy is to ensure the promotion of highly polluting coal-fired plants ; it is to fall back into the hands of the oil companies , with uncertain oil prices and the huge risk of a weakened economy ; and hence , it is to spell the end of our energy independence .

I voted against the joint resolution because of the rejection by the House of two key amendments presented by the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament on the development of medium- to long-term strategies for the progressive phasing-out of nuclear power and the definition of binding renewable energy targets .
The vote against the entire resolution by the House highlights the fact that the nuclear issue is no longer just one of greater safety .
It is now vital that we begin to think seriously about the energy issue and about investment in renewable energies .
Japan 's tragic experience has shown us just how necessary it is to discuss nuclear power in depth .
In this sense , the European Parliament 's vote is the first step towards a change of direction in energy policy choices on both a European and an international scale .
The disaster in Japan has awakened people 's concern over nuclear safety .
In the resolution from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , we emphasised that we wanted to make the proposed stress tests mandatory for the Member States and to allow independent experts to manage the implementation of the tests , and that the tests must be transparent .
We abstained from the vote on the joint resolution , as it also contained a proposal for a moratorium on the development of new nuclear reactors while the stress tests were being carried out .
Any problems are primarily associated with older reactors with older technology , not with new nuclear reactors with new technology .
We do not wish to prohibit the development of new technology that will contribute to the EU 's objective to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions .
We are opposed to a ban on the whole idea of nuclear power .
After the Chernobyl disaster in 1986 , Sweden introduced rules that made it illegal to prepare for the construction of nuclear power plants .
We also believe that Finland and Sweden should invest in nuclear energy research and take a leading role in the development of future generation nuclear reactors .
The conclusion that can be drawn from the disaster in Japan is that we should not run nuclear power plants for so many years .
The disaster can be seen more as an inspiration to build new nuclear reactors .
I voted for the adoption of this resolution and I regret that Parliament was unable to agree on a single motion for a resolution on this topical subject .
I consider that nuclear energy must remain as an important and safe source of European energy .
I support the demand for comprehensive stress tests , which must be carried out both in all existing and all planned nuclear power stations , and satisfactory results in respect of which must be the precondition for their remaining in operation .
I share the concerns expressed in this motion for a resolution that the development of new nuclear projects in Belarus and Russia ( the Kaliningrad oblast ) gives rise to serious concerns about nuclear safety standards and compliance with the obligations contained in international conventions , and that Europeans , Member States and the European Commission must respond to these concerns in a spirit of solidarity .
That is why our Union must ensure that these stress tests and the nuclear safety standards that will be defined as a result be applied not only in the EU but also in respect of nuclear power stations already built or still in the planning stage in Europe 's neighbouring countries .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
Following the nuclear accident in Japan , thousands of people died and disappeared without trace .
Significant material damage has also been done and the consequences will have long-term implications for people 's health .
Even now , we still feel the consequences of Chernobyl , and therefore today , we must reassess our approach to nuclear safety in the EU and the rest of the world .
As for improving nuclear projects , in Belarus and Kaliningrad , there are huge problems surrounding nuclear safety standards , and compliance with the appropriate obligations in international conventions , because these problems are not just a matter for the Member States that share borders with these regions , but for the whole of Europe , and EU entities and the European Commission must act together , under the subsidiarity principle .
The resolution on the EU strategy for the Baltic Sea region and the role of macro-regions in the future cohesion policy states that given the planned development of nuclear energy in the Baltic Sea region , the EU Member States must comply with the most stringent standards of safety and environmental protection , and the European Commission must monitor and check whether neighbouring countries on the EU 's external borders follow the same approach and international conventions .
Nuclear power plants under construction near the EU 's external borders must comply with international nuclear safety and environmental protection standards .
Today , energy efficiency and energy saving , renewable and sustainable energy , and the introduction of Europe-wide electrical energy networks , have become particularly important .
Moreover , it is important to have a smart power grid able to operate by obtaining energy from decentralised energy generators .
The serious accident that took place at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station on 11 March 2011 , due to the earthquake and subsequent tsunami , resulted in damage and long-term consequences for health through contamination of the environment .
Following on from warnings from the International Atomic Energy Agency on the state of now obsolete nuclear power installations , it would seem necessary to identify measures able to assess safety levels at installations .
Collaboration and coordination between Member States are crucial , as crises of this type have repercussions not only for the countries in which they are built , but also on a more widespread level .
The events that have taken place show that , in order to prevent disasters on this scale , Europe has to implement a series of very stringent measures in order to assess existing safety levels .
The development of new nuclear power installations in Belarus and Russia requires the Commission to take action by opening up a dialogue with these countries in order to ensure the safety not only of their neighbouring countries , but of Europe as a whole .
In principle , I support this resolution because it calls for a first step towards phasing out nuclear power throughout the European Union .
Where the substance of the resolution is concerned , however , I would comment that - as so often with resolutions of this type - it is a case of too little , too slowly .
In the end , the principle of the lowest common denominator prevails , which certainly cannot be satisfactory in the long term .
The only correct solution would be to phase out nuclear energy completely throughout the European Union , and to do so as quickly as possible .
I will do everything I can to work towards this .
In April , we voted on the joint resolution on the lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan .
I voted against this resolution , because apart from the bans and the moratorium on nuclear power development and the suggestion of a gradual withdrawal from nuclear energy ( which is unrealistic ) , it does not add anything positive , and neither does it provide any solutions for the future of the energy industry in general .
The situation after the tragedy in Fukushima has completely changed the philosophy of the approach to the future of energy production in Europe and Poland .
In our country , the power industry , 95 % of which is based on coal , has already suffered as a result of the adoption of the Climate and Energy Package .
Investments undertaken in order to build two nuclear power plants have also been stopped .
The resolution only stresses the importance of energy generated from renewable sources , which in Poland represents only 13 % , and at most 20 % , of our needs .
Moreover , a referendum on the nuclear power industry , which is being suggested by the Left , is still to be held in Poland , and therefore , the conclusions drawn from this very resolution are premature .
I welcomed the fact that the majority voted against the resolution .
I think that we need to avoid making immediate , far-reaching political decisions about the role of nuclear energy in the energy mix in the medium and long term .
It is important for us to have a clear picture based on precise data about what happened at the Fukushima nuclear power plant .
We must not lose sight of the benefits of nuclear energy , which produces low carbon dioxide emissions , incurs relatively lower costs and ensures energy independence .
Until now , nuclear energy has been the safest form of energy , statistically speaking , with the lowest number of accident victims , compared to other energy sources ( for example , gas and oil ) .
It is also vital to respect the decisions of Member States in terms of determining the composition of their own energy mix .
Nuclear energy has an important role to play in achieving the European Union 's targets set by the Europe 2020 strategy and the energy strategy for the current decade .
I voted against the resolution on nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan .
The reason for my voting against it is the resolution 's call for a moratorium to be imposed on the development of new nuclear power plants .
I think that the production of nuclear energy in safe conditions is of paramount importance .
I agree with carrying out stress tests .
However , I believe that imposing a moratorium for an indefinable period is inappropriate .
This period may be extremely important to power plants currently under development , especially from the funding perspective .
The structure of the energy mix is Member States ' responsibility .
This is why I do not believe that such a decision can be imposed at EU level .
in writing . - I voted against this resolution because the amendments adopted left us with a text which paid insufficient attention to nuclear safety issues .
The Fukushima disaster reminded the planet that zero risk for nuclear power does not exist .
The danger that nuclear energy represents for humanity is absolutely unsustainable , as are the high levels of risk from the waste produced .
We therefore need to go further in ensuring safety and improving safety testing .
These two criteria would be a minimum condition for reaching an agreement .
No exit strategy has yet been guaranteed with a view towards actual changes to European energy policy , which needs to move towards the setting out of alternatives , and a phasing out will enable the nuclear industry in Europe to be progressively abandoned .
I voted against this resolution as I believe that none of the aforementioned premises are guaranteed .
The Fukushima disaster reminds the world that there is no such thing as zero risk where nuclear power is concerned .
Nuclear power poses an unacceptable risk to humankind .
We must therefore go further than increased safety and safety tests .
We must draft a European plan to phase out nuclear power forthwith .
To phase out nuclear power takes time .
It is a crime against humanity not to start preparing for it now .
I shall not support this resolution if the amendments calling for nuclear power to be phased out are rejected .
This motion for a resolution on nuclear safety in Europe was more than necessary .
It deals with all the dangers posed by nuclear energy and I hope it will provide the impetus for a comprehensive rethink concerning the use of nuclear energy in Europe .
The numerous amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance were necessary in order to directly address the wide range of risks that exist and to call for a rapid phasing-out of the use of nuclear energy .
Since I am convinced that man will never succeed in getting the risks posed by nuclear power plants entirely under his control , I advocate this rapid phasing-out and supported the amendments relating to this .
Since the motion for a resolution is ultimately a step in this direction , I voted in favour of it .
During voting on the resolution on the safety of nuclear energy following the Fukushima accident , I voted against the draft amendment regarding CO2 reduction objectives for three reasons : a ) the issue does not relate to the subject of nuclear safety ; b ) the objectives set out give disproportionate prominence to the role of the EU in the unilateral reduction of CO2 ; c ) such an ambitious - and in truth , unrealistic - reduction in CO2 would only be acceptable if it were combined with a CO2 tax on imports , which could seriously affect the competitiveness of European industry , as well as leading European companies to relocate their production in countries without CO2 restrictions , with serious effects on the EU economy and employment .
I voted against the joint motion for a resolution on the lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan , for the following reasons : at least seven of the tabled amendments are scientifically unrealistic ; many parts of the text are simply sound bites without any real substance , and those speaking out against nuclear energy do not present alternative solutions to using it either .
Last but not least , I must point out that I regret the fact that the European Parliament has not adopted a stance on this issue .
However the kind of stance to be adopted must be balanced , pragmatic and based on scientifically documented realities and on realistic solutions .
It is high time for a rethink as regards the use of nuclear energy in Europe .
We must now start to take action , close down dangerous reactors and , in the medium term , find a way to phase out nuclear energy completely .
We need to reject once and for all the misplaced belief that man has the dangers posed by nuclear energy under control .
I therefore voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
I voted in favour of the resolution on nuclear safety because , following the recent events in Japan , we cannot afford not to tackle the issue responsibly and with objective criteria .
I believe it is important for Europe to review its rules on safety in nuclear power installations in order to guarantee absolute safety levels , which can be identified by stress tests , that will show any risks and limits to the use of nuclear power .
The resolution in itself aims to show that , despite everything , it is possible to learn from catastrophes , and to react clearly and effectively in order to ensure that they do not happen again .
It also underlines the need to aim at alternative sources of energy , such as renewable energy , while nuclear power remains an indispensable source of low carbon energy .
I voted against the resolution on the lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan , because I do not believe that the issue of the future of nuclear power - a crucial one for our fellow citizens - can be resolved by this House in a few hours through amendments adopted without any real debate .
All the issues must be put on the table , and no options must be ruled out , which is exactly why we need time .
At stake are the credibility of our Parliament and the wellbeing of our fellow citizens , who would not understand - and rightly so - if we were to commit them to long-term courses of action that we did not discuss calmly and exhaustively beforehand , taking into account the different national situations and the constraints of our common fight against climate change .
Lastly , I should like to say how sorry I am that , due to extremists on all sides , Parliament has been unable to approve at this time an immediate increase in the safety of nuclear power plants , even though we in our group reached a consensus demanding the most serious , transparent and independent checks possible .
I am angered that the European Parliament has today rejected the resolution on such a crucial issue as the lessons to be drawn from the Fukushima nuclear disaster .
As far as our institution is concerned , then , there is no before and after 11 March 2011 .
Yet the strong signals were there !
After all , it was not too difficult to agree on some simple principles :
The principle of supporting the Commission so that it can conduct these ' stress tests ' with the Member States on the 143 nuclear reactors in operation in Europe ;
The principle of submitting by 15 April a precise timeline on the criteria adopted : independent experts , priority given to the safety of nuclear facilities that are intrinsically more dangerous by virtue of their location in seismic or coastal areas , and safety reports for the public ;
The principle of immediately shutting down plants that fail the ' stress tests ' .
The European public expects our institution to be responsible and sensible , especially on such a controversial issue as atomic energy .
It is , perhaps , ultimately not a bad thing for the choice of energy , and hence the choice of whether or not to abandon nuclear power , to remain an exclusively national responsibility .
in writing . - I voted against .
I am extremely glad that , in the end , the pro-nuclear lobby has failed .
It is completely incomprehensible that the PPE Group and others voted against saying that zero risk does not exist , against a progressive phase-out starting now , against going towards a near-100 % energy-efficient renewables economy by 2050 , against a nuclear-free future for Europe , and so on .
The final text was absolutely unacceptable , and I am glad the majority of the House supported us Greens in rejecting the joint resolution .
The serious nuclear accident at the Fukushima Daiichi power station on 11 March caused the death of thousands of people , as well as unimaginable material damage to the entire Japanese economy .
This carnage is making every country in the world re-examine its position with regard to the use of atomic energy technologies .
Unfortunately , in many cases , these choices are being accelerated as a result of the recent tragic events , and there are calls from many quarters for the total and immediate dismantling of nuclear power installations .
The EU has been reconsidering its approach as a whole to nuclear safety for some time , but it is important to take into account the fact that this technology will continue to be part of the energy mix of various Member States for many years to come .
In the future , it may be possible to meet our energy needs using renewable energy sources , but this is not yet possible , nor will it be possible for a long time .
I am in favour of more restrictive safety measures for nuclear power installations , in line with those applicable to the latest generation installations .
However , I believe the option of stopping nuclear energy production from one day to the next is both short-sighted and pointless .
It is dictated more by emotion than by real need , and could bring the economies of the world 's leading industrialised nations to their knees .
After the nuclear disaster that has struck Japan , we have no option but to review the European energy plan .
We need to pay particular attention both to nuclear power stations already in operation and to those in the planning stage .
The European Union has already provided for stress tests to be carried out on all plants , including those in neighbouring states having existing relations with the Union .
This resolution also provides for a moratorium on the construction of new power stations to allow for proper evaluation of the associated risks .
We must be aware that in the decades to come , many countries will still depend on nuclear energy but , at the same time , we cannot allow there to be power plants in Europe that pose a risk to the population .
Power stations predating 1980 must be decommissioned .
In some countries , such as Italy , assessments are being carried out to decide whether or not to abandon nuclear energy , and it is essential to implement common decisions , also , at European level .
What is incredible is the fact that the European Parliament has been unable to pronounce on an issue such as the one under consideration today , which is important and of deep concern to citizens .
In fact , all the resolutions have been rejected , including the joint resolution , which we endorsed .
Speaking a few days ago at a meeting of industrialists , Italy 's Minister for Finance , Mr Tremonti , coined a new phrase - the ' nuclear debt ' .
The Member States that have invested in nuclear power are the ones with the highest levels of public debt .
How much does it cost to close first- and second-generation power stations ?
How much do the stress tests , which we are discussing at such length today , cost ?
Once a power station is shown to be ' stressed ' , how much does it cost to ' destress ' it ?
Furthermore , how much does it cost to dispose of radioactive waste ?
No one has yet told us .
As the European Union , we could begin to think of different options to show the Member States .
Moreover , given that the Commission will have to provide us with a road map , why not begin to think of real investment in fourth-generation nuclear power - clean nuclear , or fusion - or even begin to consider an overall energy plan ?
We expect the Commission Communication to outline a road map on this subject and to try to give the European Union a clear direction at last in this sector .
The nuclear accident at the Fukushima power station has caused an enormous disaster , with the radioactive contamination also affecting many people who were in the vicinity of the power station and who suffered injuries .
Many hospitals are refusing to admit and treat them due to the risk of contamination .
Although the Japanese Prime Minister has announced that the Fukushima power station will be decommissioned , the situation remains unresolved : the cooling system for one of the reactors is out of use and a considerable amount of radioactivity is being released into the environment .
In the light of this , it is important to ensure that all the necessary humanitarian and financial aid is provided and to lay down international safety rules that are as reliable as possible , in order to prevent other disasters like that in Japan in the future .
For this reason , I voted against the resolution , because it omitted the amendments calling upon the Member States to draw up possible strategies for abandoning nuclear power and immediately to inform regional and local cross-border authorities of their national programmes if their implementation could have a cross-border effect .
in writing . - Although this is a sensitive period of time just after the enormous problems with nuclear safety in Japan , nuclear energy remains a major contributor to energy supply cross the EU and globally .
The views expressed by those in the House seeking to force early closure and abandonment of the policy in this matter made voting for elements of this report very difficult for pragmatic reasons rather than a particularly pro- or anti-nuclear approach .
I could not support ' aggressive ' amendments which could have damaged the energy supply policy of a ' mixed ' approach leading to reduced CO2 emissions and the eventual growth in renewables .
We have not reached any agreement today on this resolution , which was intended to draw lessons from the nuclear disaster in Fukushima .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has , for years , advocated the phasing out of nuclear power , because the risks to humans and the environment are unacceptably high and because there are more than enough alternatives .
Fukushima , in particular , has demonstrated that .
It is sad that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe continue to believe in their nuclear dreams , even if , as has now been made clear by Japan and Chernobyl , they will ultimately end in nightmares .
Despite this , there are still many people who are reluctant to wake up from their bad nuclear dream .
The only truly safe nuclear power is no nuclear power .
The amendment which called for the phasing out of nuclear power was voted down .
A majority in this House appears not to understand that it is perfectly technically and economically feasible , over a period of forty years , to generate our electricity completely sustainably through such measures as energy efficiency and reliance on the sun , wind , geothermal energy , water and biomass .
For the time being , the nuclear power lobby appears to be gaining ground .
Hence , my ' no ' vote in the final vote .
in writing . - I voted against the resolution in the final vote as I believe we need to debate this issue in the context of the overall EU energy strategy , not in the context of the Japanese nuclear tragedy .
The nuclear accident happening in Japan at the moment must be followed by an in-depth debate on the plants located in France and Europe .
Stress tests must be carried out on all the nuclear power plants in operation , particularly when they are located in seismic zones .
I am thinking , in particular , of the Fessenheim power plant in the Upper Rhine .
Furthermore , I believe that imposing a moratorium with no time limit on the development and commissioning of new nuclear reactors is not an economically viable solution and may threaten many jobs , while also dangerously weakening our energy production .
I voted for this European Parliament resolution on the lessons to be drawn for nuclear safety in Europe following the nuclear accident in Japan , as its objective is to increase nuclear safety in the EU and not to ban the production and use of nuclear energy .
This is why I voted against all the amendments aimed at removing nuclear energy from Europe 's energy mix .
Although I did not vote for imposing a moratorium on the construction of new nuclear reactors , I felt that , if such a moratorium were imposed , it ought to be limited only to the period of the ' stress test ' which nuclear reactors in the EU will be undergoing .
This would allow the construction of new reactors to benefit from the conclusions of the stress tests , ensuring that nuclear safety will increase .
At the moment , nuclear energy accounts for 30 % of Europe 's energy mix .
The European Union depends , to a large extent , on Member States ' energy mix to fulfil its ' 20-20-20 ' target .
We cannot decide to get rid of nuclear energy without establishing what sustainable energy sources will be available which can meet the EU 's energy demand in the years ahead , at prices which citizens can afford .
The EU must invest in energy efficiency measures , particularly in buildings and transport , as well as in the use of renewable energy sources .
in writing . - The nuclear crisis in Japan set into motion a number of ideas that amount to an irrational tsunami .
Nuclear energy is now demonised and there is growing pressure demanding a complete switch from nuclear to so-called alternative sources of energy .
But this school of thought is bordering on outright superstition .
The nuclear reactor of Fukushima was hit by an unprecedented combination of catastrophes .
This proves that nature is unpredictable and that tsunamis cannot be banned , but it does not prove that nuclear energy is at fault .
Nuclear energy has a much safer record than any other source of energy .
While oil arguably generates exploitation , dependence , wars and dictatorships , nuclear energy is historically much safer .
Our main concern with nuclear energy should indeed be risk assessment and unitary safety procedures at a European level .
With these criteria fulfilled and observed , nuclear energy could put an end or severely limit the politics of energy dependence .
And while natural disasters cannot be prevented , nuclear energy is not a serious risk per se .
The real danger does not come from well serviced nuclear reactors , but from nuclear reactors under the wrong political control .
In other words , look at Iran , not Japan .
in writing . - I feel that this resolution was a knee-jerk reaction to the tragic situation in Japan , and did not allow enough time for debate of the issues surrounding the safety of nuclear power plants in the EU .
Nuclear power is a vital source of energy across Europe , with some Member States getting as much as 75 % of their electricity from nuclear power , and a review of the safety of nuclear power plants should be a priority , including stress tests on existing plants .
This should not , however , lead to closures of existing power plants where there are no safety concerns or prevent the opening of new nuclear installations to replace out-of-date plants .
We need a grown-up debate on these issues to ensure that there is a balanced mix of renewable and other low carbon sources of energy to ensure that the lights stay on across Europe .
in writing . - After the defeat of the joint motion for a resolution , I voted in favour of this text which , while not perfect , struck a good balance between nuclear safety and a pragmatic approach to the issue .
in writing . - I voted for this Verts / ALE Group resolution because all the other resolutions on the subject had fallen .
I backed it to show support for the safety recommendations but was uncomfortable with the more extreme anti-nuclear sentiments it espoused .
in writing . - I voted against this resolution , which I found almost naively pro-nuclear .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
Demonstrators in Bahrain , Syria and Yemen have expressed legitimate democratic aspirations and strong popular demand for political , economic and social reforms aimed at achieving genuine democracy , fighting corruption , ensuring respect for the rule of law , human rights and fundamental freedoms , reducing social inequalities and creating better economic and social conditions .
The governments of these countries responded to the people 's legitimate aspirations with violent repression , arbitrary arrests and torture , resulting in serious loss of life , injuries and imprisonments .
The violence used by the governments of these countries against their own populations must have direct repercussions on their bilateral relations with the European Union .
The EU can , and must , use numerous tools to deter such actions , such as asset freezes , travel bans , etc .
The EU must review its policies towards those countries and make full and effective use of the existing support given through the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights and the Instrument for Stability , in order to urgently assist the countries and civil societies in the Middle East and in the Gulf in their transition towards democracy and respect for human rights .
Tunisia , Egypt and Libya were the top news stories at the start of 2011 .
However , those states are not the only ones with democratic aspirations .
Large-scale movements have also emerged in Bahrain , Yemen and Syria .
There too , unfortunately , the ruling authorities have responded through the prism of repression and violence .
That is unacceptable .
A state cannot use violence against its own people and not be penalised by the European Union in the context of its bilateral relations .
Through this resolution , the European Union supports the people of Syria in their aspiration to genuinely lift the state of emergency in place since 1963 , expresses its solidarity with all of the people in these countries , and calls on the European Union to redefine its relations according to the progress made in reforms .
I think that the European Union needs to promote democratic values more than ever and show solidarity with the peoples in the Southern Mediterranean countries in their aspiration for a democratic society .
The situation in the Arab countries reminds me of the fall of the Communist regimes in Central and Eastern Europe .
We , too , went through similar events and can understand these peoples ' demands , which makes it our moral duty to show our solidarity with them .
The protests which have been going on in these countries for the last few weeks provide clear proof that the undemocratic regimes are not meeting the population 's expectations and that they cannot offer these societies political stability and prosperity .
The High Representative and Commission should firmly oppose the use of violence against demonstrators and exert pressure on the authorities in Syria , Yemen and Bahrain to commit to constructive political dialogue with the aim of resolving the situation .
Furthermore , I think that the conclusion of the Association Agreement between the EU and Syria should be subject to the Syrian authorities ' willingness to carry out reforms aimed at establishing democracy .
The Union has this instrument available and I believe that it should use it as much as possible to support the establishment of democracy in the Arab countries .
The recent protests in several Arab countries show that non-democratic and authoritarian regimes cannot ensure credible stability , and that democratic values have a key role in economic and political partnerships .
I call on the authorities in Bahrain , Syria and Yemen to comply with international law on human rights and fundamental freedoms .
It is vital that they start an open and significant process of political dialogue involving all democratic political forces and civil society as soon as possible , with the aim of preparing the way for real democracy , for the lifting of states of emergency , and for the implementation of real , ambitious and significant political , economic and social reforms , which are essential to long-term stability and development .
Bahrain is at risk of becoming the site of a confrontation between Iran and Saudi Arabia .
In this situation , we cannot overlook the religious element in the developments in the region , at a time when the Shi 'ite opposition is supported by Iran , while the Sunni dynasty enjoys the support of the monarchies in the area .
Moreover , the close ties between Iran , Syria , Hamas and Hezbollah , as well as the religious tensions between the Sunnis and Alawites in Syria , should make us exercise caution because there is a huge risk that the escalation in violence will also push Syria towards civil war , with outside interference .
The Hama massacre in 1982 , which included 20 000 Syrians among its victims , is a tragic warning in this regard , just as are the failures in Somalia , Afghanistan and Iraq in terms of the way in which the West must act in a region whose very distinctive features cannot be ignored .
I believe that we need more diplomacy and less armed force , more concern for defending human rights and the protection of civilians and less concern for the electoral potential of external intervention , as well as greater attention on the poverty and corruption which these societies are faced with , especially in Yemen .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I condemn the violent repression of peaceful demonstrators carried out by security forces in Bahrain , Syria and Yemen .
I would like to express my support for , and solidarity with , the people of these countries , who , motivated by legitimate democratic aspirations , are showing great courage and determination .
Syria , Bahrain and Yemen have been rocked by protests , which have been savagely repressed .
I call on their governments to embark on fruitful dialogue with the demonstrators .
The violence meted out to these peoples will not indefinitely stop them claiming what they believe to be theirs by right .
It will only delay them taking up these rights , make positions more extreme , and encourage more demanding reactions in the future .
Machiavelli himself , who theorised at length about how it is preferable to be feared than to be loved , warned the princes of the world that it was unnecessary and damaging to make themselves hated .
It would be better for the authorities in these states to undertake concrete reforms , and to allow their nationals to enjoy standards of democracy , freedom and justice similar to the best in the world .
The example set throughout its existence gives the European Union a historical duty to speak out against all human rights violations and to fight for peoples ' right to self-determination , both through denunciation , and through development aid .
The current situation in Bahrain - which is of strategic importance with regard to the equilibrium in the Gulf - and which , underneath the appearance of normality , is very tense , with the ongoing detention of people who are accused of nothing more than violating the right to free expression .
In Syria , protests in several cities have been brutally put down despite EU calls for rights of freedom of expression and association to be respected .
Finally , in Yemen , the situation is deeply worrying and has already been condemned by the EU because of the repression of demonstrators , to which we cannot be indifferent .
I therefore agree with the measures proposed in this resolution , not least the condemnation of those responsible for massacres in these countries , and hope that they have an effect in as short a time as possible so that the humiliation of their people can stop .
I also welcome the initiative to call on the UN Commission on Human Rights to condemn these violations of fundamental rights .
We are facing another example of the hypocrisy of the majority of this Parliament . Firstly , because they are grouping different situations and countries together in the same resolution .
They are doing this intentionally , proposing transition ' dialogue ' to help their allies ( Bahrain and Yemen ) , and pressuring those who do not defend their interests ( Syria ) .
There are marked differences with what happened in Libya , where dialogue was replaced by military aggression , making any possibility of a peaceful solution to the conflict impossible .
The objectives are clear : to camouflage the movement of troops from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates into Bahrain to assist the oligarchic regime there , with the support of the United States - a country that keeps its main Persian Gulf fleet in Bahrain - and to repress the Bahraini people 's fight for social change and democracy .
The same is happening in Yemen , where they are coming out in defence of a regime that is violently repressing its people , and their fight for democratic change and improved living conditions , in order to protect an ally in the so-called ' war on terror ' .
This resolution is another example of the hypocrisy of the majority of Parliament . To begin with , because they are lumping different situations and countries together in the same resolution .
They are doing this intentionally , proposing transition ' dialogue ' to help their allies ( Bahrain and Yemen ) , and pressuring those who do not defend their interests ( Syria ) .
Is there a case for asking why ' dialogue ' was not advocated in Libya , rather than bombing ?
The objectives are clear : to camouflage the movement of troops from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates into Bahrain to assist the oligarchic regime there , with the support of the United States - a country that keeps its main Persian Gulf fleet in Bahrain - and to repress the Bahraini people 's fight for social change and democracy .
The same in Yemen , where they are coming out in defence of a regime that is violently repressing its people , and their fight for democratic change and improved living conditions , in order to protect an ally in the so-called ' war on terror ' .
There is now an attempt to conceal outside interference in Syria , through the financing and arming of what are being called ' peaceful protests ' in a country that has had an anti-imperialist attitude , condemning Israeli and US policy in the region .
I voted in favour of this document , because following similar developments in other Arab countries , demonstrators in Bahrain , Syria and Yemen have expressed legitimate democratic aspirations and strong popular demands for political , economic and social reforms aimed at achieving genuine democracy , fighting corruption and nepotism , ensuring respect for the rule of law , human rights and fundamental freedoms , reducing social inequalities and creating better economic and social conditions .
Therefore , the European Union and its Member States should support the peaceful democratic aspirations of people in Bahrain , Syria and Yemen , and the governments of these countries must not react by increasing violent repression .
It is impossible to justify serious crimes such as extrajudicial killings , abductions and disappearances , arbitrary arrests , torture and unfair trials .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution .
I believe the EU must reassess its bilateral relations with Syria , Bahrain and Yemen in the light of their violent repression of demonstrators , and talks on a future Association Agreement with Syria must be suspended .
I am also concerned about the presence of international troops in Bahrain and call for an investigation into the deaths of 54 protestors in Yemen .
Double standards continue to dominate the external policy of the majority who govern the EU .
This resolution is a perfect example of that .
It rightly criticises Ali Abdullah Saleh and Bashar al-Assad , but not the King of Bahrain .
The dead and wounded victims of the repression of the Yemeni and Syrian governments are mentioned , but not those of Bahrain .
There is no justification for showing such respect .
I refuse to support this hypocritical text which , on the pretext of condemning some , pardons the others .
Syria , Bahrain and Yemen have found themselves in the grip of a series of popular revolts that are being forcibly put down .
In my opinion , this is not the best way of handling the situation , as violence only begets more violence .
The governments of these countries need to seek means of dialogue with the leaders of the demonstrations in order to be able to move towards levels of understanding that will prevent deaths and bloodbaths .
The authorities in these states should concern themselves with undertaking concrete reforms that allow their citizens access to democracy , freedom and justice , similar to what exists in most countries .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I believe that the European Union is in a position to endeavour , through diplomacy , to promote a process of democratic and peaceful change in Bahrain , Yemen and Syria .
I am on the side of the peoples of these countries , who want , as we all do , improved economic conditions , reduced social inequalities , the combating of corruption and nepotism , the implementation of democratic reforms , and the guaranteeing of fundamental human rights .
in writing . - In favour .
I support this claim by the EP that strongly condemns the violent repression by security forces of peaceful demonstrators in Bahrain , Syria and Yemen , and extends its condolences to the families of the victims ; expresses its solidarity with the people in those countries , applauds their courage and determination , and strongly supports their legitimate democratic aspirations .
It also urges the authorities of Bahrain , Syria and Yemen to refrain from the use of violence against protestors and to respect their right to freedom of assembly and expression ; condemns the interference by the authorities in Bahrain and Yemen in the provision of medical treatment and the denial and limiting of access to health facilities ; stresses that those responsible for the loss of life and injuries caused should be held accountable and brought to justice ; and calls on the authorities to immediately release all political prisoners , human rights defenders and journalists and all those detained in relation to their peaceful activities in the context of the protests .
The current state of affairs in several African countries , and also in Bahrain , Syria and Yemen , is the result of the people 's legitimate aspiration for political , economic and social reforms aimed at bringing about a genuine democracy .
It is well known that repressive laws restricting citizens in the exercise of their civil and political rights have always been in force in those countries .
As a result , there is a strong desire among the people for political and social reforms .
Unfortunately , the governments are reacting to these legitimate demands with violent repression and the application of anti-terrorism laws intended to justify the extrajudicial execution , torture , abduction and disappearance of many demonstrators .
Today , the number of deaths , casualties and arrests in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen is extremely high .
The excessive use of force by the governments against demonstrators has violated every single international convention on civil and political rights .
I join with the rapporteur in condemning the violent crackdown on peaceful demonstrators by the security forces in those countries , crushing their legitimate democratic aspirations .
We must express our complete solidarity and support the courage and determination that these peoples are demonstrating to the entire world .
in writing . - The situation in Syria , Bahrain and Yemen is an unpredictable ongoing process and not a bloody but unstoppable march toward democracy .
The political background in Syria and Yemen has been , for a long time , authoritarian or outright dictatorial .
Yet this is not making the opposition a fully democratic alternative .
Especially in Yemen , a lawless , fragmented polity , the forces gathering under the opposition umbrella are hosting or could give way to terrorist or radical anti-democratic forces .
In the past , ' stability ' in the foreign policy for the Middle East was a substitute for inaction or the status quo .
It was certainly an overrated concept .
Now it could become underrated .
The European and largely the democratic interest would be better served by a rational , non-emotional approach .
The need for democracy in countries with a long record of political oppression should not become the undoing of future democratic process .
This does not mean that the Assad or Saleh regimes should be propped up , but it means that the solution should be a negotiated exit strategy rather than a violent and uncontrolled regime change .
Caution and clear headed policies are much more appropriate in countries and regions that could turn from one system of oppression to another .
The European Parliament today adopted a resolution calling for the EU 's relations with Syria , Bahrain and Yemen to be reassessed in order to take account of the popular uprisings in those countries .
If I thought that that was really the intention of the European institutions , it would have my full support .
The key element of this resolution is the call for ' the suspension of further negotiations over the signing of the still pending Association Agreement between the EU and Syria ' and the fact that ' the conclusion of such an agreement should depend on the capacity of the Syrian authorities to carry out the expected democratic reforms in tangible form ' .
Point duly noted .
However , I have to point out , and the resolution itself admits it , that ' the signing of this Agreement has been delayed at Syria 's request since October 2009 ' .
One can only wonder , then , what impact this declaration will really have .
I therefore abstained on this text .
This vote by our Parliament , which follows several resolutions since the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia , is proof that the events in the Arab world are a wave , the size and longevity of which no one can predict .
Admittedly , the situation is different in each of the countries , but ultimately , these popular movements are the expression of an unshakeable desire for democracy , freedom and justice .
The European Union must not allow people 's legitimate and peacefully expressed demands to be repressed through the use of violence , which unfortunately appears to be the only response of regimes with their backs against the wall .
Europe must express itself firmly , in particular , through the High Representative / Vice-President of the Commission , so as to confirm its support for the public demonstrations , which are calling for the fundamental values that are promoted and defended by the Union to be respected in those countries .
Our Parliament , which is regarded as a temple of democracy , must reiterate its solidarity with these peoples and must support them in their democratic transition process .
It is therefore essential for us to review our relations with the countries of North Africa , the Near East and the Middle East so that , together , we can successfully build an area of stability , peace and prosperity .
I am voting for this motion for a resolution .
I believe that it is important to increase the effectiveness of development aid , and that there is a need for a coherent policy of support in areas such as trade and development cooperation , climate change , agriculture , etc .
The EU needs to follow a common position towards the least developed countries ( LDCs ) , and should not allow economic and financial crises to compromise the development of partnerships with the LDCs .
It is essential that the global commitment to addressing the specific needs of the LDCs , as regards the sustainability of development in all of its economic , social and environmental aspects , and to supporting them in their efforts to eradicate poverty , be reaffirmed during this conference .
Ahead of the Istanbul conference in May , the EU has reaffirmed its support for the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) in developing countries , and once more confirmed its commitment to provide specific aid programmes .
Although notable progress has been recorded in some countries and regions , the goal of halving the level of poverty in the world is still far from being achieved .

Eleven million children still die every year from treatable diseases , the greater part of them before the age of five ; one person in four has no access to drinking water ; 114 million children still have no access to primary education ; approximately 600 million women are still illiterate ; and just as many people have no access to progress .
The failure to achieve the goals established in 2001 will not discourage the industrialised nations , which , on the contrary , will continue to ensure that countries that need aid are at the top of the international agenda , promoting the supply of new targeted sources of finance and the creation of cooperation programmes .
Raising these countries up again and giving a future to thousands of people requires commitment , great political determination and consistent mobilisation of financial resources , all conditions that the EU satisfies .
in writing . - I voted against the joint motion on the Fourth United Nations conference on least developed countries because the motion is not focused enough on the problem of international aid ineffectiveness .
The motion , and the statement by the Commission during the parliamentary debate , ignore the current critical discussion on the last 50 years of international aid to the countries of the global South , and ignore the lessons to be drawn by past failures and successes .
Why the monumental failure of the aid to Africa ?
Why the monumental failure of the World Bank policies on development and poverty reduction ?
Why the huge scandal of foreign aid delivery to Afghanistan during the last 10 years ?
Why the huge success of the poverty elimination policies in China , Vietnam and Brazil ?
If we are not able to answer these difficult questions , we will never be able to use the EUR 60 billion in development aid for the benefit of the least developed countries .
I agreed with this resolution .
The Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries should focus on policy coherence for development , because it is an important factor for reducing poverty .
In addition to the existing challenges , the situation in the LDCs has been exacerbated by the recent global financial , food , climate change and energy crises .
Therefore , this UN conference should be result-oriented , on the basis of clear indicators and the objective of reducing the number of LDCs by half by 2020 , combined with efficient and transparent monitoring and follow-up mechanisms .
It is deplorable that 48 countries are currently classified as least developed countries ( LDCs ) , and that 75 % of the 800 million inhabitants of these countries live on less than USD 2 per day .
The long-term goal for development cooperation should be that of creating the conditions for sustainable economic development , and the fair redistribution of wealth .
Peace and security are vital to the effectiveness of development policy , and the EU should coordinate its approach better , with the aim of resolving stability problems in the LDCs and supporting efforts to build the capacities needed for the construction of peaceful , democratic and inclusive states .
It is also essential to give priority to food security , to agriculture , to infrastructure , to capacity building , and , in particular , to economic growth and access to technology , as well as to the human and social development of the LDCs .
With the previous conferences having focused on principles , I hope that the fourth UN conference will be geared towards determining results and devising clear indicators for halving the number of less developed countries by 2020 .
Out of the 51 underdeveloped countries , where 78 % of the population live on less than USD 1.25 a day , only three have moved out of this category in recent years .
The situation is worrying as these countries are the most vulnerable to ordeals such as the financial and food crises and climate change , while also facing extreme poverty , a lack of infrastructure and rising unemployment .
This reality highlights that , unfortunately , the international community has not fulfilled the commitments set out in the Brussels Action Programme .
I hope that during the conference , where I will be representing the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , we will focus on achieving consistency in terms of development policies and methods for implementing innovative funding mechanisms , with the aim of providing more effective help to those countries which need to be encouraged to implement suitable policies .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this resolution , as I believe that the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries needs to put forward measures to make the integration of these countries into the global economy possible , and to improve their access to EU markets .
The European Commission should consider increasing aid to these countries in order to minimise costs resulting from the liberalisation of their markets .
Despite the technical and financial assistance provided over the years to the least developed countries ( LDCs ) , it is essential to recognise that these countries have not succeeded in lifting themselves out of this status , and still have permanent weaknesses and needs .
It is only fair to mention the exceptional circumstances in Cape Verde , as the adopted resolution does , as the country has succeeded , despite a lack of resources , in overcoming some of the difficulties that it faced , and improving its population 's living conditions .
I would therefore congratulate the Cape Verdean people , their government and their parties on this , as they have been able to take action in a responsible and respectable manner : this Portuguese-speaking country is today an example to be followed by the LDCs .
Despite limitations on trade and problems with training and access to information , to resources and to units of production , it cannot be emphasised enough that the underdevelopment of the LDCs results mainly from their decision makers ' lack of skill and their institutions ' inefficiency , as their people are so capable in other respects .
The Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries ( LDC-IV ) will take place in Istanbul , Turkey , on 9-13 May this year .
The EU , which has always led the way in supporting developing countries through poverty eradication programmes - for which financial allocations have trebled over the last few years - is very involved in the organisation of this meeting .
Parliament will also be represented by a delegation delivering well thought-out proposals , although its observer status will not allow it great visibility , and I hope that this represents a significant boost in winning the ' battle ' of sustainable development and equitable growth for these countries .
Given that all countries have responsibilities for supporting the least developed countries ( LDCs ) , in order to meet the Millennium Development Goals , I agree with the proposals included in this joint motion for a resolution , and I would like to see the goal of halving the number of LDCs by 2020 achieved .
LDC-IV needs to support concrete measures that help to find solutions to the LDCs ' development needs , to combat poverty , and to ensure a decent income and existence .
In the context of the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries , it is appropriate to consider the Millennium Development Goals adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 2000 and to assess their implementation , specifically : eradicating poverty and hunger ; promoting equality between men and women ; increasing and improving mother / infant health care ; combating HIV / AIDS ; developing environmental sustainability ; and achieving universal primary education .
With regard to development policy , the disparity between the EU 's words and actions is clear .
We have the resources at our disposal to eradicate poverty .
These are even increased by the benefits of scientific and technological development .
Nonetheless , what we are seeing is an increase in poverty at global level .
This is the result of the system that dominates the world : capitalism , which is intrinsically unfair and unequal .
We would emphasise the importance of the alternative resolution tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , as well as the amendments tabled to the joint resolution - and unfortunately rejected by the majority - that focus on , inter alia , issues such as : food sovereignty , agricultural development , and the need to put an end to the EU 's blackmailing of a number of developing countries on the basis of so-called Economic Partnership Agreements .
It is essential to support the poorest and most fragile countries on the planet , which include nearly 50 countries , whose people are suffering the effects of successive failures to implement the conclusions of successive United Nations conferences .
In most cases , this situation is due to colonialism , and to the exploitation of their riches and peoples .
It is not the inevitability of fate , nor inescapable natural limitations or constraints that make these countries poor .
Quite the contrary : several of them are rich , very rich , in natural resources .
In other cases , it is the continuation of capitalist exploitation , with the injustice and inhumanity of a system - which is the world 's dominant mode of economic and social organisation - that is sustained by asymmetrical relationships , which create and sustain inequalities .
It is the result of free trade , of financial deregulation , of the illicit but permitted flight of capital to tax havens , and of war and conflicts fed by disputes over natural resources .
It is in breaking with the foundations of this system , and in a genuine and solidarity-based policy of cooperation and development aid , that the possibility of the emancipation of these people and the development of these countries lies .
More than 40 countries in the world belong to the category of least developed countries .
I welcome the EU 's attempt to participate actively at the top-level UN conference , and I expect concrete commitments from this .
During the past 10 years , the poorest countries have recorded greater progress than in the previous decade .
Despite this , however , many problems persist : increasing dependence on imported goods , poverty , the low level of human capital and vulnerability to climate change and natural disasters .
These problems must be resolved from all sides , but two points are particularly important .
First , these countries have to get investment flowing into the productive sectors of the economy .
Secondly , it is necessary to help build democratic structures in these countries , enabling them to decide independently on strategic priorities without foreign interference .
Commodity market fluctuations and the consequences arising from these are a specific issue that must be resolved .
From the long-term perspective , the answer is to diversify the economy .
From the short-term and medium-term perspective , it is important to control price shocks , especially in the area of foodstuffs .
With regard to the position of the EU , it is important to focus on coherent external policies .
The Commission document of 16 February is exhaustive , but it must take a more critical approach .
We need to acknowledge that not all EU activities in the area of trade or direct foreign investments are in line with development policy .
In my opinion , they should be subordinated to it .
I voted in favour of this document , because since the Third United Nations conference on the least developed countries ( LDC-III ) and the adoption of the Brussels Action Programme , some positive steps have been taken , for example , the ' Everything But Arms ' initiative and the increases in Official Development Assistance , which doubled between 2000 and 2008 , and direct foreign investment , which rose from USD 6 to USD 33 billion , enabling 19 countries to achieve a growth rate of 3 % .

LDC-IV should be result-oriented , on the basis of clear indicators and the objective of reducing the number of LDCs by half by 2020 , combined with efficient and transparent monitoring and follow-up mechanisms .
I would stress the need to give priority to food security , agriculture , infrastructure , capacity building , inclusive economic growth , access to technologies and human and social development in the LDCs .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution .
I believe that LDC-IV should focus on policy coherence for development as an important factor for policy shift , at national and international level , and call , therefore , for policy making in all areas - such as trade , fisheries , the environment , agriculture , climate change , energy , investment and finance - to support the development needs of LDCs in order to fight poverty and guarantee decent incomes and livelihoods .
I urge the EU to honour its commitments in terms of market access and debt alleviation and to reaffirm the importance of reaching the ODA target of 0.15 % to 0.20 % of GNI for the LDCs , mobilising , for this purpose , domestic resources and , as a complementary measure , innovative financing mechanisms .
I believe that the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries needs to put forward the measures necessary to make the integration of these countries into the global economy possible , and to improve their access to EU markets .
However , despite everyone 's efforts , the objectives have not been achieved , although Cape Verde stands out here , as it has achieved some success and increased its citizens ' quality of life to higher levels than the other least developed countries .
The economic crisis in the developed world has brought in its wake trade restrictions which , in turn , are putting an economic stranglehold on less developed countries .
Families on the verge of absolute poverty have seen a 15 % rise over the last six months in food prices which , according to World Bank data , have risen by 29 % compared with 2009 .
Consequently , the recent official request submitted by the poor countries for export restrictions to be lifted cannot be ignored .
The economic crisis is certainly hampering negotiations ; however , tough negotiations on the back of people living in absolute poverty are , at best , morally questionable .
This specific motion for a resolution , which I supported , emphasises and highlights specific policies to reverse this situation , both at national and at international level in numerous sectors , such as trade , fisheries , the environment , the agricultural sector , climate change , energy , investments and the financial sector .
The European Parliament aims to make its contribution to the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries through this resolution .
I support this contribution , as I also believe that this conference should foster coherent development policies by promoting measures in all areas - such as trade , fisheries , the environment , agriculture , climate change , energy , investment and finance - in order to provide strong support for the development needs of the least developed countries ( LDCs ) , to combat poverty , and to ensure decent incomes and subsistence .
Like the resolution that I voted for , I would also like to emphasise that , in 2007 , Cape Verde was one of three countries that pulled themselves out of LDC status .
This is a country with few resources , but which was able to work for growth and combat poverty .
I therefore wish to congratulate the people of Cape Verde and their government .
in writing . - In favour .
With this resolution , the EP : 1 .
Considers that LDC-IV should be result-oriented , on the basis of clear indicators and the objective of reducing the number of LDCs by half by 2020 , combined with efficient and transparent monitoring and follow-up mechanisms ; 2 .
Believes that LDC-IV should focus on policy coherence for development as an important factor for policy shift , at national and international level ; calls , therefore , for policy making in all areas - such as trade , fisheries , the environment , agriculture , climate change , energy , investment and finance - to support the development needs of LDCs in order to fight poverty and guarantee decent incomes and livelihoods ; 3 .
Urges the EU to honour its commitments in terms of market access and debt alleviation ; reaffirms the importance of reaching the ODA target of 0.15 to 0.20 % of GNI for the LDCs , mobilising , for this purpose , domestic resources and , as a complementary measure , innovative financing mechanisms .
As of today , there are 48 countries in the world that are classed as least developed , with approximately 800 million people who live on less than USD 2 per day .
Between 2000 and 2010 , the average human development index rating for the least developed countries grew by a mere 0.04 % .
This feeble increase is progressively distancing them from the eight Millennium Development Goals set by the United Nations in 2000 .
Fortunately , following the Third United Nations conference , some positive steps were taken in the area of official development assistance , enabling some 19 countries to achieve a growth rate of 3 % .
I share the rapporteur 's opinion in emphasising the importance of the Fourth United Nations conference .
The principal goals must focus on development policy , agriculture and fisheries , and must seek to obtain concrete results and innovative financing .
I hope that the contribution to sustainable development will also translate into support for health , education and the promotion of democracy , and hold fast to respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as essential components of the European Union 's development policy .
There are currently 48 least developed countries ( LDCs ) , which means that every fifth country in the world falls into this category .
The category of LDC was created by the UN General Assembly in the early 1970s , which was more than 40 years ago .
Since then , the number of LDCs has increased twofold , and only three ( Botswana , Maldives and Cape Verde ) have been able to graduate from the group .
This shows that poverty is spreading , and the effectiveness of activities undertaken so far is barely perceptible .
The critical situation has been exacerbated further by the economic crisis . Its effects have affected LDCs to a large extent and caused a further deepening of the problems occurring there .
These arise , in particular , from debt , high food and fuel prices and climate change .
I therefore supported the resolution on the Fourth United Nations conference on LDCs with full conviction and awareness of its importance .
There is a need for a deep , comprehensive analysis and diagnosis of the situation of LDCs and concrete proposals for solutions aimed at improving the living conditions of the citizens of these countries in the short term , and at leaving the group in the long term .
As a member of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly , I would like to draw particular attention to the lack of control mechanisms for work which has been undertaken .
We do not lack the political will and willingness to help , but unfortunately , we do not monitor our efforts adequately , and the result is that they are not very effective .
As one of the authors of the resolution on the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries ( LDCs ) , I believe that it is absolutely crucial for the European Parliament to demonstrate an unwavering commitment to the inhabitants of the LDCs .
The increase in the number of states falling into that category ( since 1971 , the number of LDCs has risen from 25 to 48 ) requires the international community to redouble its efforts to meet the objective of halving the number of LDCs by 2020 .
From this point of view , it is essential to ensure true policy coherence between policies directly affecting the LDCs , such as development aid , trade , fisheries , the environment , agriculture , climate change , energy , investment and finance , in order to reduce poverty and guarantee decent incomes and livelihoods for the inhabitants of the LDCs .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution on the Fourth United Nations conference on the least developed countries .
In that resolution , the European Parliament upholds the principle of coherence between the various EU policies in the field of development aid and cooperation .
This means that in the EU 's relations with the least developed countries , policy in all areas - including trade , fisheries , the environment , agriculture , climate change , energy , investment and finance - must be designed in such a way as to support their development needs .
Furthermore , the resolution recalls the importance of reaching the ODA target of 0.15 to 0.20 % of GNI for the LDCs , and warns of the adverse impact of farmland acquisition , such as the expropriation of small farmers and the unsustainable use of land and water .
The principle of coherence is designed to prevent statements of good intentions that are never translated into action , and conflicting sectoral policies .
It now remains to implement it .
I wanted to use my vote to reiterate my firm commitment to the fight against poverty , whether against its causes or against its effects .
An inexorable gap is opening up between the least developed countries and the world economy , creating a vicious circle in which the victims are the populations .
We are all responsible for the delays in achieving the Millennium Development Goals , which makes coordinated action by the EU and the UN a matter of urgency .
The priority areas are well known : food security , access to water and healthcare , and literacy .
The solutions are also well known , but I regret that the statements of good intentions are rarely translated into action .
And yet it is by working towards a better distribution of wealth , supporting LDCs on the path to growth and democracy , and combating the frenzied speculation on commodity prices , that these extremely vulnerable countries will be able to escape the vicious circle of poverty .
This is not only a responsibility ; it is a security requirement for the Union , because poverty is unfortunately often a source of instability .
I am voting for this report , as I support Iceland 's accession to the EU , provided that the government succeeds in securing the support of its citizens for this national political commitment .
I voted in favour of this resolution .
I welcome the prospect of Iceland joining the EU , because Iceland has a strong democratic tradition and civic culture , which will enable it to be admitted into the band of EU Member States unhindered .
I believe that Iceland 's accession to the EU would enhance the Union 's prospects of playing a more active and constructive role in Northern Europe and in the Arctic , contributing to multilateral governance and sustainable policy solutions in the region .
Iceland is already an active participant in the Nordic Council as well as in the EU 's Northern Dimension Policy , the Barents Euro-Arctic Council and the Arctic Council , which is the main multilateral forum for cooperation in the Arctic .
Iceland 's accession to the EU would further anchor the European presence in the Arctic Council .
Iceland can also bring a valuable contribution to EU environmental and energy policies due to its experience in the field of renewable energies , particularly as regards the utilisation of geothermal energy , protection of the environment and measures to deal with climate change .
I voted for the 2010 progress report on Iceland drafted by my colleague , Cristian Preda , because I think the time has come for this state 's EU prospects to be assessed .
Throughout the negotiations with the EU , the Icelandic authorities have demonstrated a genuine commitment to this process and a strong political will to fulfil all the accession criteria in good time .
First of all , Iceland has a long tradition of democracy .
The protection of human rights and cooperation with leading international organisations are top-priority items on Iceland 's political agenda .
On the economic front , the authorities have already devised a pre-accession strategy to ensure the diversification of their business sectors and their exit from the recession .
I think that Iceland is capable of assuming the obligations which derive from being an EU Member State .
I should mention that at present , the conditions have been met for 10 negotiating chapters .
In this context , I welcome the European Commission 's initiative to start accession negotiations with Iceland this June .
This report provides a good overview of the current state of relations between the European Union and Iceland .
Ever since the Treaty of Paris , we have maintained friendly , close and cooperative links with that country . It has been hard hit by the economic , financial and banking crisis .
Reforms must be undertaken , and we must encourage them .
Since the start of the accession process , we have begun an open and constructive dialogue with the Icelandic Government , which has also expressed a desire to join the euro area .
Enlargement to include Iceland will allow for greater European policy coherence in the Arctic region , especially where fisheries , maritime transport , scientific research and environmental conservation are concerned .
However , Europe is not a crutch or a cure for an economic crisis .
It is up to Iceland to clearly subscribe to a genuine project of integration with the rest of Europe .
I welcome the prospect of having a country with a strong democratic tradition and a solid civic culture as a new EU Member State .
Iceland has been achieving good results in safeguarding human rights and ensuring a high level of cooperation with international mechanisms for the protection of human rights .
Iceland 's accession to the EU will therefore strengthen the Union 's role in promoting and defending human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the world .
Through its experience , Iceland may also make a valuable contribution to EU policy in the field of renewable energy , particularly in the areas of the exploitation of geothermal energy , environmental protection and combating climate change .
Iceland 's accession to the EU will improve the EU 's prospects of playing a more active and constructive role in northern Europe and the Arctic , through contributions to multilateral governance and sustainable political solutions for the region .
in writing . - I voted against this report .
In the rush to enlargement , I fear that this Parliament and the EU institutions are ignoring issues of strategic importance to Member States .
It is very regrettable that , yet again , Iceland and the Faroe Islands have massively inflated their proposed catches of mackerel in 2011 , endangering the stock and endangering the viability of our pelagic fishing industry .
This outrageous behaviour exposes the lie that Iceland is at the forefront of sustainable fisheries management .
Last summer , in response to Iceland 's intransigent stance on this matter , we were told that the Commission was considering suspending negotiations about Iceland 's accession to the EU , yet little seems to have happened on this front .
Iceland 's membership of the ' EU Club ' cannot and must not be taken forward while Iceland blatantly ignores the rules of that club .
As one newspaper headline put it , are we really going to contemplate Iceland turning from collapsing its banks to making our most valuable fishery disappear ?
I voted in favour of the ' 2010 progress report on Iceland ' as I believe that we need to support the accession of one of the oldest European democracies to the EU , provided that the necessary requirements are met , such as the abolition of whaling and the trading of products extracted from whales .
Of all the countries whose accession to the European Union is being proposed , Iceland is the best prepared to do so , and to take on board the values and principles that guide Union action .
I believe that the Union will gain from the Icelandic contribution .
In general , Iceland has the same standards , and in some cases higher , than those aimed at within the Union .
I believe that the adjustments that still need to be made will not be of the kind to delay the accession process too greatly .
This motion for a resolution relates to the 2010 progress report on Iceland 's advances towards European Union membership .
Negotiations on Iceland 's accession started in July 2010 .
I believe that the necessary conditions need to be created for completing Iceland 's accession process and ensuring the success of this accession : this is a country with a strong democratic tradition and a robust civic culture , and its accession will strengthen the Union 's role in promoting the defence of human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the world .
Iceland belongs to the European Free Trade Association , and has a market economy that could provide certain advantages to the EU , specifically in the area of renewable energy .
Nonetheless , Iceland needs to provide evidence of real interest , and to cooperate on the resolution of outstanding issues in the fisheries management sector .
According to the report that has been tabled , some progress has been made , but there is still a long way to go , particularly with regard to the fisheries sector .
I hope that these outstanding issues can be quickly resolved , so that Iceland 's accession process is a success .
Our position in principle regarding the processes for new countries ' accession to the European Union is well known : when this decision is made , it must be based on the will of the people involved , which should be respected .
We therefore await the position of the people of Iceland on accession , so that we can take this position into account in the future .
Besides this principle , we also abstained from this vote because of the fundamental basis of EU enlargement processes , given the capitalist nature of the integration process and the objectives that it pursues .
Once the outlying regions resulting from previous enlargements having been exhausted , there is a need to grow further and to reach new markets .
We are unhappy about some of the requirements that the European Union is making of Iceland , including those in this report. for example , the requirements to liberalise a number of sectors , in particular , the financial sector , which is all the more serious as this was one of the sectors responsible for the crisis that occurred there , escape from which was only possible because of clear state intervention .
We abstained from this vote because of our position on the enlargement of the European Union .
We await the position of the people of Iceland on accession , so that we can take this position into account in the future .
That said , we are unhappy about some of the requirements that the European Union is making of Iceland , including those in this report , which we disagree with entirely : for example , the requirements to liberalise a number of sectors , in particular , the financial sector , which is all the more serious as this was one of the sectors responsible for the crisis that occurred there , escape from which was only possible because of clear state and popular intervention .
We await future developments , specifically the referendum on 9 April 2011 , for a clearer position on the country 's membership .
I wish to explain why I am abstaining on this text , as I do whenever a report concerning accession negotiations with a European country is voted on here .
It is not because I dispute Iceland 's right to enter the European Union ; it is because I believe that it is not a good idea for it to join .
Indeed , the vast majority of people in Iceland seem to hold the same view .
The decision to apply for membership was taken in a moment of panic , following the collapse of the Icelandic banking system , in order to benefit from European support .
Everyone knows that Iceland wants to adopt the euro without being a member of the European Union , which is stupid when we know what implications that has , and that Iceland is a member of the European Economic Area and of the Schengen area .
It will be up to the Icelandic people to decide in the end , anyway . And I hope that if they do say no , they will be heard .
I voted in favour of this document , because accession negotiations with Iceland were launched in July 2010 and it is essential to create the conditions to complete the accession process with Iceland and ensure that its accession is a success .
Iceland can bring a valuable contribution to EU policies due to its experience in the field of renewable energies , particularly as regards the utilisation of geothermal energy , protection of the environment and measures to deal with climate change .
Iceland 's accession to the EU would enhance the Union 's prospects of playing a more active and constructive role in Northern Europe and in the Arctic , contributing to multilateral governance and sustainable policy solutions in the region .
It is also crucial to give EU citizens clear and comprehensive fact-based information on the implications of Iceland 's accession .
Efforts must be made to that end , and I believe it is equally important to listen to and address citizens ' concerns and questions and to respond to their views and interests .
I had to give my wholehearted support to the resolution on the 2010 progress report on Iceland put to the vote in Parliament .
In the year just gone , Iceland demonstrated its willingness to comply on many fronts with European policy and with the principles that inspire it .
Its strong civic and democratic tradition , the progress made in strengthening the independence of the judiciary , and the particular attention paid to the economic aspect , which is increasingly on course to meet the criteria laid down by Europe , make it a country whose accession to the EU can only be considered positively , not least because it would strengthen the Union 's role within the Arctic Council .
The safeguarding of human rights , the strengthening of the legislative environment with regard to freedom of expression and access to information , and the high rates of investment in education , research and development , aimed at tackling the high level of youth unemployment , demonstrate the industriousness of the country and its firm desire to align itself with Europe .
It will be up to the people of Iceland to have the final say : they will have to vote in a referendum , and I hope that they will opt in favour of joining our great European family .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which , among other things , ' welcomes the agreement achieved between the representatives of the governments of Iceland , the Netherlands and the UK on the Icesave issue , notably on guaranteeing the repayment of costs incurred in payment of minimum guarantees to depositors in branches of Landsbanki Islands hf. in the UK and the Netherlands ; welcomes the approval by a three-quarters majority of the agreement by the Icelandic Parliament on 17 February 2011 ' ; and ' takes note of the decision of the President of Iceland to refer the bill to a referendum and hopes for an end to the infringement procedure which started on 26 May 2010 , brought by the EFTA Surveillance Authority against the government of Iceland ' .
This text condemns the refusal by the Icelandic people to repay the debts run up by private banks , even though they voted by a very large majority against that repayment .
It obliges them rigorously to apply the Copenhagen criteria .
It welcomes the IMF plans for the country .
It proposes a Commission-led campaign in Iceland , on the model of the Irish campaign , in anticipation of the national referendum on EU membership .
I voted against these repeated shows of strength against the Icelandic people , and the text 's crude logic of liberal normalisation .
Iceland has been taking concrete steps towards future EU accession , and is best placed among accession candidates to fulfil the requirements for accession .
However , the recent issue with regard to payment to the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of funds lost by citizens of those countries who had investments in a failed Icelandic bank could create obstacles to the country 's accession .
Iceland is already cooperating closely with the European Union as a member of the European Economic Area , of the Schengen Agreements and the Dublin Regulation .
Iceland is also achieving very good results where the protection of human rights is concerned .
There is a high level of investment in areas such as education , research and development , which makes Iceland well-placed internationally in these areas .
However , the consent of the Icelandic population is required before we can talk about the accession of Iceland to the EU .
It would be advisable to stop any propaganda by the EU aimed at convincing the Icelanders of the benefits of accession .
In economic terms , an OECD report from May 2010 says that Iceland has succeeded in consolidating its economy and , despite the financial crisis , its per capita income still leads the world .
The project therefore has my support .
First of all , I would like to make it clear that the possible accession of Iceland to the Union is subject to the consent of the Icelandic people .
The decision must be left to the people and must not be influenced further by the EU .
As far as the progress report is concerned , Iceland stands up to international comparison in numerous areas and in others , even leads the field : I am thinking here of areas such as per capita income , education , research and development , and the safeguarding of human rights .
I therefore voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
Iceland is one of the oldest European democracies .
Of the countries seeking accession to the European Union , it is surely the best prepared country , not only because it has similar democratic principles and values to the Union 's Member States , but also because it has the same or higher development standards .
I voted in favour of this 2010 progress report as I believe that , once the necessary accession requirements have been met , among which I would emphasise the abolition of whaling and the trading of products extracted from whales , the EU will gain from the accession of this country .
However , the question of this country 's accession should be duly framed within the Union 's common policies , the common fisheries policy in particular .
On account of the relative weight that the fisheries sector has within the Icelandic economy , difficulties with harmonising policies intrinsic to the sector may arise .
in writing . - In favour .
With this resolution , the EP , among other things : Welcomes the prospect of having as a new EU member a country with a strong democratic tradition and civic culture ; underlines that Iceland 's accession to the EU will further enhance the Union 's role as a world-wide promoter and defender of human rights and fundamental freedoms ; commends Iceland for its good record in safeguarding human rights and ensuring a high level of cooperation with international mechanisms for the protection of human rights ; supports the ongoing work to strengthen the legislative environment with regard to freedom of expression and access to information ; welcomes , in this respect , the Icelandic Modern Media Initiative , enabling both Iceland and the EU to position themselves strongly as regards legal protection of the freedoms of expression and information .
Iceland has been a candidate country for European Union membership since 2010 .
I voted in favour of this motion for a resolution because I am convinced that that country has a solid democratic tradition and civic culture , and that its accession will further enhance the EU 's role as a worldwide promoter and defender of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report as I support Iceland 's accession to the EU .
I am voting for this resolution , which recommends the implementation of the Association and Stabilisation Agreement with the EU , but regrets that the Council is not considering the opening of negotiations as recommended by the Commission .
I would also like to express my concern about growing ethnic tensions , and about the lack of political dialogue and freedom of the press .
Political parties should put an end to the boycott of the national parliament , and enter a dialogue with the institutions .
I also regret the fact that the dispute with Greece continues to block the country 's path towards accession to the EU .
The bilateral issues need to be resolved by the parties concerned in the spirit of good neighbourliness , above all , taking European interests into account .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this motion to wind up the debate on statements by the European Council and the Commission on the 2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) .
I believe it is a very balanced motion .
It expresses concern about the current political situation in FYROM , including the boycott of the national parliament by the opposition parties , and about the risk that these developments could adversely affect the country 's EU agenda .
The motion also congratulates the country on the anniversary of the Ohrid Agreement , which remains the cornerstone of its inter-ethnic relations , and calls on the government to foster a comprehensive dialogue between the ethnic communities .
I also appreciated the positive evaluation in the motion on FYROM 's continuous efforts to stabilise the region .
As a member of the European Parliament 's delegation for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , I am keeping a close eye on the progress of that country and of its application to join the European Union .
Although it still has work to do in the areas of politics , the judiciary , public administration , the fight against corruption , and freedom of expression , the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has made significant progress in areas such as decentralisation , education , and prison system reform .
The bilateral problems between that country and Greece must not hinder the start of accession negotiations .
I voted in favour of opening those negotiations .
Moreover , I would point out that early elections will be held in the country in June .
I therefore call on all the political parties to join together and work in close cooperation so as to ensure their country 's accession to the European Union .
I agreed with this report .
In 2005 , the European Council granted candidate status to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia but has failed ever since to set a date for the opening of negotiations , in spite of the substantial progress made by that country on its path towards the EU .
Despite the progress made , there is still political instability in Macedonia , which could affect the European integration process .
A lack of dialogue between the government and opposition parties in the country is preventing an agreement on the implementation of structural reforms from being reached .
The reform of the judiciary is not fully completed , the media and public administration have been politicised and the unresolved issue of the integration of ethnic groups is preventing Macedonia from achieving further progress and implementing the necessary reforms to ensure the principles of the rule of law and democracy .
I believe that the Macedonian Government must involve the opposition parties more in decision making and ensure an open and constructive dialogue on all the problems that this country is currently facing .
I voted for the 2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia because I think that the Balkans ' EU perspective is vital to ensuring the region 's stability .
In this context , cooperation with Greece is of paramount importance .
The dispute about the former Yugoslav Republic 's name plays a key role in the discussions on the accession negotiations , as it is one of the obstacles preventing the negotiations from starting .
Good neighbourly relations are essential during the process of transition to EU Member State status .
This is why the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greece must find a solution to the issue about what to call the state .
So far , Greece has proved itself to be a trustworthy discussion partner with regard to the other chapters .
It is high time for both states to reach an agreement so that the future accession negotiations are conducted with the support of all EU Member States .
In this regard , the call for neutral external mediators may be helpful , such as the involvement of the UN Secretary-General in the dispute .
In line with previous resolutions by Parliament , I regret that the Council has not taken a decision on opening accession negotiations , as recommended by the Commission for the second year running .
The process of EU enlargement is a powerful tool for peace , stability and reconciliation in this region .
I am particularly concerned about the persistently high levels of unemployment , particularly among young people , a problem that is shared by many countries in the region .
I would like to call upon the government to rapidly implement more effective measures to improve public investment focused on employment policies and the use of the workforce in good quality , stable and decent jobs .
I am , however , pleased with the recent adoption of the Energy Act , which is aimed at liberalising the country 's electricity market and is in accordance with the relevant European directives .
I welcome the adoption of the national strategy for sustainable development , but more efforts need to be made towards enforcing legislation in the environmental field , and there needs to be adequate funding set aside for this purpose .
I would like to call for closer cooperation on transnational environmental issues based on EU standards , particularly in the area of water quality , waste management and the protection of nature .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left is in favour of enlargement towards the Western Balkans in principle , provided that its people so wish .
I abstained from voting on this specific report , because there are problematic points , apart from anything else , in connection with the proposed economic reforms and how the issue of the name is to be addressed .
From experience of enlargement to date , cooperation with the countries of the Western Balkans and their integration process , especially at a time of economic crisis , should contribute towards the sustainable development and economic and social prosperity of the citizens in the enlargement countries and the Union .
However , the report insists on rewarding choices such as the deployment of troops in Afghanistan and elsewhere or the promotion of economic policies , such as privatisations which are exacerbating the recession by increasing unemployment and social inequalities and cutting social rights .
Also , the integration process should be conducted with respect for international law and international procedures .
In this particular case , as regards the question of the name , the report should encourage respect and support for the procedure to find a commonly acceptable solution , under the aegis of the UN .
I voted in favour of this resolution , as it once again recommends that the Council make a decision on opening accession negotiations to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The Council granted this state the status of a candidate country in 2005 , but since then , it has not set a date for opening negotiations , despite the substantial progress that this country has made on its path towards the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) There have been some delays in the process of integrating the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
In spite of this , Macedonia has made progress in seeking to adopt the Community acquis and to provide its institutions with reliable structures and good practice , as advocated by the EU .
The political crisis that has plagued the country amply demonstrates that much remains to be done and that there is a long way to go before it objectively fulfils all the criteria for a real prospect of accession .
I would like to call upon Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to seek to overcome their differences and show that they are faithful to the generous founding EU spirit , which we all need so very much today .
This motion for a resolution focuses on the progress that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has made towards integration into the EU over the last year .
On 16 December 2005 , the Council granted the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia candidate country for accession status .
In 2008 , the principles , priorities and conditions for accession were set out , and these are being monitored by the Commission .
Although the assessment was positive , there are aspects that need to be stepped up , such as dialogue with Greece on the status of the new Member State , the reform of public administration and the judicial system , combating organised crime and corruption , respect for freedom of expression , and institutional cooperation .
The current political situation , which includes the boycott of the national parliament by opposition parties , may adversely affect the country 's priorities with regard to the EU .
The interested parties have to resolve bilateral issues in a spirit of good neighbourliness .
All players must increase their efforts and show responsibility and determination in resolving all outstanding issues which are hampering the process of accession for the candidate country and the EU 's own policy in the region .
I voted in favour of this document because in 2005 , the European Council granted candidate status to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia but has failed ever since to set a date for the opening of negotiations , in spite of the substantial progress made by that country on its path towards the EU ; because bilateral issues should not represent and be used as an obstacle in the accession process , although they should be settled before membership ; and because the continuation of the accession process would contribute to the stability of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and would further strengthen inter-ethnic dialogue .
Bilateral issues need to be resolved by the parties concerned in a good neighbourly spirit and taking overall EU interests into account .
All the key players and parties concerned should step up their efforts and demonstrate responsibility and determination to solve all outstanding issues which are not only hindering the accession process of the candidate country , and the EU 's own policy in the region , but could also have repercussions on inter-ethnic relations , regional stability and economic development .
The document urges the authorities responsible to strengthen the independence and freedom of the media , applying equal standards to all of them and improving the transparency of their ownership .
I am concerned that there is insufficient dialogue between the government and opposition parties and a general climate of distrust and confrontation .
It is necessary to continue reform of the judiciary in order to ensure its professionalism , efficiency and independence from political pressures , expand the fight against corruption and improve the business environment .
The process of EU enlargement is a powerful stimulus for the encouragement of the peace , stability and reconciliation process in the Balkans .
Macedonia has made significant progress in the democratisation of the state , due directly to the political will to become a full member of the family of European nations .
The European Commission has evaluated this progress and , for the second year running now , has called upon the European Council to open accession negotiations with Macedonia .
Also for the second year running , the Council has not taken this decision .
This gives rise to the impression that one of the unfounded obstacles to the opening of these negotiations are mutual bones of contention , including relations with Greece .
These disputes must not block the accession process for Macedonia , all the more so since continuing the accession process would promote stability and strengthen yet further the dialogue between the ethnic communities in Macedonia .
Of course , Macedonia has a great deal to do yet in order to reform governmental and judicial institutions , successfully combat organised crime and corruption , and develop democratic dialogues in society .
Of course , the acceptance of any new Member State , Macedonia included , into the EU will only take place when all the requirements have been satisfied , and only with the unambiguous agreement of the EU institutions and EU Member States .
That is precisely why it is important to begin the accession negotiation process , which , I am convinced , will encourage positive changes in Macedonia and the region as a whole .
The motion for a resolution on the 2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , on which Parliament has voted , has been approved by a large majority and with the agreement of several political groups .
I applaud the efforts made by that country to align itself with European standards .
Judicial reform , the fight against corruption , and public administration and prison reform are some of the important achievements as regards compliance with the acquis communautaire .
Equally worthy of praise is the focus on granting local autonomy and adopting an anti-discrimination law , as well as on making a commitment to gender equality .
Freedom of expression and the independence of the media continue to be a problem , however .
Moreover , the growing tensions between different ethnic groups in the country are a cause for concern .
I therefore believe that , despite the positive results , attention must continue to be paid to the institutional question , which is very fragile and is being put to the test .
I hope , in conclusion , that the process of rapprochement with Europe will be strengthened by means of action aimed at filling the gaps that still exist today .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the resolution in order to acknowledge Macedonia 's progress towards European integration and highlight the remaining goals to be achieved for the benefit of its people .
It is essential to send Macedonia a positive signal regarding its future within the European Union in order to maintain the European momentum and further the political dialogue that has been initiated .
The name issue existing between Macedonia and Greece is exclusively a bilateral issue that should not interfere with the opening of accession negotiations .
Moreover , under the 13 September 1995 Interim Accord between Greece and Macedonia , Greece agreed not to object to the application of Macedonia to international institutions , this covering also the EU-Macedonia negotiations process .
In the Committee on Foreign Affairs , I contributed amendments concerning the public administration , the justice system and anti-corruption action .
The adoption of a national strategy for public administration reform and the creation of the stabilisation and association agreement 's subcommittee are positive steps to ensure the capacities and professionalism of the public administration .
I stress that the unification of jurisprudence and publishing of all court decisions are highly important for predictability of the judiciary and public trust in the system .
in writing . - I voted for the report on Macedonia and welcome the continued efforts in the fight against corruption , manifested , amongst other things , by implementation of the second round of GRECO recommendations and the entry into force of the amendments to the Criminal Code .
I encourage the authorities to continue implementing legislation to combat corruption and improving the independence , efficiency and resources of the judiciary .
However , corruption remains prevalent and I call for further intensive efforts to eradicate it .
I stress the urgency of effective and impartial enforcement of anti-corruption legislation , in particular , on the financing of political parties and on conflicts of interest .
I draw attention to the importance of ensuring that the court system functions free of political interference and welcome the efforts to increase the efficiency and transparency of the court system .
I stress the need to build up an enforcement record for prosecutions and convictions against which progress can be measured and call for the unification of jurisprudence in order to ensure a predictable judicial system and public trust .
In the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , violation of the independence of the press , of the independence of the judiciary and of the Skopje 2014 urban development plan are everyday occurrences .
At the same time , political dialogue has now ground to a halt .
With the unresolved question of the name being added to this unfortunate internal environment , it is clear that the European prospects of this country are being severely tried .
This resolution calls on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to do its utmost to liberalise its economy and its electricity market .
It gives the country lessons in democracy and even in journalism .
I voted against this arrogant and shoddy text .
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has experienced some obstacles on its path towards EU accession .
Despite making progress in the adoption of the entire Community acquis , giving its institutions reliable structures and best practice , there is still a long way to go .
Much remains to be done , as shown by the political crisis that has been plaguing the state .
On 9 April 2001 , Macedonia was the first country in the Western Balkans to enter into a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU .
The status of reforms since 2001 can be judged positively in many respects .
Where the judiciary is concerned , legal provisions have been passed to ensure both independence from political pressure and efficiency .
The improvements to the transparency of the court system , particularly as regards dealing with the backlog of cases in most courts , are also to be welcomed .
The country can already be seen to be making progress towards the transition to a functioning market economy , although there is still a long way to go .
Only the dispute with Greece over its name is blocking Macedonia 's accession to the EU , and it is to be hoped that this can be resolved in the near future .
However , I abstained from voting because some aspects of the report are very unbalanced .
I voted in favour of the 2010 monitoring report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
The process of accession for the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has experienced significant delays , despite the political and socio-economic progress that the country has made .
I hope that the existing differences and regional problems can be overcome to the benefit of the common European good .
in writing . - In favour .
This resolution basically says that the EP shares the assessment by the Commission 's 2010 progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and regrets that the Council has not taken a decision on the opening of accession negotiations , as recommended by the Commission for a second year in a row and in line with previous Parliament resolutions .
It is concerned at the current political situation , including the boycott of the national parliament by the opposition parties , and by the risk that these developments could adversely affect the country 's EU agenda and recalls its previous recommendation to the Council to start the negotiations immediately .
I voted in favour of this report because I believe that the moment has come to open genuine and proper accession negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
In fact , since the European Council of 16 December 2005 awarded that country the status of candidate country for EU membership , no significant steps forward have been taken on the issue .
This must be traced back , primarily , to a series of problems within the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , in particular , as regards the opposition parties ' boycott of the national parliament .
This and other problems , such as the presence of free and independent media , deemed necessary for the development of a stable democracy , must be cleared up as soon as possible so that both parties can set out once more on the road to enlargement of the EU to the East .
I voted against this particular report because , as I said earlier in plenary , I consider that , given the serious allegations made in the Sunday Times on 20 March against the rapporteur , Mr Zoran Thaler , who initially tabled the text which was then put to the vote in the Committee on Foreign Affairs on 16 March , before the revelations against him , and who may enjoy a presumption of innocence , and the fact that a new rapporteur has been reported , this motion for a resolution does not enjoy a presumption of credibility .
In my opinion , it would be a mistake , for the integrity and credibility of the House , to vote on this motion before the results of enquiries are released following the opening of the conciliation procedure .
I am in favour of this resolution because the crisis situation in Côte d 'Ivoire should be brought to a swift end , as it has already resulted in a large number of deaths .
The international community recognises the democratic victory of Mr Ouattara , and it must now redouble its efforts in helping him to take up power in a peaceful manner .
As this is a serious situation which not only jeopardises the electoral choices legitimately made by the people , but also has repercussions on the breaching of human rights , the EU must act in a diplomatic way , with all the mechanisms that it has at its disposal , so as to help to bring the situation back to normal and , most importantly , to prevent more deaths .
I voted in favour of this resolution because over the past four months , Côte d 'Ivoire has been plunged into a deep political crisis stemming from the refusal of the incumbent President , Laurent Gbagbo , to relinquish power to the legitimate President , Alassane Ouattara , despite the fact that the latter won the November 2010 presidential poll and has been recognised as the victor by the international community , following validation of the results by the United Nations .
According to UN sources , hundreds of lives have been lost in Côte d 'Ivoire since December 2010 and the actual number of casualties is likely to be much higher , as the violence taking place in the interior of the country is not always reported in the press .
Attacks are being intentionally directed against UN peacekeepers and institutions .
I agree with the need for swift international political action to address the humanitarian situation in Côte d 'Ivoire and prevent a new migration crisis in the region .
The Commission and the Member States must coordinate their efforts with other international donors in order to respond to the urgent needs of the population of Côte d 'Ivoire and its neighbouring countries .
I support the sanctions , comprising a visa ban and an asset freeze , imposed by the United Nations Security Council , the African Union and the Council of the European Union on all persons and entities that oppose the legitimate President 's authority , and the fact that these sanctions are to remain in place until the return of legitimate authorities to power .
I strongly condemn the attempts made by ex-President Gbagbo and his supporters to violently usurp the will of the people of Côte d 'Ivoire , and I would like to join in the call for Mr Gbagbo to leave power immediately .
It is regrettable that the people of Côte d 'Ivoire have had to pay such a high price in order to ensure respect for their democratic will , which they expressed in the presidential elections in November 2010 .
I would like to express my full support for President Ouattara , his government and the people of Côte d 'Ivoire in their task of reconciliation , recovery and sustainable development .
I would like to call for the opening of negotiations to restore order , peace , stability and security to the country in the difficult task of promoting national reunification .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the situation in Côte d 'Ivoire , condemning the violent attempts by former President , Mr Gbagbo , to usurp power , and stressing the need for him to leave power immediately in favour of the democratically elected President , Mr Ouattara , so as to restore peace and democracy to the country .
Despite the grandiose vision of Félix Houphouët-Boigny , Côte d 'Ivoire today is a country torn apart by the conflict between Mr Gbagbo and Mr Ouattara , and which is threatening to go on indefinitely .
The people of Côte d 'Ivoire have watched the military advances of the respective factions with concern and dread , fearing for the breakdown of security and the further destabilisation of the country .
Côte d 'Ivoire is another example of the danger posed by dictatorial leaderships that continue over time and which leave an institutional vacuum and an absence of democratic practice and the exercise of freedoms once they are gone .
In line with the example that it has given throughout its existence , the European Union has a historic duty to speak out against all violations of human rights and to foster respect for the right to the self-determination of peoples , both through denunciation and through development programmes .
We have recently seen an upsurge in violence and verified massacres in Côte d 'Ivoire , where the process of democratisation is not being accepted by all Ivorians .
Parliament has adopted several resolutions on the political situation in this country , especially on 16 December 2010 .
Other EU and international institutions , such as the UN Security Council and the Authority of Heads of States of the Economic Community of West African States ( ECOWAS ) , have condemned the violation of human rights in this country following the non-acceptance of the election results , which were certified by the UN , by the deposed President , Mr Gbagbo , which has led to a wave of violence in the country , resulting in hundreds of deaths and about a million refugees .
I therefore agree with the measures presented here and am voting in favour of this proposal , as I believe that Parliament should advocate a foreign policy based on values , and not solely on economic interests .
We did not vote for this resolution , and we remain concerned about the situation of war in Côte d 'Ivoire , the country 's economic paralysis and the high levels of violence that are affecting the people , which has turned into a humanitarian crisis .
We know that there are longstanding reasons for the grave situation that is taking place there , particularly the poverty and social inequality which were the legacy of former colonialism or the structural adjustment plans imposed for years by the IMF .
These last four months of misery following the elections have shown how regrettable it is that the international community , including the EU , has not made sufficient use of diplomatic channels for a peaceful political solution to the crisis .
The role of France is particularly unfortunate , as it has preferred military intervention to using diplomatic channels .
We therefore insist that the war and violence by all parties must be brought to an end , and we urge the EU to act accordingly .
This resolution is a master class in bad faith .
It accomplishes the amazing feat of never talking negatively about Mr Ouattara 's camp , the extent of whose atrocities the United Nations is nevertheless in the process of verifying on the ground .
Yet it is true that Mr Ouattara , a Muslim of non-Ivorian origin trained at the IMF in Washington , can only elicit your support .
The resolution praises the work of the United Nations Operations in Côte d 'Ivoire ( UNOCI ) to the skies , even though the UN itself was obliged to ask France for assistance to safeguard its mission and , in particular , to ensure the protection of foreign nationals .
A fine demonstration of effectiveness and usefulness that is !
As for the attention you are paying to ensuring that the election result is upheld , it would be good if you paid the same sustained attention when European nations reject the treaties that you put to them .
Indeed , you only support the results that suit you .
Such a short-sighted , black-and-white approach cannot be endorsed , and nor can a resolution that is even more badly informed than the European newspaper articles on which it appears to be based .
I voted in favour of this document , because over the past four months , Côte d 'Ivoire has been plunged into a deep political crisis stemming from the refusal by incumbent President , Laurent Gbagbo , to relinquish power to the legitimate President , Alassane Ouattara , despite the fact that the latter won the November 2010 presidential poll and has been recognised as the victor by the international community , following validation of the results by the United Nations .
All diplomatic efforts to devise a peaceful solution to the post-election political deadlock , including those of the African Union , the Economic Community of West African States and the President of South Africa , have been unsuccessful .
Since mid-February , fighting has intensified both in the capital and in the west of the country , with alarming reports indicating the increasing use of heavy artillery against civilians .
Atrocities have been committed in Côte d 'Ivoire , including cases of sexual violence , enforced disappearances , extrajudicial executions and the excessive and indiscriminate use of force against civilians , which amount to crimes against humanity .
Parliament therefore calls on President Ouattara to facilitate peace and national reconciliation .
The serious political and institutional crisis that has rocked Côte d 'Ivoire for several months now has given rise to a wave of violence that seems to have no end in sight .
I strongly condemn the attempt by ex-President Gbagbo to violently overturn a legitimate election result , which saw him defeated by Alassane Ouattara .
For some months now , Côte d 'Ivoire has been the scene of urban guerrilla warfare between the supporters of the outgoing President and the people .
I believe that Europe , especially in situations such as this , in which basic human rights and the very ideal of democracy are being seriously jeopardised , must make its voice heard loud and clear by condemning such acts and showing its strong disapproval and indignation .
in writing . - I welcome this resolution which urges all the political forces in Côte d 'Ivoire to respect the will of the people expressed freely in the results of the presidential elections of 28 November 2010 that were announced by the CEI and certified by the UNSG Special Representative , and which recognised Alassane Dramane Ouattara as President-elect of Côte d 'Ivoire .
The resolution asks all Ivorian parties , in particular , to refrain from , prevent , and protect civilians from all forms of illegal coercion and abuses of Human Rights .
The resolution also condemns , in the strongest possible terms , the attempts by ex-President Gbagbo and his supporters to usurp the will of the Ivorian people by fomenting violence and undermining the integrity of the electoral process .
It stresses , in this respect , that results of democratic elections must be fully respected by all participants , including the defeated candidates , and underlines that failure to uphold these results would further put at risk both peace and stability in Côte d 'Ivoire ;
Respect for democracy is an inalienable principle of the EU .
We must therefore strongly condemn the events in Côte d 'Ivoire .
The use of violence against civilians in Côte d 'Ivoire by Mr Gbagbo after losing the elections is unacceptable , and he must resign and hand over power immediately .
Those who are responsible must not go unpunished , and we must do everything in our power to identify and prosecute them , at an international level if need be , for crimes against the civilian population , whereby the EU will be able to provide the necessary support for the investigations .
Following the election results in Côte d 'Ivoire , President Gbagbo - who had been democratically voted out - was not prepared to accept his removal from office .
Neither attempts at negotiation nor international criticism were successful , resulting in a crisis involving incidents of violent conflict .
It is important to maintain international pressure , for example , by condemning the human rights abuses and crimes against humanitarian law in the strongest possible terms and by imposing sanctions .
Efforts in respect of abducted civilians , who include EU citizens , are equally important .
However , this resolution looks only at the atrocities committed by the troops of the defeated President Gbagbo , and not at the charges made against the troops of the newly elected President Ouattara .
Where acts of violence are concerned , it should make no difference who committed them .
The serious human rights abuses and acts of violence committed by the defeated President Gbagbo must be condemned by the EU in the strongest possible terms .
If humanitarian law continues to be broken , specific sanctions must be imposed .
However , it is also important that violent crimes on both sides are punished ; in other words , also those of which the new President Ouattara has been accused .
For the victims of violent assaults , it is of little concern who ordered the violence .
In this respect , I consider the resolution too one-sided .
Given the political crisis , with the serious social consequences which this country is experiencing , I welcome the commitment undertaken by the EU , and expressed by Commissioner Georgieva , to help resolve the humanitarian crisis .
in writing . - In favour .
I join my voice to those who : 1 .
Regret that the post election political deadlock was not solved peacefully and all diplomatic efforts to this end have not been successful ; 2 .
Condemn the tragic loss of life and properties in the post election violence and calls on MM Gbagbo and Ouattara to ensure the respect of human rights and the rule of law ; and 3 .
Call upon M Ouattara and M Gbagbo to take their responsibility in order to prevent any violence and post battle reprisals in the country and demonstrate their commitment to peaceful democratic transition .
In the last four months , Côte d 'Ivoire has plunged into a deep political crisis .
The refusal by outgoing President , Laurent Gbagbo , to cede power to Alassane Ouattara , the winner of the presidential election of November 2010 , has sparked off a spiral of violence throughout the country that shows no sign of abating .
Fighting has intensified since mid-February both in the capital and in the western part of the country , and alarming news of the increasing use of heavy artillery against civilians continues to reach us .
Up to now , diplomatic efforts by the international community have come to nought , despite the validation of the election result by the United Nations .
The time has come to condemn the attempts by ex-President Gbagbo and his supporters to violently subvert the wish of the Ivorian people .
Laurent Gbagbo must resign immediately and cede power to Alassane Ouattara , the legitimately elected President .
For four months , Côte d 'Ivoire has been plunged in a deep political crisis caused by the refusal of ex-President Laurent Gbagbo to hand over power to the legitimate President , Alassane Ouattara .
This situation is having particularly disastrous humanitarian consequences .
The post-election violence has created over a million internally displaced persons and refugees .
What is more , this mass influx of refugees could reignite the obvious tensions in that region .
This crisis is therefore liable to continue .
While I welcome the Commission 's decision to increase its humanitarian aid fivefold , thereby taking European aid up to EUR 30 million , it is essential for the European Union to do all it can to help the most vulnerable population groups and to monitor their changing needs .
I was anxious to support this resolution , which clearly condemns the atrocities committed against the civilian population by the militias loyal to the outgoing Ivorian President , Laurent Gbagbo .
Ending the conflict by diplomatic means would have been preferable , but the level of violence reached in Abidjan and the hard-line , self-destructive attitude of the deposed President demanded UN intervention in order to protect the civilians and to help the legitimate President , Alassane Ouattara , assume power .
This resolution therefore supports the intervention of French forces under UN control , which helps to enforce the law and the election result , and to protect the lives of civilians and European nationals .
When the rule of law has been re-established , the legitimate Ivorian authorities , with the support of the international community , will have to ensure that the losing candidate in Côte d 'Ivoire 's recent presidential elections , Laurent Gbagbo , together with all the officials suspected of human rights violations , are tried for their actions .
Lastly , I believe the EU must continue to honour its commitment to provide long-term support to Côte d 'Ivoire in order to aid national reconciliation and to help rebuild and stabilise the country .
I am voting for this report , as it has important objectives like the liberalisation of visas , free trade agreements , contacts with civil society and the non-use of force as regards EU involvement in conflicts , as well as self-determination and territorial integrity .
Since it was launched in 2004 , the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) has led to a strengthening of relations with partner countries .
The Eastern Partnership ( EaP ) is a meaningful political framework for deepening relations with partner countries , based on principles of shared ownership and responsibility .
The priorities of the EaP include the development of democracy , good governance and stability , economic integration and convergence with EU policies , particularly as regards the environment , climate change and energy security .
The implementation of the ENP faces certain obstacles ; therefore , the ENP review must include clearly defined priorities for action , clear benchmarking and performance-based differentiation .
The ENP must continue to be founded on the principles of democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , and must support the political , social and economic reforms of our closest partners .
I voted for the initiative from the Commission and Council to review the European Neighbourhood Policy - Eastern Dimension .
This policy has produced results thanks to its flexibility and it now needs to be adapted to the new realities in Europe .
This is precisely why it needs to be adjusted better to the specific circumstances of each country included in the programme .
I think that the most important consideration should be the commitment of partner states rather than geographical location .
However , people are at the heart of the reforms carried out in a state .
The countries in the east and south must enjoy the same opportunities , making it necessary to rebalance the Neighbourhood Policy .
Former Soviet states also need cooperation with the EU , a sentiment supported too by Joe Biden during his recent visit to Chişinău .
I should point out that the Republic of Moldova is the leading reformer within the Eastern Partnership .
I voted in favour of this resolution because the review of the Eastern Dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy includes such major objectives as democratic processes , good governance and stability , economic integration , the environment , climate change and energy security .
The European Parliament is of the opinion that combating corruption , in particular , in the judiciary and the police , should be a top priority for the EU in the development of its relations with the eastern partners .
Furthermore , it is necessary to intensify efforts to combat international organised crime networks and to increase police and judicial cooperation with competent EU agencies .
It is very important for the organisations of civil society to actively carry on their work , particularly in the field of human rights , promoting democratic processes and ensuring media freedom .
I would like to emphasise the importance of freedom of expression and of free and independent media , including the Internet , for the development of democracies .
I would also like to stress the importance of trade unions and social dialogue as part of the democratic development of the eastern partners .
The Commission 's reports on the ENP not only depict the real benefits of the policy of good neighbourliness , but also its challenges .
The ENP needs to be revised and a different approach adopted to the way in which the European Union responds to the progress made by neighbouring countries in terms of socio-economic reforms by giving them financial and political support and adapting it to the specific needs of each country .
The Eastern Partnership offers a political framework for consolidating relations between the EU and its eastern neighbours and the continuation of the socio-economic reforms in partner countries .
The progress made by each country must be assessed using a comparative analysis based on predefined criteria , but not without factoring in each country 's specific features .
' A European perspective including Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union ' could constitute a driving force for reforms in these countries .
Parliament must play an important role both in establishing the assessment criteria and in strengthening freedom and democracy in the neighbouring partner countries .
In the first place , I would like to congratulate my fellow Member , Mr Siwiec , on the excellent work that he has done and on the collaboration , or , better , the synthesis of ideas that we have achieved , on the general principle of the revision of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) .
Besides what I have already said about the resolution on the Southern Dimension , for which I was the rapporteur , I would like to stress the need for both ENP dimensions to favour a ' bottom-up ' approach in the future , and to emphasise that only greater involvement by local communities and civil society will ensure maximum effectiveness in the implementation of the ENP by the EU .
I also hope that the EU will not favour short-term stability at the expense of the best interests and constant defence of the public , and their individual and collective freedom , with a particular focus on women 's rights , as I stated in my speech .
Although I am immensely pleased with the results obtained in these two reports , I do rather regret the fact that Parliament and the Commission have not made the most of this opportunity , for once , to differentiate the countries of the ENP to the east from the countries that will potentially become our EU southern ENP partners .
The aim of the resolution on the Eastern Dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) is to recommend that the next strategic review of the ENP strengthens the differentiation between states based on their respective ambition and commitments , when followed by real progress and concrete steps .
The specificities of each partner should be taken into consideration , including its goals and potential .
Fundamental European values , including democracy , rule of law and respect for human rights and basic freedoms , the independence of the judiciary and the fight against corruption are the basis upon which the ENP was established , and these should be the main measure for evaluating the role of the eastern partners .
Freedom of the press and the fight against corruption should be a priority for the EU when building relations with these countries , and this should be reflected in the overall framework for institutional development .
The EU 's goals are very broad and are based on an extension to neighbouring countries in order to create a large area for the free movement of people and goods .
In these circumstances , the EU 's European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) has a vital role in its strategy for development and growth .
Several instruments and resolutions have been adopted to this end , particularly the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) and the crucial choices of the common foreign and security policy .
I am therefore pleased with the adoption of this report and the proposed measures , particularly the strengthening of funding and cooperation from various sectors , along with the holding of a second summit of the Eastern Partnership during the second half of 2011 .
I would like to point out the need for the EU to step up its dialogue with civil society organisations in these countries , fostering free trade and promoting stability , encouraging the sharing of experience and mobility between the Member States and those countries , and promoting multilateral dialogue .
I voted in favour of this resolution , because the review of the Eastern Dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy includes such fundamental goals as democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , a market economy , sustainable development and good governance .
It stresses that the ENP is still a framework of strategic importance for deepening and strengthening relations with our closest partners so as to support their political , social and economic reforms , and underlines the importance of maintaining the principle of joint ownership in the design and implementation of programmes and actions .
The Eastern Partnership has been launched as a political framework for the advancement of the Eastern Dimension of the ENP , which seeks to deepen and strengthen the relations between the EU and its eastern neighbours , furthering political association , economic integration and legislative approximation , while supporting political and socio-economic reforms in the partner countries .
I would like to stress that economic reforms must go hand in hand with political reforms and that good governance can only be achieved through an open and transparent decision-making process based on democratic institutions .
It is particularly important to foster further regional cooperation in the Black Sea space and enhance EU policies towards the Black Sea region , in particular , by launching a fully-fledged EU strategy for the Black Sea and ensuring that there are the necessary financial and human resources for its effective implementation .
in writing . - I have always encouraged the Eastern Neighbourhood Policy of the European Union and this can be seen from my previous activities .
I endorse the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy , mainly because it is needed to make a substantial contribution to ensuring that human rights and political principles are more strongly integrated into the analysis of the political situation in third countries .
It underlines the positive developments concerning human rights and democratisation in some partner countries and some negative developments in others , particularly in Belarus .
I also found important the fact that it pays particular attention to the mobility of students , academics , researchers and businessmen by ensuring that sufficient resources are available and by strengthening existing scholarship programmes .
For all these reasons , I support the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
The review of the neighbourhood policy must continue to resolve the specific problems which the regions located at the European Union 's border have to face .
I think that significant administrative capacity is required to be able to tackle such diverse problems .
Apart from the demographic challenges , climate change , economic competitiveness and quality of life , the regions which share borders with non-Member States have to deal with a series of consequences resulting from problems which are not being resolved properly .
This is the case with the way in which natural disasters are managed , for instance .
Interventions in emergency situations are extremely difficult if the neighbouring countries do not have the capacity to respond , and no region can respond to the whole situation on its own .
This is why I have proposed that the regions located at the EU border , which have borders with at least two non-EU states , should be regarded as ' platform ' regions and supported accordingly .
The neighbourhood policy needs to take into account the capacity of the regions located within the EU , but which have external borders , to tackle the problems which are much more complex .
Commensurate financial support must be provided for this .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution and encourage the countries in the region to cooperate more closely with each other and to engage in an enhanced and prolonged dialogue , at all relevant levels , regarding areas such as freedom , security and justice and , in particular , border management , migration and asylum , the fight against organised crime , trafficking in human beings , illegal immigration , terrorism , money laundering and drugs trafficking , as well as police and judicial cooperation .
The resolution recalls that good neighbourly relations are one of the most important preconditions for progress by ENP countries towards EU membership .
The new European Neighbourhood Policy that we have been promised is just more of the same , with a few extra glimmers of democratic lucidity .
When it comes to the Eastern Dimension , everything is there : free trade areas , support for the Nabucco and AGRI projects , and outsourcing the ' management of migration flows ' .
Nothing has changed .
I voted against .
The EU is neither a state nor a democracy , yet it is already behaving like an imperialist power .
Originally , the three countries of the South Caucasus were excluded from the European Neighbourhood Policy and were only included in the action radius of the Neighbourhood Policy .
Action Plans to deepen bilateral relations are an important instrument of the European Neighbourhood Policy which are brokered individually for each country , since in practice , every country follows its own path .
The region of the South Caucasus , in particular , is characterised by a series of conflicts , the final solution of which is judged even by experts to be extremely difficult in some cases .
In this context , it is important to repeatedly make it clear that the EU 's Neighbourhood Policy does not automatically lead towards accession ( as in the enlargement process ) .
Rather , it is concerned with security policy aspects and increasing stability .
This is not expressed sufficiently in the resolution , which is why I did not vote in favour .
The European Neighbourhood Policy is an instrument for ensuring stability and promoting peaceful and democratic structures , as well as for deepening bilateral relations with the countries surrounding the EU .
In the countries of the South Caucasus , in particular , there is much to do , especially since the region is repeatedly the subject of conflict .
What the European Neighbourhood Policy is not , and nor should it be , is a preliminary stage of enlargement policy .
I feel that this is not made clear , and consequently , I cannot support the motion .
The European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) has shown itself to be an effective foreign policy instrument , promoting the strengthening of relations with third countries , with certain tangible benefits .
The ultimate goal of an effective neighbourhood policy is to guarantee peace .
The Eastern Partnership is a political framework which is important for deepening relations with and between partner countries , based on the principle of shared duties and responsibilities .
I voted in favour of this resolution as I also believe that strengthening relations between all countries , as is recommended here , requires greater common commitment and further progress towards good governance and democratic standards .
I voted in favour of this resolution , which reaffirms the need to revise the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) based on upholding the EU 's fundamental values and principles and on greater involvement by civil society and local communities , and which highlights the importance of the ENP 's Eastern Dimension as an instrument for strengthening EU relations with its neighbours to the east , with a view to supporting political , social and economic reforms in those countries and deepening its commitment to shared values and principles such as democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and good governance , within the context of European integration .
in writing . - In favour .
I join my voice to those that welcome the progress in relations between the EU and neighbouring countries within the ENP and reaffirm the values , principles and commitments upon which the ENP has been built , which include democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , a market economy , sustainable development and good governance ; consider that the ENP is still a framework of strategic importance for deepening and strengthening relations with our closest partners so as to support their political , social and economic reforms , and underline the importance of maintaining the principle of joint ownership in the design and implementation of programmes and actions .
Under Article 8 of the Treaty on European Union , the Union shall develop a special relationship with neighbouring countries , aiming to establish an area of prosperity and good neighbourliness .
As we have seen , European Neighbourhood Policy has very much led to a strengthening of relations with partner countries and brought many tangible benefits for the common good .
Challenges still remain , however , and the focus should now be on the priorities for action , with more effective benchmarks , in particular , as regards the Eastern Partnership .
The partnership with our Eastern neighbours represents a political framework of great importance for Europe 's wellbeing , and its work platform is focused on four themes : democracy , good governance , economic integration and convergence with European policies .
Unfortunately , at this time , the conflicts that have arisen in these countries are seriously undermining their economic , social and political development , and constitute a serious obstacle to cooperation and regional security , as shown by the recent uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt .
I should like to see a strategic review of European Neighbourhood Policy that is based on the Union 's values , which are against oppressive regimes , and that supports the legitimate democratic aspirations of the Eastern peoples .
Since its creation , the European Neighbourhood Policy has brought tangible benefits to all parties involved .
It creates a framework for cooperation , which is of strategic importance for supporting the political , social and economic reforms of our closest partners .
The Eastern Partnership is focused on the development of democracy , good governance and stability , economic integration and on achieving closer relations with EU policy .
Since the creation of the ENP , progress has been noticeable in the field of human rights , the democratisation of public life and economic reforms in many partner countries .
It is only Belarus that participates to a limited degree in the cooperation with the EU , and its further participation in the ENP should be conditional on its willingness to respect the fundamental principles of democracy and freedom .
Attention must be paid to the fight against corruption , electoral law and the way in which elections are held , so that they are in conformity with the standards of international law .
Support should be expressed for the EURONEST Parliamentary Assembly by highlighting its role in strengthening democracy and the development of cooperation with the countries of the Eastern Partnership .
The resolution of the European Parliament on the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy is to meet the challenges that have emerged in recent months in our neighbourhood , both in the Eastern and the Southern Dimension .
These events have demonstrated the inadequacy of the existing EU involvement in the neighbourhood .
The paradigm shift proposed by the European Parliament from ' stability first ' to ' democratisation and human rights first ' in EU policy is necessary .
There should be no more pretending that the political status quo , i.e. maintaining authoritarian regimes , is better for Europe and its security .
The time has come for solidarity with our neighbours .
Despite the differences , most countries in the neighbourhood share common characteristics : limited freedom , or no freedom at all , and a lack of success in modernisation .
The allocation of additional , generous funds in order to build a stable EU neighbourhood seems unavoidable .
The ENP should therefore continue to be founded on the principle of conditionality , bilateral and multilateral cooperation and should be extended by the pursuit of institutional integration , liberalisation of the visa regime , opening up the European market and support for civil society .
It is worth recalling again the position of Poland , the advocate of the EU 's successive enlargements , which urged the Member States two years ago , in partnership with Sweden , to strengthen the Eastern Dimension of the ENP in the form of the Eastern Partnership initiative .
In the face of current events , Poland 's role takes on a symbolic meaning .
Poland , which has historical experience in transformation of its political-economic system , may serve as a good guide and model for both eastern and southern EU neighbours in the current policy .
The European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) has shown itself to be a key EU foreign policy instrument , fostering closer relations between the partner countries and providing benefits for both parties .
The amendments that have resulted from the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon are intended to give greater consistency , efficiency and legitimacy to the EU 's external dimension .
However , it is vital to review and point out the mistakes of the past .
The review of the ENP and the Eastern Partnership should set out priorities for specific action from each partner , along with benchmarks and differentiation based on performance and the results achieved .
A ' bottom-up ' approach , with support for civil society and the processes of democratisation , is a prerequisite for long-term sustainability and growth .
A strong focus on training , education , research and mobility is needed in order to address the socio-economic problems of the region .
Lastly , I would like to highlight the support that the EU has given to Belarusian civil society in the strengthening of democratic and social reforms so as to enable its participation in the ENP and other sectoral policies .
I am in favour of the statements that make the commitment that new developments , past mistakes and support for democratic transformation should be taken into consideration , along with economic and social reforms in the region , combating corruption , and the promotion of human rights and basic freedoms .
Most importantly , a multilateral dimension should be developed and synergies created between the bilateral and multilateral dimensions of this partnership , including the revitalisation of the Union for the Mediterranean ( UFM ) and the strengthening of the role of trade unions among the civilian population .
It is also important to point out the need to increase the funds allocated to this policy , and to make better use of them .
We need to rethink our policy on the Southern Mediterranean .
The European Neighbourhood Policy was supposed to promote the values of democracy and human rights , yet the events that have been taking place in the Southern Mediterranean since the start of the year show that we failed on that score .
Admittedly , cooperation in areas such as education and modernisation of the economy has borne fruit .
The same cannot be said of good governance , judicial reform and democracy , which are nonetheless headline objectives of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
This text has the merit of proposing solutions for radically rethinking this policy .
I hope that the European Commission and the Council will be able to take inspiration from it .
Important strategic amendments were made to the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) today in the plenary debate in Strasbourg .
This has shown that Europe can be proactive if it wants to be , and that it can remain united around an ideal .
We have proven this once again today .
I am pleased to see this , in a resolution for which I had the honour of being the rapporteur .
Indeed , I was pleased to notice that Commissioner Füle welcomed almost all of our proposals , as the whole Chamber could see during the debate which preceded this vote .
I now challenge the Commission to demonstrate the ambition that this moment demands in its review process on 10 May , with a neighbourhood policy that is tailor-made to each state , with clear benchmarks and careful consideration .
This will allow a future Mediterranean Economic Area with the new democracies in the south , and I hope that the good atmosphere and cooperation that have marked the work on this subject will lead to the permanent involvement of Parliament in planning and evaluating this policy .
I think it is absolutely vital that the EU should favour a bottom-up approach in the future for its neighbourhood policy , for the reasons outlined in this resolution .
in writing . - I voted against this motion .
Whilst it is essential that we try to encourage peace and democracy in the Mediterranean , it is absolutely clear that the strategy behind the European Neighbourhood Policy has so far failed .
This policy costs taxpayers in the region of one and a half billion euro per year , yet it has manifestly failed to deliver .
We are currently facing a refugee crisis in the area and many regimes are turning on their own people .
There is no doubt in my mind that we will soon be asked to approve further funding .
Without clear objectives and a programme of work , this muddled policy will continue to fail the most vulnerable in the region .
It is equally clear that the High Representative has been ineffective in coordinating a response to the continuing security and humanitarian situation .
The recent events in the Southern Mediterranean region , which began with Tunisia in December 2010 , have brought a new urgency to the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) .
Parliament should monitor the processes of democratic transition in the Southern Mediterranean countries and , along with the other European institutions , support this transition as swiftly and peacefully as possible , providing important support through the instruments at its disposal , which are aimed at promoting political , economic and social reforms .
The strengthening of democracy , rule of law , good governance , the fight against corruption and respect for human rights and basic freedoms are essential elements in the political dialogue between the EU and its southern neighbours .
Given these events , the Union for the Mediterranean deserves to be revived , and should be strengthened with a view to the Southern Dimension of the ENP .
I am pleased with the quality of this resolution and its adoption , and I would like to offer my congratulations to my colleague , Mr David .
The EU 's goals are very broad and are based on an extension to neighbouring countries in order to create a large area for the free movement of people and goods .
In these circumstances , the EU 's European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) has a vital role in its strategy for development and growth .
Several instruments and resolutions have been adopted to this end , particularly the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) and the crucial choices of the common foreign and security policy .
However , the review of the ENP now has a greater importance in the context of the events in the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean .
The EU should draw lessons from the events in the south , particularly in Tunisia and Egypt , and revise its democracy and human rights support policy so as to create an implementation mechanism for the human rights clauses in all agreements with third countries .
The revision of the ENP should give priority to criteria relating to the independence of the judiciary , respect for basic freedoms , pluralism and freedom of the press , and the fight against corruption .
In the light of the recent events in the Mediterranean basin and of their direct and indirect consequences for European countries , we must carry out a swift and thorough review of European Neighbourhood Policy .
Europe 's new strategy must be based on a redefinition of the resources available for the Mediterranean , provide for an increase in financial commitments to facilitate political , economic and social reform in the countries of the region , and press for resources relating to immigration .
Moreover , as regards the radical changes affecting our southern neighbours , I believe that the moment has come to adopt a new European approach with the aim not only of defending democracy but also of taking concrete measures to alleviate migratory pressures and to guarantee the security of energy supply .
In this context , it is essential to lay the foundations , as soon as possible , for a new and strengthened partnership with our neighbouring countries to the south : a partnership aimed at promoting the stability , economic development and democratic transition of the area .
With this in mind , I believe that the European Union must play a key role in the geopolitical context of the region .
I voted in favour of this document because it highlights the importance of setting up a task force , involving Parliament , in response to the calls for monitoring of the democratic transition processes made by actors for democratic change , in particular , as regards free and democratic elections and institution building , including an independent judiciary .
It also calls on the EU to lend strong support to the process of political and economic reform in the region by using all existing instruments within the framework of the Eastern Neighbourhood Policy and , wherever necessary , by adopting new ones in order to assist in the most effective way possible the process of democratic transition , with a focus on respect for fundamental freedoms , good governance , the independence of the judiciary and the fight against corruption , thus responding to the needs and expectations of the peoples of our southern neighbours .
We must ensure that we provide better targeted assistance , particularly aimed at civil society and local communities , in keeping with the bottom-up approach .
However , any increase in the funds allocated should be based on an accurate assessment of needs and consistent with an increase in the effectiveness of the programmes implemented , tailored and prioritised according to the requirements of each beneficiary country .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution which recalls , in the light of current events in the Southern Mediterranean , particularly in Tunisia and Egypt , the ENP 's failure to promote and safeguard human rights in third countries ; urges the EU to draw lessons from those events and to revise its democracy and human rights support policy so as to create an implementation mechanism for the human rights clause included in all agreements with third countries ; insists that the review of the ENP must prioritise criteria relating to the independence of the judiciary , respect for fundamental freedoms , pluralism and freedom of the press and the fight against corruption ; and calls for better coordination with the Union 's other policies vis-à-vis those countries .
The new European Neighbourhood Policy that we have been promised is just more of the same , with the addition of a few necessary democratic considerations .
For the rest , the agreements negotiated with dictatorships are set to live on : free trade areas , outsourcing the ' management of migration flows ' , the EU 's energy security - everything is there .
The EU could not care less about burgeoning democracies .
I voted against .
For some years , the EU has focused in its neighbourhood policy on economic liberalisation , hoping that this will have positive political side-effects .
The dynamism of economic reforms has long been undermined by authoritarian regimes by means of increased state repression .
Whether the European Neighbourhood Policy can really contribute to greater stability is questionable in view of the escalation of events in Libya .
In the Maghreb countries , it seems that the hopes of the Barcelona Process may be fulfilled in part , albeit with side-effects that the EU had not anticipated and for which it was not prepared - even though they are commonly associated with processes of transformation .
The Barcelona Process in itself is a good thing , and I also took this into consideration when voting .
The European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) has shown itself to be an effective foreign policy instrument .
Through the interparliamentary delegations and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Union for the Mediterranean , Parliament should assume its responsibility to promote the idea that the stability and prosperity of Europe are closely linked to democratic governance and the economic and social progress of the southern neighbour countries , and to promote political debate , real freedom , democratic reforms and the rule of law in neighbouring partner countries .
For these reasons , which were expressed in the resolution , I voted in favour .
The recent protests in several countries in the EU 's southern neighbourhood , particularly Tunisia , Egypt , and Libya , have clearly shown the need for the EU to amend its neighbourhood policy , giving it more ambitious and effective instruments that will allow it to encourage and support the political , economic and social reforms which are being demanded .
It is therefore vital that the revision of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) reflects these developments and allows an adequate response to the challenges that these present , with an emphasis on the uncompromising defence of democratic values and fundamental rights and freedoms , with a commitment to greater involvement by civil society and local communities .
Mr David , the rapporteur , states this very well in his report , and I would like to commend him on his excellent work .
in writing . - In favour .
The EP reaffirms the values , principles and commitments upon which the ENP has been built , which include democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and respect for women 's rights , good governance , the market economy and sustainable development , and reiterates that the ENP has to become a valid framework for the deepening and strengthening of relations with our closest partners so as to encourage and support their political , social and economic reforms , which are designed to establish and consolidate democracy , progress and social and economic opportunities for all ; emphasises the importance of maintaining the principles of shared responsibility and joint ownership in the conception and implementation of ENP programmes ; considers that since its launch in 2004 , the ENP , as a single policy framework and through its performance-driven differentiation and tailor-made assistance , has brought tangible benefits both for ENP partners and the EU .
Under Article 8 of the Treaty on European Union , the Union shall develop a special relationship with neighbouring countries , aiming to establish an area of prosperity and good neighbourliness .
Respect for , and the promotion of , democracy and human rights , especially those of women , are fundamental principles of the European Union and must constitute common values shared with partner countries of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Today 's popular uprisings in Tunisia , Egypt and Libya are the consequence of the people 's general discontent with their own totalitarian regimes , and it is spreading throughout the entire eastern region .
In view of this changed social and political landscape , the EU must make effective adjustments to its neighbourhood policy in order to give effective support to the reform process in the areas of human rights and democracy .
The EU must define in detail the strategic priorities pursued in the partnerships with its eastern and southern neighbours .
I should like to see the Union take action sustained by the will to initiate a process of democratisation , in particular , with regard to greater participation by women in public life and better planning of socio-economic development .
I voted in favour of this report because current events should encourage us to reform the neighbourhood policy , not just to refocus it .
In economic , trade and political terms , respect for rights and freedoms should be , at the same time , conditions and objectives of our cooperation .
The financial assistance that the EU provides to this end should be markedly increased and should fulfil those same conditions and objectives .
We should also relaunch the Union for the Mediterranean on a moral basis in terms of its requirements and on a practical basis in terms of its achievements .
Our cooperation should no longer be restricted to exchanges with the ruling authorities : the European Union should make it a priority to speak to the various members of civil society and to encourage the emergence and organisation of political pluralism in that region .
By encouraging the introduction of legitimate , organised changeovers of power , we will not face a dilemma between unconditional support to governments for the sake of stability and chaos .
Moreover , by basing our cooperation on values this time , we will give it the popular legitimacy and the continuity necessary to meet the historic challenges of that region .
In today 's vote , I supported the resolution concerning the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy with respect to both the Eastern and Southern Dimensions .
These resolutions are particularly important given the recent course of events in the southern region .
In particular , we must take into account the strong demands from the public in several southern neighbours of the EU for the overthrow of dictatorships and for pursuing democracy .
The strategic review of the European Neighbourhood Policy must fully take these events into account and reflect on them .
Both resolutions , in relation both to the Southern and Eastern Dimensions , are important for mutually beneficial cooperation between the EU and its various neighbouring countries in order to ensure the necessary developments in relation to democracy , human rights and also the economy and security .
Europe 's stability and wellbeing are closely tied to the success of the ENP 's southern neighbours in democratic governance as well as their economic and social success , and it is therefore important to support the principles of political debate , full liberties , democratic reforms and the rule of law in the partner countries of the neighbourhood policy . Thank you .
The uprisings in Tunisia , Egypt and Libya came as such a surprise to Europe that everyone agrees that it ought to review the terms of its cooperation with the countries of the Mediterranean .
Several options are already open to us when it comes to providing long-term support for the democratic transition , economic development and regional integration of our southern neighbours .
The EU has two tools at its disposal : the Union for the Mediterranean and the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
Both have shown their weaknesses , but a genuine political commitment could rectify our mistakes .
I therefore support this resolution , which provides a clear framework and specific objectives for the next European Neighbourhood Policy .
I would , however , draw my fellow Members ' attention to the cross-border dimension of this policy .
Accounting as it does for a mere 5 % of the ENPI 's total budget , it is overlooked by central government and its programming is subject to alarming delays .
However , this dimension may act as a catalyst for many structural initiatives for cooperation in the Mediterranean .
Establishing a genuine EU-Mediterranean partnership means not only taking the aspirations of the peoples into greater account , but also providing real investment in concrete projects .
I supported the resolution on the review of the European Neighbourhood Policy - Southern Dimension .
From the position of a member of the Committee on Women 's Rights , I would like to draw particular attention to the importance of gender equality policies as an inseparable element of human rights , which is also a fundamental principle of the European Union .
Women 's rights must be a priority item in talks with the countries of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) .
According to the resolution , women 's rights should be included in revisions of codified law ( constitutional law , criminal law , family law and all bodies of civil law ) , and should be included in the dialogue on human rights conducted with the ENP partner countries .
We should also focus on measures which will deepen the social integration of women .
We need programmes that promote the education of women , and we need to promote their employment and increase their participation in public life .
The effects of measures to improve gender equality in the ENP countries should be continuously monitored and supervised , and failures in this area should be categorically condemned , and even punished .
I opt for not strengthening the EU 's relations with those third countries that do not sufficiently incorporate women into their policies and institutions in matters related to the organisation of civil society ( in particular , human rights organisations and women 's organisations ) .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which has significant importance , given recent events in the EU 's southern neighbourhood .
It is vital that the renewed policy supports democratisation and genuine reforms in the countries concerned .
The events in North Africa and the Middle East are indicative of the ineffectiveness of the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) , but also of the new challenges facing the EU as a regional player .
The creation of an area of prosperity and good neighbourliness based on EU values should continue to be the basis for relations with ENP partner countries - in this particular case , with the Mediterranean countries .
In the first place , I believe that it is essential to review the indicative programmes for 2011-2013 , taking into account the most urgent needs and , at the same time , making the financial instruments , in particular , the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument ( ENPI ) and the European initiative for democracy and human rights ( EIDHR ) , more flexible in order to provide direct support to civil society organisations .
I would also like to call for the Union for the Mediterranean to be strengthened both in terms of funding and in terms of commitment by the Member States , as a favoured forum for the exchange of best practice , where a clear Mediterranean policy should be established , based on partnership policy , the principle of ' ownership ' and conditionality .
Lastly , I believe that solutions urgently need to be found to bring an end to the war in Libya , and also to prepare a package of measures for rebuilding the country after the conflict has ended .
I welcome the adoption of this resolution by our Parliament , which is taking stock and deciding on the future direction of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership .
My commitment to a rapprochement between the two shores of the Mediterranean led me to make a number of proposals , which I am delighted to say have been approved by my fellow Members .
In particular , I stressed the need to review the European Neighbourhood Policy in the light of the events in the Arab world , by stepping up dialogue with civil society , encouraging the exchange of good practice , guaranteeing respect for human rights in our association agreements and supporting the democratic transition process in those countries .
The ENP offers us a wonderful opportunity to promote our values and to strengthen our relations with the countries on Europe 's doorstep .
For that reason , I hope that our partnership with our neighbours in the Southern Mediterranean will become a priority of our foreign policy .
I shall be vigilant in ensuring that we work on an equal footing and that sufficient resources are devoted to achieving our goal of making the Mediterranean region an area of peace , prosperity and cooperation .
I am in favour of this resolution because it upholds the most basic civil rights , particularly those relating to freedom of expression .
This type of behaviour should have consequences for the relationship between the EU and any state that perpetrates such attacks on freedom .
Without strong political pressure on these countries , it will be difficult to bring about peace .
The EU should always be at the forefront of combating these kinds of attacks and should remain alert to future developments in the region .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the use of sexual violence in conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East .
Women who have actively participated in the uprisings for more democracy , rights and freedoms in North Africa and the Middle East deserve our respect and support .
The European Union cannot be silent when these brave fighters for democracy and freedom are cruelly treated .
We therefore call on the Commission and the Member State governments to strongly oppose the use of sexual assaults , intimidation and targeting of women in Libya and Egypt , because these countries ' incumbent regimes have resorted to sexual violence against women as a weapon in the conflicts that arose during these revolutions .
The Egyptian authorities must take urgent steps to end torture , investigate all cases of abuse against peaceful demonstrators , and stop prosecuting civilians before military tribunals .
I strongly believe that the changes taking place in North Africa and the Middle East must contribute towards the end of discrimination of women and their full participation in society on equal terms with men .
The acts of violence committed against women and children in the last few weeks , during the conflicts that have broken out in North Africa , are no surprise because , unfortunately , women living through armed conflicts have increasingly become a target for humiliation , torture , possession and control , the intention being to wholly or partly destroy a particular group .
It goes further than that , however : no one has the right to violate the dignity of women merely because they have the courage to demand the right to express their thoughts , actively participating in the construction of a peaceful and democratic world and demanding , above all , the right to gender equality .
Inflicting inhumane and degrading treatment , such as electric shocks , ' virginity tests ' , physical and psychological violence , rape and slavery , is an unacceptable practice to which we must say ' Enough ' .
As far as the events in these North African countries are concerned , it is only right that the people responsible for these serious violations be punished , as in any other conflict in the world , because we are dealing here not just with civilians but , what is more reprehensible still , also with soldiers .
I sincerely hope that the EU will succeed in applying pressure so that these countries rapidly ratify a series of international judicial instruments , including the Statute of the International Criminal Court and the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees .
I voted in favour of this resolution because there is an urgent need to halt the use of violence and sexual abuse against women .
The European Commission and the Member States should strongly condemn sexual abuse , intimidation , torture and violence against women in Libya and Egypt .
We must call on Egypt 's Supreme Military Council to take immediate measures to stop these violent crimes against women .
We must ensure that all security and armed forces are clearly instructed that crimes and torture cannot be tolerated , will be fully investigated , and the perpetrators held accountable .
Furthermore , everyone should be able to express their views on the democratic future of their country without being detained , tortured or subjected to degrading and discriminatory treatment .
Women have had a key voice in the riots calling for more democracy , rights and freedoms in North Africa and the Middle East .
Unfortunately , the regimes in Libya and Egypt use violence as a way to intimidate and degrade women , making them more vulnerable .
I strongly condemn the acts committed by the Egyptian army against female protesters arrested in Tahrir Square .
Immediate steps must be taken as a matter of urgency to put a stop to this degrading treatment , and to ensure that all the security and army forces are clearly told that torture and other forms of ill-treatment will be the subject of a thorough investigation .
It is up to the Egyptian authorities to take urgent measures to put a stop to torture , investigate all cases of abuse against peaceful protesters , and to bring an end to the trials of civilians before military tribunals .
I urge the Commission and the governments of the Member States to vigorously oppose the use of sexual aggression , intimidation and harassment of women in Libya and Egypt .
I voted in favour of this resolution as it strongly condemns the regimes in Libya and Egypt for resorting to sexual aggression in the course of the conflict which is part of the current revolutions .
Women have played a key role in these riots , fighting and risking their lives for more democracy , rights and freedoms .
It is vital to ensure that the changes that are happening in North Africa and the Middle East contribute to bringing an end to discrimination against women , and to their full participation in society , on an equal footing with men .
Unfortunately , we are all aware that periods of upheaval and armed conflicts exacerbate situations of violence against women and children , and lead to a rise in cases of sexual abuse .
This practice is absolutely reprehensible , as are the use of torture , gang rape , ' virginity tests ' , threats and abuse , whether physical or psychological , directed at women as a way of intimidating or frightening them , or limiting their rights to political participation , as is happening in Egypt and Libya .
The EU , and Parliament in particular , should be a bastion of protection for fundamental rights and human dignity , and clearly and unequivocally denounce all violations of these values .
I strongly condemn the practice of violence against women , and also children , in the recent conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa , and I would like to call for the most appropriate measures to be taken to protect their most fundamental rights and dignity .
The fight against the violation of human rights is the main goal of the EU and its institutions .
In view of this , the use of sexual violence in any conflict has given rise to the strongest renunciation and condemnation by these organisations .
Indeed , many resolutions have been adopted by Parliament denouncing violence against women .
This joint motion for a resolution focuses on this violence , in particular , sexual violence , perpetrated against women in North Africa and the Middle East .
The reports of violence in the context of war and repression that have reached us are utterly gruesome and have caused great disgust and indignation .
The perpetrators of such behaviour cannot go unpunished , even when protected by dictators or under the pretext of backward mentalities .
I am therefore voting in favour of this report , which condemns any kind of violence against women in any region , calls for severe penalties for the perpetrators , and establishes EU support for the process of empowering women as a priority , especially those who have had the courage to participate in the so-called ' Arab Spring ' , and encouraging their full participation in civic life in the countries where they live .
In the discussion which took place on the use of sexual violence in conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East , the Commission pledged to steadfastly advocate bringing an end to sexual violence and slavery , which are recognised as crimes against humanity and war crimes under the Geneva Convention .
As stated in the draft resolution that we submitted , it is vital to insist upon effective diplomatic action that vigorously opposes the use of sexual aggression , intimidation and harassment of women in North Africa and the Middle East , or in any other place .
We would also like to stress the importance of recognising the role of women in the revolutions , and stress the need to guarantee women 's rights , including their participation in the new democratic , legal , economic and political structures of these countries , ending the centuries-old discrimination that they have suffered .
I voted in favour of this resolution on the use of sexual violence in conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East .
It calls on the Commission and the Member States to strongly oppose the use of sexual assaults , intimidation and the targeting of women in Libya and Egypt .
I believe that everyone should be able to express their views on the democratic future of their country without being detained , tortured or subjected to degrading and discriminatory treatment .
The role of women in the revolutions and democratisation processes should be acknowledged , and the specific threats they face and the need to support and defend their rights should be underlined .
in writing . - I supported this resolution , which calls on the Commission and the Member State governments to strongly oppose the use of sexual assaults on , and intimidation and targeting of , women in Libya and Egypt and strongly condemns forced ' virginity tests ' inflicted by the Egyptian army on women protesters arrested in Tahrir Square and considers this practice as unacceptable , as it amounts to a form of torture ; calls on Egypt 's Supreme Military Council to take immediate measures to stop this degrading treatment and to ensure that all security and army forces are clearly instructed that torture and other ill-treatment , including forced ' virginity tests ' , cannot be tolerated and will be fully investigated
In warlike conflicts , it is often the women and children who are the real victims .
It has long been known that rape and torture are frequent occurrences .
The situation is no different in Libya and Egypt , according to reports from foreign journalists concerned .
In Egypt , female demonstrators were arrested and subjected to virginity tests , which were also documented .
In Libya , soldiers carried out rapes and torture .
A further aggravating factor is that the women who told their stories must now expect severe reprisals , such as being accused of defamation .
Once again , a severe abuse of human rights is taking place here about which something should be done , including by the Western powers .
I voted in favour of the resolution because the EU must not close its eyes to these atrocities either and it is only right to demand of the governments in Egypt and Libya that these cases are investigated without exception and the perpetrators held accountable , in order that the countries may continue along the path towards democracy and freedom .
In the course of the unrest in Egypt and Libya , there were reports in the international media of tragic assaults and acts of violence repeatedly being carried out against women .
Torture and rape often go unpunished because the authorities quietly drop the cases or , worse still , accusations of ' defamation ' are made against the women themselves .
The roles of victim and perpetrator are reversed for the benefit of a patriarchal society .
The EU must not stand idly by ; the EU must do more to protect women and children , as well as the principle of the rule of law for everyone , in Egypt and in Libya .
I therefore voted in favour of this motion for a resolution .
The joint motion for a resolution on the use of sexual violence in conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East roundly condemns the crimes identified in Egypt and Libya .
The targeting of women in both countries and the complaints about ' virginity tests ' conducted by the military on women rounded up in Tahrir Square and subsequently subjected to rape and torture , so that they could then be tried before military courts for failing ' virginity tests ' , are inhumane and criminal acts in complete breach of the Geneva Convention on crimes against humanity and war crimes .
In addition to its round condemnation , the motion for a resolution , which I supported , calls on the Commission and the governments of the Member States to strongly oppose the use of sexual assaults on , and intimidation and targeting of , women in Libya and Egypt and to take specific and coordinated action to put an immediate stop to these practices .
I voted in favour of this resolution as it condemns gender-based violence and , of course , the use of sexual violence in conflicts .
I agree with the need expressed in the resolution to give priority to human rights in measures taken under the European Neighbourhood Policy ( ENP ) as an integral part of the democratisation process , and also with the need for the EU to share with these countries the experience that it has in equality policies and the fight against gender-based violence .
The uprisings in North Africa and the Middle East have seen women play an active role in demanding their shared desire for democracy and fundamental rights .
Unfortunately , the regimes in power in Libya and Egypt have resorted as ever to sexual assault as a weapon with which to target women .
We must denounce the use of sexual violence as an instrument for intimidating and humiliating women , without forgetting that the power vacuum that has now emerged could lead to a deterioration in their rights .
One significant case is that of a Libyan woman who , in March , told some journalists in a Tripoli hotel that she had been a victim of gang rape by soldiers .
Today , that young woman has been sued for defamation by the same men who raped her .
We must act by strongly denouncing the disproportionate impact of armed conflicts on women and enhancing their peace building role .
I trust that the EU 's denunciation of violence against women and children , particularly during armed conflicts , and of all forms of discrimination against them , within the meaning of the Geneva Convention , will be made in the strongest possible terms .
I wholeheartedly supported the resolution on combating sexual violence in the conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East .
Mass sexual violence against women is a permanent part of armed conflicts in North Africa and the Middle East .
The United Nations Children 's Fund ( UNICEF ) gives , among others , the example of Kenya , a relatively stable country , in which pre-election riots led to a doubling of the number of victims of sexual violence in a matter of days .
Sexual violence is becoming an epidemic .
In fact , it has become one of the tactics of war .
The European Union must not remain neutral on this issue .
It is therefore essential to include gender mainstreaming in the mainstream of European Neighbourhood Policy and in the centre of our efforts towards creating an effective and structured approach to gender equality in the countries covered by the policy .
Human rights , an inseparable element of which is the equality of men and women , should constitute an essential element of democratic processes in third countries .
It is shocking that despite the prevalence of sexual violence in Africa , governments do not include fighting it among their priorities , as we can see , for example , in the case of South Africa .
The EU should focus its efforts specifically on women .
The proposals included in the resolution for the enhanced social integration of women , the promotion of their employment , the fight against illiteracy among women and traditional harmful practices are very important .
Education for women and girls must include knowledge of the rights to which they are entitled .
During the recent events in North Africa , the ruling regimes in Libya and Egypt used sexual assault as a weapon for intimidating and persecuting women who took part in the uprisings there .
It is vital , firstly , that the perpetrators of these acts are tried for their crimes and , secondly , that the women who suffered such atrocities are protected from any reprisals .
I myself have been to the Kivu region in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo , where this heinous practice is regularly used by soldiers and members of armed groups .
I can testify to the extreme suffering of the women rape victims and to the impunity of the perpetrators of these atrocities .
The international community must do everything it takes to ensure that the perpetrators of these crimes do not go unpunished .
The revelations concerning the honour crimes and the humiliation suffered by women during the uprisings in the Arab world have shocked and disturbed me , and I am pleased that our Parliament has denounced the atrocities committed against them .
Europe cannot allow such violations of human rights and of its most fundamental values to be committed with impunity on its doorstep , in partner countries , and against the backdrop of peaceful demonstrations .
I therefore insist that these barbaric acts be investigated and that those responsible be punished .
Our resolution addresses an essential requirement for the future of those countries : that of giving women a central role in the democratisation process in Arab societies .
Women played a leading , silent , underestimated even , role in the liberation movements , and I think it was essential to pay tribute to it in this text .
Europe has pledged to support the countries of North Africa , the Near East and the Middle East in their democratic process .
It is now up to us to ensure that we include in that approach guarantees with regard to respect for human rights and equality between men and women .
I am in favour of this report , which deals appropriately with important issues such as the new Statute of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) following the Treaty of Lisbon , project bonds , the implications for the planned financing of the EIB during the economic crisis , its financing after 2013 and its activities outside the EU , in particular , development projects , greening projects and how to be stronger with respect to offshore financial centres .
I voted in favour of this report .
The European Investment Bank plays a critical role in supporting SMEs , particularly during this financial crisis and economic downturn .
Given the huge importance of SMEs to the European economy , it was agreed that from 2008 to 2011 , SMEs should receive loans totalling over EUR 30 billion .
The European Progress Microfinance Facility was set up in March 2010 with some EUR 200 million in funding from the Commission and the Bank .
However , SMEs still face difficulties trying to obtain credit .
As stated in the Bank Watch report , SMEs , particularly those in Central and Eastern European Member States , are unable to take advantage of the assistance intended for them .
The EIB must lay down clear financing conditions and more strict lending effectiveness criteria for its financial intermediaries providing loans .
National financial intermediaries were given a period of two years to provide loans , but as the report states , some financial intermediaries granted only a small portion of the loans or did not grant any at all , although the financial resources were in their accounts .
Furthermore , the EIB 's website still lacks publicly available data regarding the use and beneficiaries of allocated funding .
I believe that the EIB must enhance transparency in its lending through financial intermediaries and report annually on its lending to SMEs , including an evaluation of the accessibility and effectiveness of this and lists of loan beneficiaries .
In the first place , I would like to congratulate the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) on all the work that it has carried out , particularly its support for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) through funding that has steadily increased since 2008 , and also through the creation of the European Progress Microfinance Facility in March 2010 .
I also believe that the commitment to the idea of project bonds , which is aimed at enhancing the credit rating of bonds issued by companies themselves , and where these bonds are used to finance European transport , energy and IT infrastructures , is a positive step .
At this point , it is desirable that both the Commission and the EIB should submit concrete proposals for project bonds .
It is also worth highlighting the important work that the EIB may carry out under the EU 2020 strategy , by simplifying procedures and maximising multiplier factors in order to attract public and private sector investors .
With regard to EIB financing outside the EU , I believe that a Memorandum of Understanding signed by the EIB , the EBRD and the Commission is desirable , so as to strengthen cooperation in all the countries where they operate , with the dual aim of making their lending policies both consistent with one another and consistent with the EU 's political objectives .
The European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , created in 1958 under the Treaty of Rome , is a financial community of the EU which primarily aims to contribute to the balanced development of the EU through economic integration and territorial cohesion .
I welcome the changes introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , which give greater flexibility to EIB financing .
I recall the amendments introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , clarifying the aims of the funding granted by the EIB to third countries , which should support the general principles governing the EU 's interactions with the rest of the world , as specified in Article 3 ( 5 ) TEU , and which , under that assurance , should support the objectives of EU external action .
This financial institution is obliged to submit a document with the balance of its activities to Parliament every year .
This motion for a resolution focuses on the analysis of the 2009 report .
This document refers not only to the improvements that resulted from the adoption of the new statutes , but also to the activities of the EIB .
We recognise the importance that borrowing from the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) can have for development and social progress , given its low rates and long payment periods .
However , its options are not always sufficiently transparent and clear .
In addition , neither are the countries and regions that most need to borrow from it those that are most favoured with its loans .
This report , which we support , therefore contains some criticisms , suggestions and proposals .
However , we disagree with transforming the EIB into a mere tool for the EU to implement its policies , as well as addressing the problems of social and economic cohesion and social development , which should be considered in the EU budget and EU structural and cohesion funds .
Obviously , the EIB can monitor and improve these efforts , but it cannot be a substitute for EU budgetary policies .
The European Investment Bank ( EIB ) currently plays an irreplaceable role in providing finance in the EU and elsewhere .
The submitted report takes a positive view of the fact that the EIB acted correctly in supporting SMEs in the EU during the crisis .
It is true that the bank formally committed EUR 30 billion over a four-year period to supporting SMEs .
However , the problem is that not all of the money even reached the SMEs .
In specific terms , only about half of the funds committed reached SMEs in the V4 region in the first period .
The EIB gave banks an inexplicably long period of two years to distribute the funds , and also failed to stipulate any sanctions against banks in the event that this deadline was not met .
The banks of Central Europe , hard hit by the crisis , were only too pleased to ' hold on to ' these funds .
What was billed as support for SMEs therefore became , in reality , support for the Central European branches of foreign banks .
There is reason enough to think that this was not by accident , but by design .
To conclude briefly - the EIB is also having problems in the area of development .
It needs to take on more employees specialised in development .
The EIB is currently under-staffed , despite its impact on so-called developing countries .
I also agree with the rapporteur that the EIB must make strict changes to its funding via intermediaries , as this may end up in tax havens .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament appraises the annual report of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , albeit from a distinctly bird 's-eye view .
The EIB is playing a decisive role in fighting the crisis .
For me , however , the issues of transparency and measurable results remain doubtful .
The EIB 's activity focuses on the three areas where the crisis hit hardest : small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , convergence regions and climate action .
SMEs play a key role in the recovery of the European economy and the fight against unemployment , and therefore it would be expedient to make it easier for them to access the capital required for developments .
In this respect , it would be useful if we could see an assessment of the accessibility and effectiveness of the loans in question every year , which would ensure the transparency of the final purpose of the loans and improve the administrative process .
Also in this respect , I believe it is vitally important that the EIB updates and tightens its policy on offshore financial centres .
The EIB plays a very important role in enhancing the European Union 's convergence , and due to the technical aid and cofinancing offered by it , the regions under the convergence objectives are able to use an ever larger proportion of the funds available to them .
For this reason , I believe that further increasing this role is practical and to be supported .
Lastly , I suggest that the proposal that transparent regulatory supervision should be introduced in the interests of the quality of the EIB 's financial situation , the precise measurement of its results , and compliance with effective and successful business practice , deserves consideration .
I approve of the fact that in this period of crisis , the activities of the European Investment Bank should be focused on helping small and medium-sized enterprises , which are the backbone of our society .
The involvement of and dialogue with local financial intermediaries is welcome .
What is very important in my opinion is the emphasis placed on renewable energy as regards the candidate countries .
For this reason , I am voting in favour of the report .
I voted in favour of this resolution because the European Parliament welcomes the changes brought about by the Treaty of Lisbon , allowing more flexibility in EIB financing , including : equity participations as a complement to the ordinary activities of the Bank ; the possibility to establish subsidiaries and other entities , in order to regulate the so-called special activities and to provide wider technical assistance services ; and the strengthening of the Audit Committee .
It recommends considering the suggestion that prudential regulatory supervision should be introduced concerning the quality of the EIB 's financial situation , the precise measurement of its results and compliance with the rules of sound business practice .
It also welcomes the idea of project bonds , aimed at enhancing the credit rating of bonds issued by companies themselves within the framework of the Europe 2020 strategy and which are used to finance European transport , energy and IT infrastructures and the greening of the economy .
Such project bond issuance would impact positively on the availability of capital for growth- and job-enhancing sustainable investments complementing national and Cohesion Fund investment .
in writing . - I voted for this report which recommends the following steps to strengthen the EIB 's role in development : ( a ) the allocation of a greater number of dedicated and specialist staff with expertise in development issues and developing countries , as well as an increase in the local presence of staff in third countries , ( b ) increasing the share of the participation of local actors in the projects , ( c ) additional dedicated capital in the area of projects targeting development , ( d ) the allocation of more grants , ( e ) exploring the possibility of grouping the EIB 's activities in third countries together under a single separate entity .
I should like to record my satisfaction that the Cutaş report on the 2009 annual report of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) has been approved .
I would emphasise the excellent work done by the EIB in support of small and medium-sized enterprises in a period of economic difficulty and difficult access to loans .
I am , moreover , in favour of the development by the EIB , in conjunction with the European Commission , of project bonds for use in financing large infrastructure projects relating to transport , energy and telecommunications , which are essential for achieving the goals of growth and cohesion within the Union .
The 2009 annual report of the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) highlights the essential role which the EIB has played in supporting small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , especially at this time of financial crisis and economic recession .
The EIB has focused on three areas which the crisis in Europe has hit hardest , namely : SMEs , convergence regions and climate action .
The importance of the SMEs for the European economy is unquestionable , so I welcome the increase in EIB financing for the SMEs in the 2008-2010 period , which totalled EUR 30.8 billion , and the establishment of the European Microfinance Facility , which has been granted about EUR 200 million by the Commission and the EIB .


in writing . - In favour .
Although it is not a text that we , as Greens , would have drafted ourselves , we thought the text acceptable enough to vote in favour of it .
The document that has been approved today highlights the clear need for additional support by the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) in areas strategic to the recovery of the European economy : small and medium-sized enterprises , midcaps and infrastructure and other key growth- and employment-enhancing projects as part of the Europe 2020 strategy .
The report urges the EIB to invest in freight transport in the European railway sector as well as in other Trans-European Networks of freight transport with a focus on the Mediterranean , Black Sea and Baltic Sea ports , in order to link them definitively to European markets .
The EIB should , moreover , provide more support for the building of the TEN-T network , with the aim of generating a leverage effect for more investment , from both the public and the private sector .
In order to achieve this objective , project bonds can act as a complementary investment instrument alongside the budget in the TEN-T fund .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
The case of Ai Weiwei in China
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolution on the case of Ai Weiwei in China .
author . - Mr President , this is the first time that I have participated in a Thursday afternoon debate , so there are some lessons I think I can pick up for the Conference of Presidents with regard to making the plenary session more attractive .
I am pleased that this point has been put on the agenda , because the case of Mr Ai Weiwei is quite dramatic , as the latest information we have is that there is certainly no intention on the part of the Chinese authorities to release him .
The best thing we can do is to approve the urgent resolution we have agreed together with all the groups so that we can increase pressure on the Chinese authorities .
I have to tell you that I have my doubts that this resolution will change anything in the attitude of the Chinese Communist Party and the Chinese authorities .
What we are , in fact , doing on human rights with the Chinese is a game .
We are talking about human rights , they are saying they will open a dialogue and we think that things have changed .
Nothing shall change .
That is the reality .
We have the Nobel prize-winner who could not attend the meeting in Oslo .
We now have Mr Ai Weiwei , who is a well-known artist and was one of the last dissidents who had the possibility to say something .
The only thing we can say is in an urgent resolution in which we deplore what is happening .
In any case , I had hoped that we could ask why we should continue to participate in fora that the Chinese Communist Party organises with our political parties .
I deplore that there was not enough support from the other groups to come to an agreement on that .
We could at least have agreed on a principle of not continuing to participate in fora with the Chinese Communist Party , if Mr Weiwei and other dissidents were not released .
For that reason at least , I hoped for the support of all the groups here - with the other amendment the Greens tabled , even if the best part of it was eliminated .
Yes , it is true , they tabled a fantastic amendment and then eliminated the best part !
OK , it was not their fault , but apparently the fault of others .
( Interruption by the President )
I may be taking a minute more than I usually do , but for Mr Ai Weiwei , it will take ten years longer , apparently .
If we can speak in favour of somebody who may be in gaol for years , one minute longer is not too much , Mr President !
( DE ) Mr President , I do not know how often Mr Verhofstadt is here .
I wanted to ask him whether he should not perhaps come more often , since he would then see that the sessions here are always very attractive .
It is just that unfortunately , there are some people who do not come , but that is something that can be changed .
The sessions are extremely attractive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I vividly recall the first time that I saw a work by the Chinese artist Ai Weiwei .
At that time , in about 2000 , I was a lecturer in Art History in Lisbon , and there , in an anthology of modern artists , was his enormous chandelier , the size of a room , overturned and broken .
It was at once extremely beautiful and somewhat poignant and sad .
This image somehow also reflects an image of China : able to show itself as sumptuous , rich , developed , and capable of presenting itself to the world , as in the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games .
It is a sophisticated China , yet one with something seriously broken inside .
That something is the will , free speech and the spirit of the Chinese people themselves .
Today , we have met to discuss the case of the artist Ai Weiwei , and we have asked the Chinese authorities to release him , to let him speak with his lawyer and his wife , and to make any accusations , if there are any which are true , and not charges trumped up on the spot .
Above all , we have gathered here to say that this artist 's spirit of creativity , imagination and humour will surely survive much longer than that of his gaolers .
author . - Mr President , once again , we are debating China , and its government 's intolerance of dissent .
As we know from our debate last month on the Communist regime 's vandalism of the ancient city of Kashgar , China vigorously tries to suppress cultural expression that does not conform to what its Communist rulers deem appropriate .
Ai Weiwei is an heir to China 's magnificent and ancient artistic traditions .
He has also used his artistic talents to raise awareness of China 's dismal human rights record and dearth of political freedom .
Clearly , there is also a lack of freedom of expression in China .
How else can the regime explain Mr Ai 's arrest on economic crimes and because he failed to complete the correct departure procedures for travelling to Taiwan .
This is plainly a smokescreen .
In fact , the real reason was later elucidated by the state-run Global Times newspaper in a menacing editorial , which said that Mr Ai would pay a price for his resistance .
We abhor the Chinese Government 's disgraceful treatment of this distinguished artist .
We in this House call for his immediate release , and we express regret , once again , that China goes to such extreme lengths against those who dare speak out for their basic human rights .
Mr President , more than a year ago , we spoke in this Chamber about Liu Xiaobo being sentenced to prison .
Here we are now discussing a second signatory of Charter 08 who has been detained by the Chinese authorities .
As has already been said , Ai Weiwei is not only a very famous artist , but also one of the biggest critics of the Communist regime .
He was arrested on Sunday and there is no prospect of his release .
Indeed , in addition to this , we saw today that the Chinese authorities maintained that his arrest was an economic and not a political matter , which is blatantly a barefaced lie .
As is well known , Ai Weiwei was prevented from attending the Nobel Prize award ceremony .
His arrest is part of a wider trend in cracking down on human rights activists .
We have included in our resolution a whole list of people whom , I believe , Lady Ashton must mention whenever she has the opportunity .
I believe that we need to reassess our dialogue on human rights more generally .
author . - Mr President , it is no coincidence that the increasingly repressive measures against Chinese journalists , dissidents , human rights activists and lawyers is taking place in the aftermath , or during the turmoil , of the North African revolutions .
The word ' jasmine ' has been banned from the Chinese Internet recently .
Today 's news , which Mr Preda highlighted , is very significant because now , we see how dictators copy from each other and compare notes .
We can see that the methods that Russia used against Khodorkovsky and Lebedev have been used by Venezuela and Kazakhstan against businessmen who come too close to political influence , who want to establish opposition parties : they are all punished in the name of economic crimes .
Punishment of economic crime is the name they give to political repression .
We have to be aware that this has not happened much before in China : this is a turning point that does not bode well .
It is important that Members of the European Parliament raise the persecuted activists ' names when they travel to China and when meeting their Chinese counterparts , and that they insist on a prison visit .
We know that many of those who are persecuted suffer terrible torture in Chinese prisons , sometimes in what we call ' black gaols ' which are completely unidentified places .
This is a reminder to all European Parliament delegations that all of them are entitled and obliged to exercise their duty in respect of human rights when they visit countries .
We call for the immediate release of Ai Weiwei .
The disappearance of Ai Weiwei must be understood within the context of the increasingly desperate political repression carried out by the Chinese authorities .
All this is happening due to their fear that the revolutionary spirit of the Arab world will infect Chinese society .
However , the EU can make a difference .
Violations of human rights by the Chinese authorities must be a constant theme in its political dialogue with China , and this dialogue should be rethought to ensure that there are concrete results , in particular , the review of court rulings that have kept human rights activists in gaol .
Negotiations on the new framework agreement cannot leave aside the issue of human rights , subjugating everything to commercial interests .
When pursuing its economic interests , the EU itself has a responsibility to support activists like Ai Weiwei , Liu Xiaobo and Hu Jun , who have fought courageously for urgent political reform in China , against oppression , and for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
China , as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council , has particular obligations regarding human rights , contained in the UN Charter , and it must be accountable for these not only to its citizens , but also to the rest of the world .
Mr President , I am very pleased that we in the European Parliament were able to add a current breach of human rights so quickly to the list of urgent petitions .
As we know , the case of Ai Weiwei is not actually the only serious breach of human rights of which the Chinese Communist Party is continually guilty , but , as Mrs Hautala has already previously mentioned here , the democracy movement in China has received a new boost from the uprisings in North Africa .
Over the past few weeks , officials have stepped up their surveillance of critics of the government and many dissidents , activists and human rights lawyers have been either put under house arrest or taken into police custody .
As Amnesty International has said , Ai Weiwei 's arrest is an alarming turn of events in the increased incidence of counterblows against dissidents by the Chinese authorities .
Economic interests must not now be allowed to blur the issue of human rights and prevent the call for the immediate release of prisoners of conscience .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Beijing 's justification for the arrest of the artist Ai Weiwei for economic crimes is not convincing , and neither is the need to treat a free , dissident artist so harshly .
It is not convincing since this arrest is one of hundreds of arrests of opponents and part of the systematic repression of all signs of dissent .
At a time when uprisings are breaking out in the Arab world , we think back to the images of cruel violence in Tiananmen Square against young Chinese who , just like today 's Jasmine revolutionaries , were demanding freedom and democracy .
China has opened up to the West in economic terms without , however , linking production to respect for the environment and safety at work , and it is unable to embrace democracy and pluralism in any form whatsoever .
This is not interference on our part in Chinese internal affairs , as Beijing maintains , but the appeal of men and women , of movements and parties that intend to build a world free of intolerance on every continent .
The Beijing government should watch what is happening in the world to grasp that , if it does not change , it will be historic events and Chinese citizens that will change China .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , reports on the worrying human rights situation in the People 's Republic of China have become more and more frequent .
In Parliament , we have this issue on our agenda for almost every session .
Like the usual cycles of repression , the recent crackdown has already lasted for a while , which might be signalling a power struggle between reformers and hardliners in the Communist Party .
The Chinese Government has made it harder to access foreign websites , blocked encryption software used to jump what is colloquially known as ' the great firewall of China ' , obstructed access to Googlemail and intensified arrests , including that of the internationally renowned artist and critic of the regime , Ai Weiwei .
Resolute action is needed . I therefore call on the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , to make a démarche with Beijing .
Ai Weiwei must be released now .
Mr President , Ai Weiwei was - and this is the very sad truth - one of the last remaining courageous critics of the Chinese leadership .
His arrest was , without doubt , not just the culmination of a whole wave of arrests of critics , but also a message to all the others that not even international prominence can provide protection from being put back in prison by the Chinese authorities or from even disappearing completely .
At the same time , our representations are regularly ignored in the human rights dialogue that the European Union is conducting with the Chinese representatives at all levels - with a friendly smile , but ignored and dismissed nonetheless .
For us , the question arises as to what strategy we can use in response to this .
I believe we must respond in our own China delegation and make it very clear on our next visit to China that we want to visit these critics too , that we want to see them - for otherwise there is no longer any point in continuing our human rights dialogue .
We have no desire to keep talking to a brick wall .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , I condemn the arrest of Ai Weiwei and call for his immediate release .
His detention is part of the most severe police crackdown in China in decades .
Since 2008 , China 's internal security budget has , incredibly , grown larger than its military budget .
It now stands at an incredible USD 95 billion .
This pays for a massive apparatus of State repression , including over 40 000 policemen whose sole job is to police the Internet for dissent .
This repression is being stepped up because the regime fears the spread of revolution from the Middle East and North Africa .
The regime is right to be afraid .
The revolutions there demonstrate that a risen working class and the risen poor are more powerful than even the most brutal repressive methods , the most repressive regimes .
Mass struggle is needed , in particular , the creation of independent , democratic mass organisations of the working class .
The struggle against dictatorship must be linked to the struggle for genuine socialist change in China , whereby the vast wealth and resources in China are taken into democratic public ownership and the economy is democratically planned to raise the living standards of ordinary people .
( DE ) Mr President , as an artist , Ai Weiwei has given faces to the child victims of the Sichuan earthquake .
As a civil rights activist , he has given a face to Charter 08 .
He is now giving a face to those people who have disappeared into the gaols and prisons of China - thousands of them anonymous .
A hundred of them are known to us and here in this House , we must give a voice to these people who stand up for human rights but who have been temporarily silenced .
I therefore say quite clearly that of course , these human rights debates and the dialogue are necessary .
I understand those who say they have no desire to keep talking to a brick wall .
If we stop talking to this brick wall , however , then the dictators will have got what they wanted .
There was a great reformer , Zhou Enlai .
Zhou Enlai was no democrat , but he was a Chinese patriot and he opened up his country .
What we need is a democratic Zhou Enlai to arrange for a democratic opening up of his country .
If the country fails to implement democratic reforms , it will end up in the same sort of crises as it suffered in the 1930s .
It is in the Chinese interest to help bring about a breakthrough in human rights and we must therefore support these initiatives as well .
( FI ) Mr President , the artist Ai Weiwei , who has achieved international recognition , is someone who has enriched Chinese culture and art .
Instead of rewarding him and treating him with respect , China has locked him up in prison .
Human rights are not just a European concept : they are universal principles underlying human dignity .
The representatives of the European Union 's External Action Service and the Delegation of the EU to China must highlight the case of Ai Weiwei with the Chinese authorities at the highest diplomatic level .
The human rights dialogue with China , however , must not simply be allowed to remain at the level of diplomatic speeches .
Given the repeated breaches of human rights and a human rights situation that has failed , the European Union must draw its conclusions and reconsider its relations with China .
The human rights dialogue must not simply be empty words : positive steps need to be taken , and there must be followup and twoway discussion .
Besides , culture and art are a resource that enriches society and takes it forward , both here in the West , but also in the East , the South and the North too .
A Uachtaráin , China is an enigma .
On the one hand , it has modernised and taken on many Western practices , as we saw at the Olympics , which I had the privilege of attending , and indeed they were a great success .
But while it has westernised in some ways , it is archaic in others , in particular , in relation to fundamental rights , especially freedom of opinion .
The case of Ai Weiwei is a perfect example .
Here is a world-renowned artist , arrested on 3 April for no apparent reason .
Nobody has heard much about him since and this , of course , is totally and utterly unacceptable .
We call here today for his return to his wife , his friends and assistants .
Because one thing is for sure - and the Chinese should take note of this - Ai Weiwei will be remembered and renowned long after those who were responsible for his arrest are forgotten .
( DE ) Mr President , I think that what the Chinese are doing here is a deliberate political provocation , or to put it another way , a political test .
It is intended to test the strength , the resolve and the credibility of democratic countries .
It is an attack on human rights .
It is true that there must be dialogue , but precisely for that reason we must make it clear to the People 's Republic of China that further economic cooperation must go hand in hand with further democratisation of their country .
We therefore demand the release of Ai Weiwei .
By the way , whenever dictators want to avoid being accused of political trials , they always play the tax evasion or economic crimes card .
It was the case in the former GDR , it is the case in Russia , and unfortunately , it is also the case in the People 's Republic of China .
That is why I emphatically endorse this resolution .
( DE ) Mr President , I would first like to agree with Mr Verhofstadt .
It is indeed shameful that these human rights debates , which are actually very important to us Europeans who believe in values , always take place on Thursday afternoons when most people have already left .
I would like that noted in the record once more .
It is something that we must change .
Right now , however , we are talking about China and there we are more or less powerless , as has already been said .
Mrs Lichtenberger spoke of a brick wall .
Mr Posselt , I do not believe by the way that it is really in the Chinese interest - as you said - to help bring about a breakthrough in human rights .
It is apparently not in the interest of the Chinese Government , although it is undoubtedly in the interest of the Chinese people .
We are talking today about many people : Ai Weiwei and Liu Xiaobo have already been mentioned .
We have frequently debated in the past how we can bring about a human rights breakthrough .
It is not just a matter of instructing Baroness Ashton to speak out against the human rights abuses in China at every opportunity .
All our foreign ministers and representatives must do so , and we need to stick together .
I think that is the only way that we can actually have a small influence on China .
Otherwise , as a strong economic power , China will play us off against each other and we will achieve nothing whatsoever .
That would be a very bad thing , especially for the people concerned .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , the detention of the distinguished Chinese artist , Ai Weiwei , at Beijing Airport on 3 April as he was attempting to travel to Hong Kong , has rightly drawn international concern .
The delegation of the European Union to China and a public statement immediately condemned the increasing use of arbitrary detention against human rights defenders , lawyers and activists in China , and underline the EU 's concerns regarding Ai Weiwei .
At the moment , we have no information concerning Mr Ai 's whereabouts , and I wish to emphasise today that the EU 's view on arbitrary detention and disappearance is that it constitutes a grave violation of human rights and is unacceptable in all circumstances .
We call for the immediate release of Ai Weiwei .
Moreover , as the resolution before this House makes clear , the detention of Ai Weiwei is only one among many recent incidents of arbitrary detention and disappearance in China .
Several prominent Chinese lawyers who frequently act for defendants in human rights cases are reported to have been arrested by police officials since February and have not been seen since .
Concerns about their treatment are only intensified by the ongoing disappearance of the lawyer Gao Zhisheng who , with the exception of a brief reappearance in April 2010 , has now been missing for over two years .
The High Representative is worried about reports based on interviews with Mr Gao in April 2010 that during his initial period of disappearance , he was detained incommunicado in a variety of unauthorised places of detention and subjected to improper treatment .
There are , moreover , reports that in recent weeks , a significant number of bloggers and political activists have either been charged with criminal offences , such as subverting state power , or have been detained without charge .
I can assure this House that the Vice-President / High Representative , Catherine Ashton , is following developments very closely and will raise these issues with the Chinese authorities at the earliest opportunity , and that the EU will also make known its concern to the Chinese authorities at the next round of the EU-China human rights dialogue , for which we have proposed dates in May .
Allow me to support the statement by Mrs Meissner that what is really needed is one voice , a unified message , which comes not only from the EU institutions , but from all EU Member States .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
2 .
Ban on the elections for the Tibetan government in exile in Nepal
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolution on the ban on the elections for the Tibetan government in exile in Nepal .
Mr President , I believe we have all been following with approval and admiration the efforts of the Tibetan people to win the right to run their own country .
The many attempts of the government in exile or the Dalai Lama , spiritual leader of the Tibetans , to find a sensible solution through negotiation with the Chinese ruling power , have always ended in failure .
The Chinese clearly do not regard the Tibetans as partners in a shared state , but as an obstacle preventing them from taking full possession of an occupied territory .
The position of the Nepalese Government is therefore complicated .
On the one hand , it must comply with its international obligations and guarantee universal rights to the Tibetan community , but on the other , it cannot disregard the opinion of its enormous neighbour .
The position of the Nepalese Government vis-à-vis the elections to the Tibetan Government in exile clearly tells us who is the real global player in this region .
For the Nepalese Government , it is China .
We Europeans can make symbolic gestures and declare our reservations regarding the weak Nepalese Government .
However , if we really want to bring about a change the position of the Tibetan people , our partner in the dialogue must be the Chinese Government , as it is the political leader in the region , influencing the rules of regional politics .
We can , of course , make a declaration to the Nepalese Government , but that will not solve the problem .
author . - Mr President , since the abolition of the Nepalese monarchy and the election of a Maoist-led government in Kathmandu , Nepal and China have inevitably grown much closer .
It is no surprise , therefore , that the Nepalese authorities prevented Tibetan refugees living in Nepal from voting for a prime minister and a parliament in exile .
Indeed , a similar election plan for last October was disrupted by Nepalese police , undoubtedly in response to pressure from Beijing .
The fact that China has sought to interfere with an unofficial election taking place in another sovereign neighbouring state is an indication of its leaders ' contempt for democracy and their paranoia about Tibet .
It is obviously irrelevant to China that time and time again , the Dalai Lama , Tibet 's spiritual leader , has stressed that he seeks maximum autonomy for Tibet , not independence .
I hope that the High Representative - who is not here today - will raise this episode with China and also with Nepal , whose own nascent democracy is kept afloat partly by EU taxpayers ' money in the form of financial aid .
I also wish to take this opportunity to salute the courage , fortitude and peaceful resistance of the Tibetan people whose example is an inspiration to us all .
Nepal is indeed in a delicate position , geopolitically and geographically speaking , but it should seek inspiration from its democratic neighbour to the south , India , rather than from the repressive dictatorship which exists to its north , namely the PRC .
Democracy will , I hope , one day be the norm throughout the whole of Asia .
Mr Tannock , you used only one and a half minutes .
Next time , I will give you an extra half minute !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , obviously it is not enough that the suppression of Tibetan culture within China has been increasing more and more since the 2008 Olympic Games .
Since then , things have , in fact , only got worse .
There has not been a single step forward .
Now pressure is also being exerted abroad to make it as difficult as possible , or downright impossible , for Tibetans to exercise even their right to vote for a parliament in exile .
We have seen for some years already how enormous pressure is being exerted on Nepal - whether this concerns accepting refugees or matters such as voting rights for Tibetans .
However , we should be pleased that such things are guaranteed .
The European Union should learn from this .
The Chinese leadership is exerting pressure on its sister party , even on Nepal as a whole , in order that action is taken against the Tibetans - and Nepal caves in .
We must concentrate our efforts to counter this , and that includes the withdrawal of any aid .
author . - Mr President , there are three points that I would like to make concerning the ALDE amendments to this resolution .
First of all , the justification for the amendments is based on the causal nature of the occupation of Tibet by the People 's Republic of China in the thwarting of the Tibetan elections in Nepal .
Although the resolution addressed the issue of the ban on elections for the Tibetan Government in exile in Nepal , it cannot be ripped out of the wider context of the status of Tibet .
Secondly , if there were no reference to the Chinese occupation of Tibet , which is the very cause and reason for Beijing putting pressure on the Nepalese Government , it would be like talking about the First World War without mentioning the assassination of Franz Ferdinand .
Finally , the call for meaningful autonomy for Tibet is the only constructive proposal that the European Parliament can make to avoid a reoccurrence of the ban on the Tibetan elections in Nepal .
I call on colleagues to support it .
Mr President , the country I come from has a great deal of rich experience when it comes to governments in exile .
Between 1939 and 1990 , a total of 15 Polish prime ministers and six presidents ruled from political exile .
Poles did not give up the pursuit of democracy , and finally the red colour of solidarity was able to combine with the white of the ballot paper to give birth to a new , democratic state in 1989 .
Today , the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal , too , has a chance for a new beginning thanks to the constitution , which will come into force on 28 May .
It would be a pity if Nepal spoiled this celebration by continuing to limit the rights of the Tibetan minority and got a red card from the international community as a result .
I consider preventing the participation of Tibetans from Nepal in the recent elections of the Prime Minister in exile an unacceptable violation of fundamental civil rights .
The European Union should use all diplomatic and financial means in order to neutralise the pressure on Nepal by China and , in the long term , to ensure that the Tibetans have the right to vote , associate and demonstrate their views .
Just as in the case of Poland , where it was not possible to prevent the work of the 21 representatives of government who were in exile , so will the Dalai Lama 's successors , I am convinced , not stop their activities .
Nepal and China should bear this in mind .

Mr President , on 20 March , around 80 000 exiled Tibetans worldwide participated in the direct election of a new prime minister and the members of the government .
Members of the European Parliament , including members of the European Parliament Tibet Intergroup , attended as election observers .
My experience in Switzerland was the same as that of my fellow Members in other countries : the elections were conducted fairly , in secret and absolutely in accordance with democratic rules .
The only exception was in Nepal , where security forces - under pressure from the Chinese Government - prevented tens of thousands of Tibetans from taking part in the elections .
In so doing , they continued the deliberate measures taken last year , when ballot boxes were confiscated and voting sites shut down .
Yet Nepal is not a vassal state .
The government in Kathmandu must prove that it can liberate itself from Chinese influence .
Basic rights include freedom of speech , freedom of assembly and , not least , electoral freedom .
Commissioner , the European External Action Service must insist vigorously that these human rights are upheld .
Mr President , the ban imposed by the Nepalese authorities on organising the elections for a Tibetan government in exile raises a question mark about the human rights situation in this state .
I would like to point out that members of the Tibetan community organised this process with the aim of making their institutions democratic .
Such an initiative must be facilitated , wherever it might take place .
It is now time for Nepal to show that its democracy is working both domestically and internationally , especially so that the votes cast can be sent to the Central Electoral Commission by 15 April to be validated .
I appeal to the Nepalese Government to take advantage of this opportunity to remedy the situation on fundamental rights in its country .
This aspect is vital for ensuring an effective neighbourhood policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , we must fight for democratic rights everywhere , not just in our own neighbourhood , not just in North Africa .
We must have a standard European policy towards non-democratically elected governments , against governments which do not respect democratic rights .
Mr Verhofstadt said that , to a certain extent , we are hypocrites .
It is true because , often , we do not rank any principles above trade .
One typical example is the Mercosur agreement , in which , for the sake of opening up trade , we are happily sacrificing 11 % of the Amazon and millions of European farmers .
The Commission is to blame in all of this , Commissioner .
The Commissioner for Trade is often indifferent towards other European policies .
However , if we continue like this , we shall continue to be hypocrites .
Nepal must respect the democratic rights of refugees from Tibet and the European Union must use every means at its disposal and must raise the issue within all frameworks , not just in connection with human rights .
This is not only Baroness Ashton 's affair ; it is also Mr De Gucht 's and the entire Commission 's affair .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , bullied by the Chinese authorities for too many years , today it is Nepal that is depriving the Tibetans of a fundamental political right : the right to vote .
If one thing is certain , it is that Beijing has found a new ally in its harassment of the Tibetan people , and that new ally is Nepal .
In reality , though , all this goes far beyond the elections because , for several years now , the Nepalese Government , under pressure from the Chinese authorities , has been placing ever more restrictions on the freedom of expression of Tibetans living in exile on its soil .
Last June , Kathmandu handed over Tibetan refugees to the Chinese authorities .
Preventive arrests and the ban on demonstrations , assembly and even movement , have become a common occurrence for Tibetans living in Nepal .
Our Parliament must therefore stop being hypocritical and not just be indignant but also strongly condemn these acts of repression by Nepal and , more generally , the very many - too many - violations of human rights and of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
Moreover , we call on Nepal to stop this harassment and ill-treatment of political refugees , and simply to respect their rights .
When we consider Nepal 's history as a host country - something which it has always been for Tibetans until recently - it is ultimately very sad to see what that government is inflicting on political refugees .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I believe it is simply outrageous that the Tibetans living in Kathmandu did not get permission to vote in the elections because of pressure from China .
The pressure China is putting on Nepal , preventing refugees from enjoying a minimum level of rights under international law , is something that we as the European Union should condemn .
We should also express our concern at the fact that the Chinese are preventing another country from providing people with humanitarian aid .
It is important that the High Representative , through the EU delegation in Kathmandu , should closely monitor the situation .
This is something we have been requesting for a long time now .
Bearing in mind the current situation , we cannot wait any longer .
The pressure from China is something that we have to do everything we can to counter , and if we do not do it right now , when we are trying to launch this dialogue with the Chinese , I am afraid that we will never do it .
Mr President , I believe that it is bad enough that the Tibetans do not have the right to self-determination in the land of their birth , but there is also pressure for them to be denied their most basic democratic rights outside their country , as many of them painfully chose exile , or were forced into it .
One of the arguments that was always used by those who were critical of Tibetan resistance was that this resistance , focused on the figure of the Dalai Lama , had many non-democratic aspects .
Now that the Tibetan resistance is in the process of democratisation , it is extremely unfortunate that Nepal , a country where so many Tibetans live , has prevented the democratic elections from being conducted in a normal way .
However , I would also ask you to appreciate one thing : often , our governments are the first to yield to pressure by the Chinese Government to create a reality that agrees with the dreams and wishes of the Chinese leaders .
We have to understand that in Nepal , the government probably wanted to do the same thing .
Therefore , if we want to put pressure on the Nepalese Government to act differently , we also have to start by putting pressure on our own governments to show that they have some backbone in their discussions with the Chinese authorities .

( RO ) Mr President , the Nepalese authorities prevented , under pressure from the Chinese Government , around 20 000 Tibetans in Nepal from voting in the elections for the prime minister of the Tibetan Government in exile .
The right to vote , as well as the right to free elections and peaceful demonstration , are fundamental rights for every individual and for communities .
The more obstacles there are preventing people from exercising these rights , the greater their determination to exercise them .
I firmly believe that the desire of Tibetans in Nepal to elect their Head of Government in exile is also greater .
Indeed , the attempts by the Nepalese and Chinese authorities to rule them by fear have had exactly the opposite result .
I call on the European Union 's High Representative to express clearly these demands and measures from the European Parliament when in dialogue with the Nepalese and Chinese authorities .
( FI ) Mr President , China has increased its pressure on the Tibetan Government in exile .
Over 10 000 Tibetans in Nepal were not permitted to vote for a prime minister and members for the parliament of the government in exile .
Under pressure from China , Nepal 's main parties support the socalled One China policy , and they consider Tibet to be an inseparable part of China .
For these reasons , the Tibetan refugees in Nepal are kept under strict control at all times .
Although this resolution deals with the election ban , in the background is China 's occupation of Tibet .
China 's authority and the pressure it exerts are growing all the time as its economic influence grows .
This , like the previous resolution on Ai Weiwei , shows how dismal the policy being pursued by the Chinese Communist Party is .
As the Commissioner said , Europe must be unanimous in its policy towards China .
Mr President , I was not going to take the floor on this , but because the Dalai Lama will visit my country next Thursday and will speak in my own constituency in the University of Limerick , where I am sure he will have much to say on this and other issues .
Obviously , the behaviour of the Nepalese home ministry in confiscating ballot boxes is totally reprehensible .
As for what happened in Kathmandu - a place renowned in song and story , and that even makes it sadder - up to 10 000 votes were not allowed to be counted .
All we can hope is that we in the European Union , by expressing our voice unanimously , can bring some pressure to bear , not just in Nepal , but on their masters , the Chinese , to try and be a little more understanding , especially in relation to Tibet and the Dalai Lama .
Finally , I want to say that he will be as welcome in Ireland as the Queen of England and President Obama , who are also coming .
( FI ) Mr President , the right to participate in democratic elections is a universal fundamental right .
The elections now under way are important for the preservation of Tibetan identity and culture .
The Tibetans are voting for a new spiritual leader , as the current Dalai Lama steps down .
Back in 2009 , we agreed that the EU would support democracy and participatory governance in its foreign relations .
We need to be consistent and stand behind this policy of ours .
Obviously , Nepal is siding with China , under pressure .
Nepal needs to be reminded of its international human rights obligations to safeguard the democratic rights of the Tibetans , and it should not prevent free elections from going ahead .

Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , as you know , some 20 000 Tibetans live in Nepal , most of them from the old days .
They have enjoyed freedom of economic activity , the right to reside in Nepal and , until recently , also some political space to debate the future of Tibet amongst themselves .
The recent elections on 20 March were an important event for the community outside Tibet and represent a significant step forward in a long reform process envisaged by the Dalai Lama .
Against this background , we note with concern that the Nepalese authorities are tightening their grip on the political activities of Tibetans in Nepal .
On 20 March , more than 10 000 of them were effectively stopped from voting by the authorities .
This is not the first time this has happened .
During an earlier round of voting in Nepal on 3 October last year , the polls were subject to a crack-down by the Nepalese authorities , which seized ballot boxes and closed the Tibetan community 's voting sites .
The European Union , through its delegation in Kathmandu and the embassies of the EU Member States , has been monitoring these developments in close contact with the Tibetan community and the government .
The EU takes the view that Tibetan refugees should be allowed to exercise their right to freedom of association in accordance with international human rights standards .
This should be done in a way which permits the smooth implementation of these rights .
Access to Nepal 's territory should be maintained , and the gentlemen 's agreement between the government of Nepal and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees should be honoured .
New Tibetan arrivals apprehended by the Nepalese authorities en route to Kathmandu should be transferred to the UNHCR 's care promptly and without hindrance .
Pre-1990 Tibetans who are recognised as refugees by the Nepalese Government should be provided with adequate Nepalese registration .
I would like to ensure this House that the EU will continue to raise this issue with the authorities and continue its monitoring and reporting on future developments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Tibet 's Dalai Lama has taken a decision to retire from political life and continue as the spiritual leader of his people .
He is , of course , one of the best known of all leaders , and people all over the world have derived strength and consolation from his ideas about goodness , understanding and pacifism .
His spiritual role will remain in place , but his political duties will now be transferred to the Prime Minister of Tibet 's government in exile .
That , however , will not be without its problems .
Owing to growing pressure from the Chinese Government , the 20 000 or so Tibetans living in Nepal have not been allowed to vote .
The Nepalese Government has said that the demonstrations by Tibetans go against the ' One China ' policy and has confirmed that it will not allow ' antiBeijing activities ' on its soil .
It has therefore imposed a voting ban on Tibetan groups .
This comes as no surprise , since the Nepalese authorities have been repeatedly guilty of breaching the freedom of expression and human rights of Tibetans in exile .
This is despite the fact that Nepal has signed the UN international human rights agreements relating to civil and political rights .
From its delegation in Kathmandu , the European External Action Service should carefully monitor the political situation in Nepal and , in particular , the treatment of Tibetan refugees , and ensure that their rights are being respected .
Adherence to democratic principles is important if Tibetan identity is to be preserved and strengthened , both within and outside Tibet .
The whole world is well aware of how complicated the situation of the Tibetan people is , who , for decades , have been demanding not so much independence any more , but at least respect from the Chinese Government for the fundamental rights of autonomy .
A nation with such a rich and unique culture lives under a constant threat from a powerful neighbour .
Now that the Dalai Lama has resigned from political leadership in favour of a new generation of democratic leaders , the Tibetans have been faced with an opportunity to strengthen democratic traditions , despite the fact that the Tibetan Government is still forced to operate in exile .
However , thousands of Tibetans living in Nepal have been deprived of this right .
The pressure from China seems to be very effective , and what have so far been peaceful demonstrations in defence of freedom of expression and fundamental rights may become a situation which is difficult to control , and this will certainly have international repercussions .
After all , we can imagine how effectively the Chinese Government will want to deal with those who ' disturb the peace ' in Tibet .
Recent events should remind the world that the rights of the Tibetan people are constantly being violated and that the issue of Tibet is not a closed chapter , because the Tibetans will certainly continue to insist on respect for their independence , and they will do so with ever-increasing clamour .
3 .
Zimbabwe
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolution on Zimbabwe .
Mr President , this is not the first time we have discussed the method of governing employed by Robert Mugabe and his party .
In July 2008 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution implementing sanctions against Robert Mugabe and his entourage .
The reason for this decision was , just like today , serious violations of human rights by the ruling administration .
New cases of intimidation , arrests and also the uninvestigated disappearance of political rivals of the ruling party confirm to us that Robert Mugabe and his political party know that a fair and transparent political contest would strip them of power and raise the prospect of penalties for terrorising the population and pillaging the wealth of the country over many years .
We can surely all agree on the adoption of the draft resolution , in the hope that measures initiated by the EU may assist the people of Zimbabwe , who are terrorised by their government , to reverse , with the assistance of civic and opposition leaders , the current difficult situation in the country by means that are as peaceful as possible .
For the European Union to accredit an ambassador of Robert Mugabe in this situation would surely be seen as an affront to decent people .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , let us try , at least through our political behaviour , to promote important political changes in Southern Africa .
author . - Mr President , since I have been in this Parliament , some twelve years now , we have been trying to help the people of Zimbabwe have better lives and greater optimism for the future .
We have been clear on two points .
Firstly , that as long as Robert Mugabe remained in power , protected by a small self-serving element in Zanu-PF and the security forces , pillaging the nation 's wealth for their own enrichment , there was little prospect of real change .
Secondly , that it was up to the people of Zimbabwe , with the support of their African neighbours - and here I name South Africa in particular of course - to bring about the necessary change .
Maybe , just maybe , there is at last some movement in the right direction .
You know when Mugabe is worried : he starts to panic .
His police and militia start attacking anyone they see as opponents .
The MDC is supposed to be in a power-sharing coalition , but in the past few days , MDC Ministers and MPs , as well as human rights activists , have been beaten up and arrested .
I suppose Mugabe is increasingly nervous on two counts .
He has seen what has happened to his friend and main bankroller , Gaddafi ; and just a week ago , on 31 March , the Southern African Development Community , which includes South Africa and all Zimbabwe 's neighbours , at last voiced its grave concern at the resurgence of violence in Zimbabwe .
It has called for an end to that violence and for all elements of the global political agreement to be implemented .
It has appointed a team to work out a road map to peaceful , free and fair elections in Zimbabwe , and today , that team is in Harare .
We are calling on European governments and the EU to intensify their engagement to use all their political influence in Southern Africa to help bring about rapid change for the better in Zimbabwe and pave the way for properly monitored elections to be held in an atmosphere free from intimidation .
Until there is evidence of real change , the restrictive measures specifically targeting Mugabe and his close allies must remain in place .
In this regard , there is no way that the EU should accredit Mugabe 's unilaterally appointed envoy as ambassador .
Once the people of Zimbabwe have their freedom restored , and genuine democracy and the rule of law established , I feel sure that the international community , including the EU , stands ready to come forward with generous assistance .
Mr President , I have been involved with the situation in Zimbabwe for some ten years now , by my reckoning .
I used to work for a development organisation in Amsterdam and , every now and then , we would bring Zimbabwean human rights activists to the Netherlands , to Europe , in order to give them some breathing space .
Not just so they could get to know other activists and swap stories , but also to give them an opportunity to get away from Zimbabwe for a little while .
One of the people I met at that time was Abel Chikomo , whom we have also mentioned in this resolution .
A human rights activist who has never lost his enthusiasm , his motivation , for the cause in all these years .
It is because of people like him that we are adopting these kinds of resolutions because , to be honest , I do not think that Mr Mugabe is losing any sleep over this .
What these resolutions are about is ensuring that he and his colleagues from the MDC have renewed motivation to continue their work .
What could we possibly aim to do with these resolutions other than enforcing sanctions ?
I would therefore insist that we tighten the Kimberley Process for the trade in conflict diamonds to such an extent that diamonds from Zimbabwe are prevented from being offered for sale at all , because they are the reason why the government has been violating human rights , oppressing people , using child labour and so forth .
Our involvement in Zimbabwe is well known , but we should continue to mention it , again and again , precisely because of people like Abel Chikomo .
author . - Mr President , it is a matter of grave concern that the human rights situation in Zimbabwe has worsened during the last months in particular , and this concern relates to Zanu-PF 's deliberate obstruction of the Zimbabwean government of national unity .
The European Parliament must demand an immediate end to the persecution of the political opposition to Zanu-PF , of civil activists who are being arrested and tortured , and of NGOs , which have been raided and whose members have been detained arbitrarily .
The EU should keep its restrictive measures against individuals and entities with links to the Mugabe regime in place until there is real evidence of a change for the better in Zimbabwe .
The Zimbabwean people should also be given freedom of expression without the fear of violent persecution , arbitrary imprisonment or torture , and those who have been committing systematic political harassment should be prosecuted .
The wave of oppression that is breaking over Zimbabwe is a clear sign of the trouble that will precede the coming elections .
The international community and , in particular , the political players in the region , such as the Southern African Development Community , cannot tolerate the harassment and arbitrary arrests carried out by Zanu-PF and the security forces against civil society activists and members and supporters of the MDC , and they have to demand greater respect for human rights before the elections take place .
Police raids on offices of human rights organisations , such as the Zimbabwe Human Rights Forum and several others , allegedly in searches for subversive material , and the arrests of various NGO workers and members of the MDC itself , along with students and young activists , which have intensified since February , are tactics in an unacceptable campaign of intimidation .
Instead of launching a campaign of terror against those who refuse to sign a petition against the restrictive measures imposed by the EU on leaders linked to Mugabe , the leaders of Zanu-PF should pay more attention to the lessons to be drawn from the Arab Spring , and allow truly free elections to take place .
deputising for the author . - Mr President , firstly , I want to say that I am speaking on behalf of my colleague , Alain Cadec , who was to be the speaker here this afternoon .
Of the three topics we are discussing , this is by far the worst and probably the most recurring , as speakers have said .
Robert Mugabe has been strutting the world stage for far too long now and has been behaving in a most dictatorial and brutal fashion towards his own people , and particularly towards opponents within his country .
The government of national unity , which was set up in 2009 to bring about democracy , is obviously not working , due to his efforts to ensure that it does not .
The intimidation , arbitrary arrests and disappearances - which is probably another way of saying summary executions - of opponents , particularly in recent months , is quite unacceptable .
Even NGOs have not escaped : their offices have been raided and their staff have been detained , so it is quite obvious that action needs to be taken against this dictator .

As Mr Van Orden said , at least the African Union is now beginning to form some class of opposition to him , and that gives us here in the European Union an opportunity to side with it and to bring every possible diplomatic force that we have at our disposal to bear on this issue to ensure , firstly , that Mr Mugabe stops the arrests and the executions , and secondly , that the constitution is accepted for the freedom of the Zimbabwean people , which will lead to free elections and the establishment of a truly democratic government in Zimbabwe .
Mr President , we all know that the 2008 agreement , implemented in 2009 , for the sharing of power between Robert Mugabe and Morgan Tsvangirai , or between Zanu-PF and the MDC , was not an ideal agreement , nor was it an agreement to bring about an ideal world , but it was the only possible agreement to try to improve the situation of human rights and democracy in Zimbabwe .
The fact is that Mr Mugabe and his allies have done everything they can to ensure that this agreement does not work .
They have used pressure and intimidation in attempts to break the opposition movement , which now has a majority in the lower house of parliament .
Just a few minutes ago , it was reported that there have been attacks and violence towards people who had gathered around a memorial where there were MDC militants .
It is vital that the EU does not avert its gaze from what is happening in Zimbabwe , that it does not allow Mr Mugabe to get away with this final trick of appointing an ambassador without going through his country 's constitutional mechanisms , and that it also ensures that the sale of diamonds does not profit Mr Mugabe and his allies .

Mr President , not everyone in Zimbabwe will be happy about today 's debate , since in a few days ' time , 18 April will be Independence Day in Zimbabwe .
Those who do wrong things in this country will have their celebration spoiled .
Agreements concerning the distribution of power are often problematic .
This is due to the fact that generally , they do not reflect the result of a democratic decision of the citizens , but a compromise forced by the situation .
This was precisely the case in Zimbabwe .
However , agreements on the power sharing can be acceptable and may have a positive impact on society if certain conditions are met .
One of them is the improvement of the human rights situation .
That is why we are dealing with human rights in this country .
For example , it is questionable whether the restrictive measures represent a necessary and effective tool .
However , we must not allow people who do not want to sign a petition calling for the abolition of these measures to be beaten and harassed .
That is why we defend those who struggle for human rights .
Mr President , Mugabe 's party and its mechanisms , as my fellow Members said , are currently threatening , torturing and striking out against anyone fighting for democracy , democratic freedoms and the transition to a smooth democratic regime in Zimbabwe .
We are responsible for what is happening in Africa .
We have intervened on numerous occasions in the history of democracy on this continent , especially at the beginning when these new countries were being created , and we have obstructed democratic procedures when they threatened our interests .
As such , we have a double duty to help Zimbabwe acquire a democratically elected government .
Emotionally , this situation is extremely important to Greeks .
We had a very harsh dictatorship from 1967 to 1974 and , at that time , any condemnation from the Council of Europe or an international organisation gave hope to the citizens fighting in Greece .
That is why we must not brook any relations with illegally appointed representatives of Zimbabwe and former associates of the Mugabe regime , and the European Union , together with the countries in its region , must guarantee the transition of Zimbabwe to democracy and the application of the Kimberley Process .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the EU supports the Kimberley Process , which aims to eliminate African conflict diamonds - or so-called blood diamonds - from the global market .
However , recent developments in Zimbabwe are worrying .
The Chairman of the Kimberley Process , Mr Mathieu Yamba from the Democratic Republic of the Congo , has decided unilaterally , and without consultation , to allow the marketing of diamonds from Zimbabwe 's Marange mine .
This mine , which was debated in the House last year , was seized by President Robert Mugabe and his cronies .
Hundreds of people were dispossessed of their homes and there are reliable reports of his security forces torturing , raping , and even killing , local residents .
The sale of diamonds from the Marange mine will help Mugabe to further consolidate his tyrannical hold on Zimbabwe and , indeed , enrich his Zanu-PF thugs .
I therefore urge the European Union , as a party to the Kimberley Process , to raise this scandal at the highest level and insist on the restoration of consensus-based decision making in the Kimberley Process .
More generally , I have long been calling for a similar system , a certification , to cover other natural resources extracted in Africa in order to prevent brutal governments or guerrilla groups from selling minerals to fund arms purchases .
I am pleased to be working alongside the London-based , internationally renowned , human rights NGO Global Witness in this endeavour , in which the US Administration is leading the way with the passing of the Dodd-Frank Act .
( RO ) Mr President , let me begin by saying that whenever I hear talk of Robert Mugabe , I see the Romanian dictator , Nicolae Ceauşescu , before me .
In actual fact , in the 1980s , Mugabe was a regular guest of Ceauşescu 's , along with Gaddafi .
I am grateful to Mr Van Orden because he reminded me of the link between Mugabe and Gaddafi .
In fact , I think that Mugabe has learnt something from Ceauşescu , namely , hatred for civil society activists .
The 46 members of civil society who were arrested on 19 February by the security forces in Zimbabwe are currently charged with treason .
They are now at risk of being sentenced to death .
This is the penalty .
Their only ' crime ' is that they discussed what happened in Egypt and Tunisia .
The solution for the Mugabe regime is basically to hold fair and free elections .
Let us hope that this will be possible on this occasion .
( FI ) Mr President , in February , the EU Foreign Affairs Council adopted conclusions concerning the situation in Zimbabwe .
The period for EU sanctions to be in effect would be continued , because no adequate progress had really been made in the country 's internal reforms .
The lifting of restrictions will require tangible progress to be made in the implementation of the political power sharing agreement of 2008 .
That apparent power sharing agreement was unable to prevent Mugabe 's security forces from continuing to persecute his opponents , and right now , they are being arrested , tortured and murdered , even right up to ministerial level .
Since EU sanctions are not targeted at the people of Zimbabwe , the EU at present is still the country 's biggest provider of aid , which it grants , in particular , for agriculture and food production .
The EU must continue to put pressure on Mugabe , and if there is a decision to hold elections , the EU should be involved as an observer .
( PL ) Mr President , since our last debate on Zimbabwe in October last year , the situation in this country in southern Africa has not changed .
Unemployment has reached 90 % , average life expectancy is 44 years , and the citizens of this country have no access to basic healthcare services .
It is obvious that the political agreement reached two years ago by President Mugabe and Prime Minister Tsvangirai has failed to meet the hopes placed in it and that a new , fully democratic solution is needed .
The internal situation in Zimbabwe has not changed in the last six months , but the external situation has .
Today , we are debating a country in the context of the ' Spring of Nations ' in Africa , and although Harare is 6 000 kilometres away from Tunis , the most recent case of Côte d 'Ivoire shows that sometimes , democracy knows no barriers at all .
The European Parliament therefore urges the government of Zimbabwe to take into account the current international situation and the strong reorientation in domestic politics and , above all , to cease repression of the political opposition , to release its representatives from the prisons and allow them to participate in the elections .
Six months ago , I said that a poor country like Zimbabwe cannot afford to look for alternative problems .
Today , I think that the African ' Spring of Nations ' puts an additional strain on the political debt of President Mugabe .

( RO ) Mr President , as a member of the Delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament , I firmly believe that the European Union , and Lady Ashton in particular , should take a strong stand against the actions of the Mugabe regime involving the intimidation and harassment of human rights activists , and encourage respect for public rights and freedoms , including the freedom of expression and assembly , which Zimbabwe has formally committed to at a global level .
Zimbabwe must abide by its international commitments , including the African Charter of Human and Peoples ' Rights , by repealing all its national laws which contravene the international texts on the protection of human rights .
I also sincerely believe that countries in the region , and mainly South Africa , could get involved in supporting the return to democracy and respect for human rights in Zimbabwe .
( RO ) Mr President , the events currently going on in Zimbabwe sound an alarm bell for the human rights situation on the African continent .
With the prospect of the elections in June , President Mugabe is conducting a campaign of intimidation against his rival candidates .
Hundreds of government officials , human rights activists and opponents of the regime have been arrested during the last two months .
This situation is unacceptable .
In addition , the drafting of a democratic constitution has been postponed for a year by Mugabe .
The new fundamental law would have guaranteed that the elections were held in transparent circumstances .
I should point out that the country 's economic situation is deeply affected .
The President supports nationalisation of the mining sector , which is the main economic sector in Zimbabwe .
Such a measure is harmful as it is precisely the foreign investments in this sector which have maintained the state 's stability in the wake of the economic crisis .
( FI ) Mr President , in Zimbabwe , President Mugabe and the Zanu-PF Party have not managed to keep to the terms of the Global Political Agreement concluded in 2009 .
Zimbabwe has been unable to move towards democracy .
On the contrary , in the past few months , there has been a clear increase in the intimidation of political opponents and the number of arbitrary arrests and disappearances .
Efforts to create stability will not bear fruit in a political climate like the present one .
Zimbabwe is still a country where you can be abused or tortured for your political opinions .
The legislative system , which suppresses free and open journalism , restricts the right to freedom of speech .
Journalists are harassed .
Everything should be done to support the country 's progress towards genuine democracy and economic development .
It is only right and fitting that , in February this year , the European Council decided to extend restrictive measures concerning people and organisations connected with the Mugabe administration and to keep a record of the blacklist .
I also think that these should be continued until there is real evidence of genuine change in Zimbabwe .
However , the measures should only be targeted at Zimbabwe 's corrupt government and must not be allowed to exacerbate the plight of the Zimbabwean people .
( DE ) Mr President , back when I was a child , I received letters from what was then Rhodesia .
Three of my grandfather 's sisters were Catholic nuns in the then Rhodesia and in South Africa .
They never wrote of the people of Rhodesia having to go hungry .
What we hear from this country today is simply intolerable .
Rhodesia , and later Zimbabwe , were the bread basket of southern Africa .
Mr Mugabe - a communist socialist dictator - has managed to turn this bread basket into a famine zone .
I would like to thank all the fellow Members who have put this matter back on the agenda .
It is intolerable that this dictator , Mr Mugabe , has been allowed to terrorise the people of Zimbabwe for so long .
I believe that the key to ending this lies in southern Africa .
I regret to say that for as long as South Africa fails to put this dictator in his place , he will continue to terrorise his people .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I think we would all agree that Zimbabwe and its human rights violations have been on our agenda for far too long .
Every glimpse of hope of some positive development is immediately crushed by outbursts of political repression and violence .
This is exactly what happened again just a couple of months ago .
The European Union therefore had to proceed to renew its restrictive measures , for the eighth time , in February this year .
By this clear gesture , we wanted to underline the critical importance of an agreement between the government parties on the necessary steps leading to elections in the country .
In this context , the EU emphasised its willingness to revise its decision in response to further concrete developments on the ground .
The EU is deeply concerned at the upsurge in political violence seen in recent months in Zimbabwe .
On 11 March , together with 21 embassies and representations , the EU issued a statement to express its concerns over the increase in what appears to be politically motivated intimidation and violence .
In this context , the EU welcomes the outcome of the recent SADC summit on 31 March 2011 .
The SADC communiqué calls for an immediate end to violence , intimidation , hate speech and harassment , and calls upon the government of Zimbabwe to complete all necessary steps to hold an election .
It offers assistance so that elections can be organised in accordance with SADC principles and guidelines governing democratic elections .
For that reason , the SADC will appoint officials to join the South African facilitation team and work with the joint monitoring and implementation committee .
The EU believes that strengthened facilitation and mediation efforts by SADC and South Africa are key to preventing further instability in Zimbabwe .
The EU welcomes the region 's efforts to mediate in the Zimbabwean crisis .
South Africa , in its capacity as facilitator , together with the SADC , as guarantor of the Global Political Agreement , has decided to accredit the Zimbabwean Ambassador .
At this point in time , keeping a formal channel of communication open with Zimbabwe and maintaining a dialogue with the inclusive government is vital , and we should not jeopardise the position of the EU Ambassador in Harare .
The EU will act and proceed in close coordination with all EU Member States .
The EU remains the largest provider of development assistance to Zimbabwe .
We want to clearly express that we are tough on the regime , but we try to assist the people .
With the disbursement of approximately 365 million since the establishment of the Global Political Agreement in 2009 , we are - as I said - the largest donor .
Resources are only channelled through UN bodies and specialised NGOs .
Since 2009 , the EU has also supported governance reforms , as stipulated in the Global Political Agreement , including the constitutional reform process .
The EU also funds human rights programmes , including programmes from human rights defenders .
We just have to hope that all the international pressure will finally lead to free and fair elections in Zimbabwe and to the gradual normalisation of the very difficult situation in this country .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
In recent months , many opponents of the Mugabe regime as well as NGO representatives have been arbitrarily arrested by the Zimbabwean authorities .
Mr Mugabe 's party has systematically prevented Zimbabwe 's government of national unity , formed in 2009 , from paving the way for a democratic transition and credible elections .
There must be an immediate end to all political violence perpetrated by Mr Mugabe 's supporters .
The European Union and its Member States must actively engage with the African Union and the Southern African Development Community so as to ensure that future elections are not held in a climate of intimidation and violence .
I welcome the fact that the European Parliament resolution calls on all Zimbabwe 's political parties to work together in drafting a new democratic constitution , acceptable to all the people of Zimbabwe , prior to the next elections .
Once again , we see that intimidation , arrest 