Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 19 June 2003 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Piet Dankert , from Stiens in Friesland , whose enthusiasm for social democracy had been kindled by his Frisian grandfather , started his career as a teacher , and made an important contribution in Europe in many roles , of which I should like to list a few examples .
Openness .
The election of Piet Dankert to President of the European Parliament was the first time that a decision of such significance had not been reached internally among groups .
The election was held in an open and almost professional manner , and included a press campaign .
This action was about twenty years ahead of its time .
Piet Dankert , monsieur le Président .
Perseverance .
As a good European , Piet believed in the right and proper use of European money .
He took an interest in any report of possible misuse .
However , he was also keen to find out whether the accounts were true .
Sometimes , the facts were somewhat distorted to ensure that other bodies with more powers would actually take action .
Democracy .
In 1979 , Piet Dankert managed to give the European Parliament more bite by deploying budget legislation as a political instrument in an inventive manner .
He threatened that Parliament would vote against the Budget , and this is exactly what happened .
Ever since , the Commission and Council have been forced to take the European Parliament seriously .
Vision .
Piet Dankert wanted a more social and democratic Europe with a clearly defined role in a world with which it shows solidarity .
Piet Dankert featured in this connection as a level-headed and realistic champion of the European ideal .
In the capacity of secretary of state for Europe , he tabled proposals for a more democratic Europe during the Dutch Presidency in Maastricht in 1992 .
Governments were not quite ready for this .
Piet Dankert observed with satisfaction that the results of the Convention were not dissimilar from his own proposals all those years ago .
Enjoyment .
In 1979 , Piet Dankert made a very conscious and clear decision in favour of the European Parliament over the Dutch Second Chamber .
According to him , operating at international level was more fun and more exciting .
He also knew how to enjoy the pleasant sides of his job .
From time to time , Piet was able to appreciate a meal consisting of a little more than a cheese roll and a mug of buttermilk .
Relations .
He was averse to hoo-ha , could be very obstinate , yet was at times almost shy .
He was a kind and honest man , and was able to identify with the political way of thinking of people from other countries .
Over the past few days , and during the commemorative service yesterday in the Great Church at Edam , many confirmed this image of him as Monsieur l 'Europe .
We hope that all these impressions , qualities and images of Piet Dankert will be of comfort to his wife , Paulette , and his children .
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 26 June has been distributed .
The following changes have been proposed
Mr President , as you will be aware , the relevant Rule states that there will be a debate and vote .
I presume there will be a debate as well , as the Rule specifies .
Mr President , I would like to raise the matter of the European Youth Parliament and the funding of EUR 180 000 , which this Parliament approved for the year 2003 .
The difficulty is that the Youth Parliament is now at risk of having to cancel its event planned for 11-20 July because the Commission is refusing to confirm that this money is available to it in order to run this event .
I am appealing to you , Mr President , to contact the Commission as a matter of urgency to seek to ensure that this money is made available , or at the very least that a letter is sent to confirm that it is available , so that these young people - who , after all , are the future politicians who will maintain this institution and other European Union institutions - are allowed to continue with their work .
They need this confirmation urgently because they need to access temporary financing in order to overcome the difficulty created by the Commission .
We will contact the Commission on that matter this afternoon .
Mr President , less than a month on from the visit of the President of the People 's Democratic Republic of Algeria , Mr Bouteflika , to this House , which should have strengthened the ties between the European Union and Algeria , a serious incident has taken place .
The Algerian ambassador to the United Nations has requested that the representative of the United Nations Development Programme , UNDP , leave Algeria .
For its part , the World Bank has decided to suspend programmes in the country until the presidential elections in 2004 .
I would ask , Mr President , for a response from Parliament , that a letter of response be sent to the President of the Republic and the Algerian Government and that a letter of support be sent to the United Nations Secretary General and to the person concerned .
I would also call upon the Commission to arrange a debate with the United Nations on the situation of this country , with regard to judicial reforms and , in particular , the earthquake .
I hope , Mr President , that you will act on my request .
Mr Schmidt , I do not want to open a debate on this issue at the moment .
Ordinarily , this should be signalled to the services in advance .
Then , as I have done with the other issues of which we have been informed in advance , I would put it to the House for adoption or rejection .
At this stage I regret to say that you have missed the boat with regard to setting the agenda .
We did not deal with it last week at the Conference of Presidents and it was not signalled to us under the relevant procedure in time to deal with it today .
We have already been through the adoption of the agenda and the issue was not raised at that time .
It seems to me that I have covered the requirements under the Rules of Procedure .
Under the Rule you quote it clearly says that we adopt such changes at the start of a part-session .
Regrettably , you raised the point when we had finished that part of the procedure .
Mr President , you are absolutely right but I was not fast enough .
I was told that the boat was there last week , and the question was raised .
We can debate it in September but it is unfortunate because the matter ought to have gone before the Council this week .
I will be quicker next time !
Mr President , I wish to raise an issue which has been brought to my attention because of my work with refugees .
It concerns an individual of Iranian origin living in the UK who , on a visit to Syria , was abducted by the Syrian authorities and handed over to the Iranians .
His name is Jamil Bassam and he has been living in the UK for 25 years .
He visited Syria with all the appropriate documents and , along with a colleague , Ibrahim Khodabandeh , was abducted by the Syrian authorities and handed over to Iranian officials .
Given the disquiet voiced in this House on many occasions about the situation in Iran , and the way in which political opponents are treated there , this is obviously a matter of some concern .
I am asking you , therefore , to raise this issue with the Iranian authorities and do what you can to secure his safe release and that of his colleague .
Mr President , my point of order is not as serious as some of the previous ones .
It has been brought to my attention that a Union Jack is flying out of a window between the sixth and seventh floors of the Louise Weiss building .
This might be a rash of patriotic enthusiasm or the flag might be just hanging out to dry .
We cannot tell from looking at it from the outside who is responsible for this ; I have my suspicions though .
Could we ask whoever has hung out this Union Jack to perhaps remove it , unless we are all to hang our flags outside the windows .
As you know , Mr President , this is against the rules .
All I can say to you , Mrs Banotti , in your role as chairman of the College of Quaestors , is PACE !
Mr President , another ten emigrants drowned yesterday while trying to reach Italy .
They wanted to work in Europe .
In the last few weeks , hundreds of emigrants have suffered the same tragic fate off the coasts of southern Italy , Andalucia and the Canary Islands .
I mention this state of affairs once again in an attempt to induce Parliament and the Union to take the necessary political steps to avoid these intolerable tragedies and prevent them from happening ever again .
In any event , let us remember these innocent people .
Mr President , please allow me to thank you on behalf of all Andalusian fishermen , and on my own behalf , for the efforts you are making to persuade the Portuguese authorities to free Agustín García , the fisherman who , as you know , has spent more than two months in prison .
Mr President , the Guadiana fishing agreement between Spain and Portugal expires today , and it would be really positive if the negotiations on the renewal of this agreement were to begin with a gesture of friendship and goodwill on the part of Portugal , freeing the imprisoned fisherman , as well as a commitment on the part of all fishermen to respect all the agreements signed .
I would like to thank you once again and I would ask you not to forget this issue and to communicate this proposal to the relevant authorities .
Mr President , I , like a previous speaker , wish to refer to the case of Mr Abrahim Khodabandeh and Mr Jamil Bassam , both of whom are residents of Barnet , in my constituency .
Mr Khodabandeh - who has been resident in the UK for many years and was granted refugee status - was travelling recently in Syria to assist humanitarian efforts to deal with the consequences of the war in Iraq .
He was forcibly removed from Syria and taken to Iran where he and his colleague , Mr Bassam , remain in custody .
Mr Khodabandeh 's family and friends are deeply concerned about his fate .
I ask the House to urge the Iranian authorities to release Mr Khodabandeh , since his deportation contravened the ordinary principles of international law .
We are very concerned about the circumstances of the deportation .
I urge the House to add its efforts to the campaign to free these two people .
As you said , our colleague , Mrs Lambert also raised this point .
Yes , I will prepare an exchange of letters with the relevant authorities and send copies to both of you in the course of the week .
Mr President , I refer to the continuing media reports that US President Bush is accusing the EU and EU leaders of funding Hamas .
These reports have been ongoing over the past week .
I ask you to communicate strongly to President Bush that there is no truth in this allegation .
In Rome this last weekend , at a meeting of the EU-US delegation , I and other Members of Parliament strongly refuted this allegation and outlined the stringent budgetary controls in place for the funding of the Palestinian Authority , to make sure that such funds are not misappropriated .
I urge you to raise this issue with President Bush at the earliest possible opportunity .
The next item is the report ( A5-0246 / 2003 ) by Klaus-Heiner Lehne , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the request for waiver of the immunity of Mr Daniel Marc Cohn-Bendit ( ( 2000 / 2109 ( IMM ) ) .
Mr President , I hope I will not use up all these five minutes .
This procedure has to do with an application for the waiver of Mr Cohn-Bendit 's parliamentary immunity made by the Public Prosecutor 's Office in Frankfurt on the basis of charges laid by a member of the Hessen Land parliament .
In these charges , Mr Cohn-Bendit is accused of obstructing the course of a prosecution , in that - as stated in newspaper reports - he , together with others , a number of decades ago now , helped a Mr Klein , a terrorist alleged to have taken part in the OPEC attack in Vienna , to flee to France .
In the normal course of events , Parliament would comply with such a request when it was made .
There were , however , a number of peculiarities , which led the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to take a somewhat different approach to this matter .
One reason why it did so was that the original application submitted to us was - let me put it frankly - relatively flimsy ; that is to say , its substance did not amount to very much .
The result of this was that , in the summer of 2000 - only a few weeks after the application was made to us - the then chairman of our committee , Mrs Ana Palacio , wrote a letter to the German authorities asking for further detailed information .
The German authorities supplied this further detailed information after two more years had elapsed - that is how long this process took - and this meant that our committee could then rule on the matter .
I myself had , as rapporteur , originally proposed that , in this specific case , a conditional waiver might be considered , as is provided for in our Rules of Procedure , but - as I mentioned earlier - there is a whole array of peculiarities associated with this case , and these meant that the great majority on the committee saw it as right and proper not to waive immunity in this specific case .
Such was the prevailing opinion .

One of the reasons for this is that , as regards at least some of the things Mr Cohn-Bendit may have got up to at the time , he did them at the behest of the German internal secret services , or with their direct or indirect involvement ; it is in any case quite remarkable that the secret services should involve themselves in such things , while , on the other hand , the law enforcement authorities of the same country seek to take action against them .
Another point was that Mr Cohn-Bendit indicated that it was him alone against whom investigations were in progress , rather than against all the others named in this newspaper article as possible accomplices .
The third point has to do with the proceedings against the terrorist Mr Klein , which have now run their course , and in which the judge , in stating the grounds on which his judgment was based expressed admiration for what Mr Cohn-Bendit had done and depicted it as a typical example of what constructive help could be given to enable such people to break free from terrorist circles .
Against this background , the committee came to the conclusion that the special circumstances of this case mean that the waiver of immunity does not appear to be justified .
I would like to make it quite clear that this does not mean that we are accusing the Frankfurt Public Prosecutor 's Office of fumus persecutionis , that is , of criminal proceedings intended to prejudice Mr Cohn-Bendit 's political activities .
That is something that I too repeatedly opposed in the debate in the committee , quite simply because , as German law on immunity stands , a German public prosecutor 's office simply cannot do otherwise ; it is not permitted even to open a file and commence investigations before a definite decision has been taken on the waiver of immunity .
Taking the overall circumstances of this case into account , however , it seems appropriate to us - particularly in view of the European elections being not that far off - that immunity should not be waived in this case .
I ask the plenary to endorse the committee 's proposal .
Mr President , there are some points I would like to underline in supporting what Mr Lehne said at the beginning of this debate .
First , and most importantly , we are dealing with a matter of great public concern , but a matter that has been in the public domain for a long time .
We are dealing with a course of events which Mr Cohn-Bendit has not merely not denied but has also publicly avowed .
We are dealing with a course of events in respect of which Mr Cohn-Bendit was specifically praised by the trial court involved in the trial of Mr Klein some years ago , where the court drew attention to the courage and public spirit of the people who had assisted in getting that particular accused person to come out of hiding and give himself up to the public authorities .
So this is not a case of somebody seeking surreptitiously to hide from accusations or from public justice , but of somebody who has openly avowed his actions .
Mr Lehne was absolutely right to say that there can be no question of the public prosecutors in Frankfurt being themselves in any way deviously motivated .
They have a public duty to take up a complaint that has been laid before them on ostensibly justifiable grounds .
However , it does not follow that those who laid the accusation before the public prosecutors , thereby triggering that public duty , were themselves wholly lacking in any deviousness of motive .
When account is taken of two aspects of the public interest here today - firstly , that there ought not to be unreasonable protection of MEPs or anybody else from public prosecution where circumstances warrant it and , secondly and importantly , that electoral debate and discussion should be able to go forward without unreasonable impediment or harassment of leading figures in it - the balance of the public interest in this case seems to be absolutely clear : the public prosecutors are doing their duty and we should do ours .
In this case , that duty points clearly in the direction indicated by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to decline waiving the immunity .
Mr President , I have taken the floor to speak on this report because , at last , Parliament is taking into consideration the specific nature of the request made by the national authorities when addressing the issue of immunity .
In the case of Mr Cohn-Bendit , we have decided not to waive immunity for a very specific reason , although , ultimately , it might have been in Mr Cohn-Bendit 's interests for this trial to go ahead .
For Parliament , on the other hand , the fact that the case has been raised many years after the alleged incident and that there could objectively be a suspicion or a suggestion that , behind this belated recognition by the German authorities of the possible guilt of Mr Cohn-Bendit , there might conceivably lie ' fumus persecutionis ' , justifies the stance taken by our committee , which I and my fellow Radical Members support .
I am saying this in anticipation of other cases too , Mr President , for although it is true that in some countries we have reduced the scope of immunity , confining it strictly to the political activities of each Member of Parliament , it is also true that the scope of political activities cannot be limited solely to what is said in the Chamber , at least where those political and legal systems which provide for extensive immunity for Members of Parliament are concerned .
Until we have the single Statute for Members of the European Parliament , until Mr Rothley 's line becomes law in our Union , I hope , from this point of view , that it will be precisely the examination of our texts which will prompt the Intergovernmental Conference to accept the idea that the Members ' Statute should have a prominent place in the forthcoming European Constitution and specifically recommend that specific immunity and specific privileges be included in the Statute for Members of the European Parliament .
There is no doubt that the evidence in a case which indicates the political nature of an act can fall down , whether in this or in future cases .
For example , as you know , you will soon be called upon to deal with the case of Mr Dupuis , who handed out doses of hashish as a way of condemning Italian legislation on drugs , which will lead to the opening of a case .
In conclusion , Mr President , I support the line taken by Mr MacCormick , and I believe that , in acting in this way , Parliament will be setting a precedent for subsequent cases .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be tomorrow at noon .
Mr President , this is one of those cases concerning the immunity of a Member of Parliament which raises in a very sharp form the issue of the immunity or non-immunity of Members when they are indulging in political activity outside Parliament .
It is very clear law that expressions of opinions or votes cast in this House can never be the subject of legal action or prosecution anywhere .
That is an essential part of the liberty of discussion in a democratic assembly .
However , in the course of their duties , Members of this House often indulge in political speech and political activity elsewhere , most particularly in their own constituencies and in their home state - for example at party congresses .
The case we have before us concerning Mr Camre arises from a speech at his party congress in Denmark in 2001 , shortly after the desperate events of 11 September .
In the course of a speech to his party congress , Mr Camre made some very strong and , in my personal judgment , highly offensive remarks about Muslims living in the West .
All the countries of the West , he said , are infiltrated by Muslims and some of them speak nicely to us while they are waiting to become sufficiently numerous to get rid of us , as they have done in Sudan , Indonesia , Nigeria and the Balkans .
There are other similar or even more unpleasant remarks .
Under Danish criminal law , section 226 b of the Danish Criminal Code , it is an offence to make statements constituting derisory and humiliating treatment of a group of people .
In this case the accusation is that the statements made were derisory and humiliating treatment of people in Denmark , namely people of Muslim belief or family background .
Under European law , the position is that a Member of this House , acting in his home state , enjoys the same immunity from prosecution and legal intervention as would a Member of the home parliament .
Under the Danish constitution , a Member accused of a criminal offence such as this enjoys immunity from prosecution unless the Folketing - the parliament - waives that immunity .
We are informed that normally the Folketing would waive immunity in a case of this kind .
However , the European Parliament has always rightly said that we must have a common set of principles concerning the waiver of immunity that apply to all MEPs in all countries .
Therefore , the issue is not would the Danish Parliament waive immunity ? but ought this Parliament to waive immunity in a case of this kind ? where the words complained of are certainly to any ordinary judgment very offensive - to put it mildly - but where they are also unquestionably statements made in the course of a political activity .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market instructed me - rightly - to look into the whole range of the precedents , the decisions that this House has taken about immunity in these sorts of situations .
It became clear to the officials who looked into it , and myself , that Parliament has a universal practice of declining to waive immunity in the context of prosecutions where what is involved is a prosecution of matters which are directly the content of a Member 's political activity .
That being so , while I have to say that I myself have extreme disgust for the remarks that were made , I consider it to be my duty as rapporteur , and in any event it is the unanimous opinion of the Legal Affairs Committee , that in this case the Parliament ought to inform the Danish authorities that it declines to waive the immunity of Mr Camre and I so recommend .
I must say , as I reviewed the case law , it did seem to me personally - and this is a purely personal opinion - that it might be that over the years we have cast the net of parliamentary immunity rather wide .
It would not be appropriate or just to use an individual case arbitrarily to change the practice , but it might be worth the Committee on Constitutional Affairs reviewing the question of how far we ought to expect parliamentary immunity to extend , how far we should wish it to .
I believe it would be appropriate for the Constitutional Affairs Committee to consider this if in due course it were invited to do so .
But that is a separate issue .
There is no doubt that the required course of justice in upholding the long-standing principles and case law of this Parliament is to decline to waive immunity in this case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I share Mr MacCormick 's view .
Mr Camre 's utterances , which are at issue here , are surely utterly unacceptable and intolerable , nor could they ever enjoy anyone 's political support .
That , however , is not what this was about .
This was simply about the question as to whether this is one of those instances - to be found in previous exemplary cases - in which we have , in the past , come to the decision that a Member 's freedom of speech is inseparable from his duties as an MEP , that is to say , from his mandate .
Mr Camre came out with these utterances at his party conference in Denmark , and this is a quite classic case in which we must assume that he was acting in connection with his mandate as an MEP .
I might add that Mr MacCormick 's report , as well as the opinion that our secretariat has been so kind as to draw up , clearly show that this is the decision we came to in the past .
I believe that this House is also under a self-imposed obligation to continue to come to similar decisions , most especially when it is obvious that political activities are concerned .
Apart from that , the different ways in which each Member State deals with these things will , in the long term , only be resolved if - as Mr Rothley has mentioned in his report - a single European immunity law is soon on the way .
It is the Council that holds the key to this .
Let the Council simply adopt our statute .
The Council would also be making a great contribution to progress if it were to give some thought , perhaps in the course of the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference , as to whether it might be appropriate and possible , in line with our resolutions , to amend the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities as part of the new Treaty provisions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be tomorrow at noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0248 / 2003 ) by François Zimeray , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the request for upholding of the immunity and privileges of Mr Francesco Musotto ( 2002 / 2201 ( IMM ) ) .
Mr President , as a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , I fully agree , of course , with what the rapporteur has just said .
I would , however , like to point out to you , Mr President , and to the House , a further consideration which the rapporteur , not being of Italian origin , was not able to highlight .
Mr Musotto is already on trial in Italy for this incident .
In this situation , and in many similar situations too , a principle is being overlooked inasmuch as we take as a basis - or some people do - the erroneous interpretation of what is , in actual fact , the law .
The Treaties lay down that we are all subject on national territory to the laws , and therefore the immunities , which apply to the national parliaments .
In our case , however , we are not taking into account - or someone , in Mr Musotto 's case , has not taken into account , and that is why I am pointing it out , Mr President - the fact that the immunity granted to the European Parliament - not to its Members but to Parliament itself - is , in any case , completely independent of national arrangements .
No one - neither the Court nor the Public Prosecution Department which has opened the proceedings relating to Mr Musotto - has applied to the European Parliament for authorisation : there has been no request or notification .
Mr Musotto has had to make the request and inform us of his situation himself ; the Presidency and the Committee on Legal Affairs have expressed an opinion and the opinion will now , with tomorrow 's vote , provided that it is still in line with the Committee on Legal Affairs ' proposal , become a Parliamentary document .
Mr President , it is essential that the outcome of tomorrow 's vote is enforced outside this House too , where the Public Prosecution Department in question is concerned , for it is essential not just that it is clear to everybody but - seeing as so much hangs on that word ' immunity ' in my country - that it is enforced as a general principle as well as in the case in point .
Parliament is autonomous , and this has been practice and consolidated case law since Parliament was first established , since Parliament was elected by universal suffrage : too many people forget this .
I therefore ask , Mr President , not just for the House 's decision to be communicated to those to whom it directly relates but for a clear , precise , unambiguous principle to be established , which , thus far , has certainly not been followed by certain courts .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be tomorrow at noon .
Mr President , this is not quite as dry or as difficult as the title makes it sound .
I wish to begin by thanking my colleagues on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their hard work on the amendments on the prospectus directive .
I also wish to thank the Commission for the important facilitating role it has played in reaching what I hope will be an agreed set of amendments when they are voted on Wednesday , and to thank the Greek Presidency - and before that the Danish Presidency - for the preparation of this particular dossier .
I hope we will have an overwhelming vote in favour of the compromise amendments , with the agreement of the Council , and that we will therefore have a prospectus directive later in July when the Ecofin Council meets again .
This is a key part of the Financial Services Action Plan and of creating a single market in financial services .
Instead of having to use 15 separate prospectuses to reach retail investors in the existing European Union , in future an issuer of bonds or shares will only need one .
That will give a passport not just to 15 Member States but to 25 and a market of more than 400 million people .
The single European market in new issues of shares and bonds is set to become a reality .
This will lead to more competition and , therefore , greater choice for investors , cheaper capital for businesses , and more funding opportunities for many businesses that might be denied finance if they were limited to their national market .
Moreover , this key advantage - a single passport - has been achieved without some of the less felicitous baggage that was originally contained in a somewhat rushed proposal from the Commission and that would have added to the regulatory burdens , particularly on smaller listed companies .
This deal ensures that there is no mandatory shelf registration and that there is no mandatory annual updating , unless the issuer intends to continue issuing shares or bonds .
This is a significant achievement for this Parliament in influencing the final shape of this legislation .
Crucially this agreement also confirms the freedom that issuers of bonds have to go to different EU regulators for the approval of their prospectus , so long as the minimum denomination is EUR 1000 or more or , importantly , a nearly equivalent amount in other currencies , so that USD 1000 can also be a minimum amount .
The euro markets raised USD 1.6 trillion equivalent of finance for business last year and 60 % of that finance was in non-euro currencies such as the dollar and the yen .
Europe is the proud home of the international capital market and this deal now gives that international market a way of bringing its benefits across to domestic investors too .
The Council and the Commission have accepted the vast majority of the amendments passed by Parliament at its first reading in March 2002 : on the choice of EU regulator for bonds , on a light touch for small and medium-sized businesses , on tailoring requirements to different issues , on lightening the burden on issues .
Thanks to Parliament 's insistence we have also reached compromise on the ability of national authorities to delegate approval of prospectuses to stock exchanges and others such as the nominated advisors in the aim market .
There will be a review after five years and the Commission may reconsider the commitment to phasing out delegation after eight years .
The political declaration from the Commission is important and it shows an open-mindedness faced with the evidence , which we would obviously expect .
We have also made clear that both national authorities and stock exchanges may continue to insist on higher standards of disclosure and corporate governance as a requirement of listing , if they so wish .
This should put some fears to rest .
As regards the last-minute changes that were agreed only last week by the Council , we have also clarified that existing medium-term note programmes , a very important type of financing structure in the euro markets , can continue unchanged .
Indeed they will now be extended beyond the four Member States which currently recognise them and will also benefit from the passport .
This is a real breakthrough for the single market and this House can be proud of its influence in ensuring that the directive is an effective means of extending competition , choice and efficiency .
. Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that this directive is fundamental for the functioning of primary markets in Europe and for our aim to build an integrated capital market by 2005 .
For the Commission , the prospectus proposal has two aims : to facilitate fund-raising for European issuers and to ensure adequate levels of investor protection .
During the past two years this text has evolved significantly .
There have been some important changes but the text maintains the necessary balance between facilitating for issuers and investor protection .
The Commission amended its proposal to take account of Parliament 's position .
After first reading , 50 out of 62 amendments were taken on board by the Commission in its amended proposal .
The Council 's common position is broadly in line with this amended proposal .
Today I should like to congratulate Parliament on its spirit of collaboration and its willingness to achieve convergence .
We welcome the new amendments tabled by the rapporteur , together with the following Members of Parliament : Mrs Kauppi , Mr Ettl , Mr Goebbels and Mr Blokland .

I am very optimistic that they will be accepted also by the Council .
I much appreciate Parliament 's constructive spirit and I should like in particular to pay tribute to the rapporteur , Mr Huhne , for all his work to get approval for this compromise proposal .
In particular I should like to thank him for his report and for the 21 new amendments he has tabled .
We can accept them in their entirety , as we consider that they improve the text of the common position and contribute towards achieving the goals set by the proposal .
In this context , we reject the first 47 amendments tabled , since those which could be accepted - even partially or in spirit - by the Commission are now covered by the 21 new amendments .
Regarding more particularly Amendment Nos 50 and 67 , related to delegation of tasks from a competent authority to an exchange , I confirm that the Commission in the review to be conducted in accordance with Article 21 will also examine the conditions relating to the sunset period in the same article .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment Nos 69 to 71 since they provide for preferential treatment with respect to banks , and this is against the philosophy of the directive .
Such treatment would create discrimination towards other institutions and distort competition .
That is something the Commission objects to .
Finally , I should like to thank the Greek presidency for its most valuable efforts to reach agreement on this matter now .
It is an important and highly significant achievement .
We must now use our remaining energy reserves to resolve the investment services , transparency and , of course , take-overs directives by the April 2004 deadline .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Huhne , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by giving Mrs Kauppi 's apologies .
She regrets that her flight cannot get her here yet , and so she has asked me to stand in for her .
We know that this directive is an important part of the financial services action plan .
What are this action plan 's strategic objectives for the financial internal market ?
The first is that a single wholesale market for financial services should be guaranteed ; the second is the creation of open and safe retail markets , and the third is the modernisation of the rules of compliance and of the way in which they are monitored .
What is today 's debate about ?
Today we are debating the prospectus to be published when securities are offered to the public or admitted to trading .
What do we mean by a prospectus ?
By that we mean a document published when shares or bonds are issued , containing those items of information considered necessary to investors .
What does the directive aim at ?
It aims to introduce a single passport for prospectuses , approved by the authorities in the country of origin and subsequently recognised throughout the EU for the purposes of the public offering of securities and / or their admission to trading on regulated markets .
In place of the fifteen separate authorisations still required despite two directives on the subject , only one authorisation will be required under the new directive for what will be the twenty-five Member States of the European Union .
I would like to extend very warm thanks to the rapporteur , to the shadow rapporteurs of all the groups , and also to the chairman of the committee , for the great deal of time and effort that they have devoted to this .
Last Thursday , when we were in a conference call , we were in fact even more divided , but it was possible , on the Friday , for us to make a conciliation committee unnecessary ; I think this right and proper , as we have no idea whether the conciliation committee would have enabled us to make any progress or might indeed have jeopardised this important directive .
The six major successes achieved by Parliament mean that we can say yes to the compromise .
As early as first reading stage , we managed to add the sunset clause to the Lamfalussy procedure , to produce a better definition of professional investors and to take greater account of small and medium-sized firms .
At second reading stage , and in recent days , we succeeded in getting a free choice of supervisory authority for non-dividend-bearing securities with a denomination per unit of at least EUR 1 000 , which amounts , de facto , to a free choice of supervisory authority .
We managed to get the deadlines for authorisation reduced ; it is still possible for supervisory authorities to delegate ; and the position will be reviewed after five years .
If , though , the Commission 's report after these five years is an unfavourable one - which I do not expect it will be - the option of delegation will have to lapse after eight years , so that , here too , we have improved the Common Position along the lines desired by Parliament .
This does not mean that everything has been sorted out .
It is a cause of anguish to me that there are two things that have not been achieved .
One is a rule on basic prospectuses for all banks issuing shares , for which I campaigned .
Here - as is , indeed , stated in the recitals - it was not possible to do justice to the aim of this directive , that being to speed the process up .
The directive has rather missed the mark here .
The second thing that did not get through - although this was adopted with the support of all groups in this House - was the increase in maximum value for each issuer from EUR 50 to EUR 100 , in respect of which exceptions are possible .
That would have been a help especially for states such as Austria and Germany , where no prospectus is at present required below this threshold .
Although it is unfortunate that we did not succeed in this , the compromise is , all in all , a good one , and we will therefore be supporting it .

Mr President , it really does take a lot of self-restraint , following this overture by Mr Huhne and Commissioner Bolkestein , not to let a note of discord disturb their duet .
It falls to me , in any case , to congratulate the rapporteur on his work , even if - as far as the outcome is concerned - I do not entirely share his opinion .
The directive on prospectuses for securities forms , without any doubt , an important part of the financial services action plan .
If they are to obtain finance on the capital market , businesses need these reliefs , which they had expected .
As we are also dealing with this matter under some pressure of time , I would be the last to want this issue to go to a conciliation committee .
We - that is , the Economic Affairs Committee - believe that conciliation under Italian aegis could not bring about any fundamental improvements to the status quo .
It is still the case - and we are to vote on this as soon as tomorrow - that countries such as Italy , Spain , and France too , have certain reservations as regards points of detail in the European prospectus , about which you will hear more later .
I believe that , yet again , the Council and the Commission , in discussions on what is a typical codecision issue , are showing themselves to take a less flexible approach to this elementary question of financial markets than this House might have been able to expect .
Our approach and our thinking were in every respect guided by the practice of the market , so that , if I am able to recommend approval of this second-reading compromise , it is more on the basis of the general weighing of the interests involved .
To be able to provide one single information document valid throughout the EU is , though , surely to the advantage of businesses that introduce shares , or make offers to buy , on European stock exchanges .
It is obvious , though , that , in dealing with this matter , we have to consider the transparency of securities markets and , to an increasing extent , the protection of small investors and small and medium-sized enterprises .
A procedure that is as simple and cheap as possible when it comes to the amount of an enterprise 's data that are required and the way in which they are to be updated , is meant to make for easier access to capital markets .
That is what we need .
To some extent - or almost exclusively - we have done justice to this , but our desire to extend , on the basis of liability , protection of small investors by defining responsibilities more clearly - with reference , for example , to analysts or chief accountants - has , unfortunately , met with rejection .
Equally unfortunately , the issue of the venue of jurisdiction has found no clear resolution .
Issuers were allowed to have recourse to the courts in their own countries , an advantage denied to investors .
This may well continue to be a live issue .
It is unfortunate that this immovability , which was not necessary in this case , has resulted in no further progress in the issues in the financial services sector that the public really care about .
Nor were the prevailing customary practices on European markets followed when it came to convertible debentures .
Had these been unambiguously defined , as had indeed been proposed , quality improvements would have followed , because , for example , the right to convert would have gone to the owner of the securities .
This is also highly significant in terms of Basle II , as this type of financial instrument is likely to become more popular .
It baffles me , Commissioner , how a minimum framework of information for regional and local authorities presenting prospectuses for loans in all the EU 's Member States , could come to be regarded as a hindrance rather than as a good thing .
A measure of this sort would be of additional value in view of the EU 's enlargement .
I regard that as regrettable , but at least other points were accepted , among them the choice of a minimum nominal value of EUR 1 000 or USD 1 000 - now determined by reference to the market - for all loans .
The temporary solution of eight years - with the office authorising the prospectus allowing certain tasks to be delegated to the stock exchanges - is of no small significance to smaller financial markets and is a good way of dealing with this .
Last but not least , we can go along with what has been negotiated .
Congratulations to the rapporteur , and no clashing discords to the Commissioner .
Mr President , the proposed arrangements have a dual purpose .
First , to restore the shaken climate of confidence of small working-class investors in the institution of the stock exchange , so that grass-roots savings can continue to be plundered unimpeded and , secondly , to set up a regulatory framework for the action of the big investors .
In other words , the aim is to consolidate the stock exchange as a mechanism for concentrating capital and safeguarding a quick , easy profit for monopoly groups .
The proposals for measures to be taken are not at all convincing .
In its communication , the Commission talks of practices which will improve the reliability of the market and help to attract capital , in other words , they will allay the fears of small investors so that they can plunder their savings with impunity .
Having succeeded in sweetening them with a taste of the profits so that they gamble all their savings , by applying the idea of easy money , they have also managed to turn their heads by inciting them to raise gambling to an art form .
So far , not only have no substantial control measures been taken , but also recent repeated scandals have revealed that even these very control mechanisms have advocated cheating by adopting creative accounting methods , and as a result the savings of the working classes , the capital of small investors and pension funds have grown wings and flown into the coffers of the monopoly groups , which grow rich in this parasitical manner .
The history to date of the stock exchange and of the control mechanisms relating to it show that it is the place where ' big fish eats little fish ' applies absolutely .
The myth that state controls can limit speculation in the very temple of speculation has now been exposed .
Only an economic and political way out that puts grass-roots needs first and socialises the basic means of production constitutes a promising prospect for safeguarding grass-roots incomes today .
Mr President , I very much welcome the prospectus directive that is before us .
Its importance lies in its regulation of the issue of European Passports for the prospectuses , which will enable securities to be marketed right across the European Union 's internal market .
If a prospectus is authorised by a competent national authority , this authorisation will , as we know , be valid in all other Member States .
This means that the European Passport will save the issuers a lot of expense and administrative effort .
As I have already said , this directive is one of the most important components of the Commission 's action plan , which aims to establish an internal market in the area of financial services .
In December 2002 , the Commission estimated that the creation of an efficient internal market in securities would result in a 1.1 % growth in gross domestic product .
I hope they are right in saying this , as we could all do with a spurt of growth under present circumstances .
The recommendation for second reading , as presented to plenary , is a fine document .
I would like to express my congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Huhne , as the text improves two important aspects of the Common Position about which I am personally concerned .
One is that this text allows the issuers , from a denomination per unit of EUR 1 000 and upwards , to choose , when it comes to the approval of the prospectus , between , firstly , the competent authority of the Member State in which the issuer 's registered office is situated ; secondly , that of the Member State in which the securities are authorised to be traded on a regulated market ; or , thirdly , that of the Member State in which the securities are offered to the public .
Having EUR 1 000 as the denomination per unit is far more realistic than the threshold value of EUR 5 000 estimated by the Council , as it will be small investors that will have a particular interest in it .
So I am very much in favour of this and hope that it will not be watered down still further .
I am given to understand that it still stands even after the compromise with the Council .
Secondly , this text allows the competent authorities to delegate the examination of the prospectus to other bodies possessing the necessary expertise .
In small Member States in particular - both present and future ones - the tradition is that prospectuses are examined by the stock exchanges .
Responsibility remains , of course with the competent state authorities , whilst stock exchanges do have the necessary highly-qualified staff .
In Luxembourg , we had great difficulties finding experts with Luxembourg nationality , as the officials of the supervisory authorities have to be Luxembourg nationals , so I am glad that this delegation does not lapse after five years , but will be checked by the Commission to see if it still works .
Rather than sharing Mrs Berès ' view , I am convinced that this examination will not produce adverse judgments ; we will not end up , after eight years , with a delegation of this sort becoming inevitably impossible .
I very much want to underline once more how significant this directive is , and I am glad that Commissioner Bolkestein has told us that he can go along with the twenty-one compromise amendments on which the rapporteur and the Commission have agreed .
I would again like to thank Mr Huhne most warmly for the work he has done , which has been of real value , and for his sympathetic attitude , particularly to the concerns that I raised and which , it is to be hoped , will soon be dealt with in the way I have described .
If that happens , we will soon have a proper directive , one that will be of great importance to the smooth functioning of the internal market .
Mr President , if compromise is about being able to live with views which are not entirely your own then the rapporteur has done tremendously well in terms of handling the debate within the House and within the committee , with the Commission and with the Council .
He certainly listened to his colleagues and I congratulate him for his sensitivity .
As Mr Ettl said , raising capital is vital , and it is more vital perhaps for small businesses where delicate problems can cause immense harm .
The protection of businesses from disproportionate costs is surely vital and the attempt which has been made to steer this text towards a more balanced approach effects what I believe is the long-term security for this market .
An obvious example , which was mentioned by Mrs Villiers , is on shelf registration , which could have caused tremendous harm and has been avoided .
I also fought hard against this .
I believe that is a great success .
I would also like to mention , rather than going into the details which have been repeated so much , the risk capital action plan of which this is a part as well , and I am always keen to make sure we cross-reference .
It is part of the Lisbon goals for growth for all our economies .
The single market helps create the potential for such growth .
As a past rapporteur on the risk capital action plan , I am pleased to see it has completed its passage through this House and I am pleased that it has been completed successfully so far .
As the Commissioner says , there are other reports to come and I hope that they will reflect the same level of debate that we have heard for this particular report .
It was not perfect when it reached this House - very rarely things are of course , which allows us to stay in the job we are in - and I believe that Parliament has handled it supremely well and this demonstrates the maturity which it can lend to such technical reports .
I look forward therefore to our discussion on the transparency directive , which , as you now know , has been given to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
As the rapporteur I look forward to a very vital debate , as we will expect for the completion of the financial services action plan that this directive will be pointed at as well .
Mr President , there is no doubt that the European Passport for issues of securities will , in future , make it easier to raise capital .
This proposal is one of our contributions to the removal of bureaucracy and of the other barriers that mean that a financial internal market is still not yet feasible .
I have to say that there has been very constructive cooperation between the institutions , and this has been made easier by the rapporteur 's willingness to compromise ; we have all had to agree on formulations in order to produce a watertight piece of legislation .
I think it was a great stroke of genius for us to draw a distinction between equity and non-equity securities .
That was a smart move , for which I am sure that , one day , both investors and issuers will be grateful to us .
When we do actually adopt a directive , it will be important for us always to attempt to balance the interests of the issuers and those of investors .
In this directive , this House has again attached great value to the protection of small investors , who have in recent years been particularly unsettled , and we are obliged to restore small investors ' confidence if we really do want to have a properly-functioning internal financial market from which everyone can benefit .
The three things that are important are , firstly , that every investor will in future be able to rely on the prospectus underlying an issue complying with high standards of quality , without regard to the issuer 's home country and also without reference to the country in which the security is offered .
This will become a selling point .
The second is that , in the course of negotiations , we were able to make it a requirement that the summary prospectus , which is the main source of information for small investors , should comply with high standards and form part of the prospectus .
If the summary is false , misleading or inconsistent , it must be possible , in consequence of this , for those responsible to be brought to account .
Thirdly , the investor is protected against misleading advertising , in that it is ensured that issuers , when describing their product in the media , cannot promise more than the security can hold in accordance with the prospectus .
In conclusion , I would like to mention one concern that again became very apparent when this directive was under discussion , and that is the question of whether Parliament 's rights have actually been safeguarded .
If I consider the Interinstitutional Agreement in the light of better regulation , I have my doubts about this , so you can be sure that we will consider very carefully whether the work that you and CESAR do on this particular directive meets our expectations and is within the framework we have set .
If you were to fully meet Parliament 's expectations , that would build confidence in the legislation to be derived from this in future , and in secondary legislation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be on Wednesday .
. ( IT ) Mr President , we are addressing in this part-session - the vote is to be held on Wednesday - a reform which , because of the interest it has raised and the debate it has prompted , is certainly one of the key elements of this legislature and one of the key stages in the opening up of the markets and the implementation of the internal market in Europe .
We are approaching second reading after overcoming a number of difficulties encountered recently with translations and amendments - even now , this evening , the facility for tabling amendments is open until 7 p.m ; in fact , it is about to close .
In any case , this issue is of such significance as to require some in-depth comments .
We have conducted a lengthy debate , both direct and indirect , with the Commission .
I would like to thank Commissioner Bolkestein and all the members of his staff for losing no time in addressing the issue .
We have worked on it together on many occasions , outside the Chamber , outside Parliament but within the institutions , in an attempt to achieve the best possible outcome .
I would like to thank all the Members who have made useful contributions through their interest , their input and the amendments they have deemed it necessary to table .
It is a major , important reform which is coming to the end of the Parliamentary process after a period which has lasted for almost the whole of this legislature .
Simplification , the alignment of technological and social development and the completion of the internal market were and are still the imperative goals driving Parliament .
Debate , dialogue and the diversity of political positions and national interests have stimulated and shaped the conclusions .
Public works , public supply and public service contracts account for EUR 1400 billion each year in the Union , which means and shows that this legislation concerns the very powerhouse of the Community 's economy .
We are drawing up general , fundamental rules , on the basis of which specific national rules will be laid down .
These general rules must contain principles which will be useful to all , not just to a few , which will be useful to the Community as a whole , not just to partisan lobbies ; rules which will provide certainty , transparency , fair competition and an internal market which is open to all .
Procurement rules cannot and must not differ according to the value : administrative procedures may differ above or below an appropriate threshold , but the principles cannot differ .
At present , the thresholds mean that only about an eighth of the sum I quoted relates to European competitions .
The rest is lost because of national or regional regulations .
For this reason , I for my part acknowledge that the thresholds should be abolished .
However , since that cannot happen , a requirement has been proposed which , moreover , already exists indirectly , according to which the basic principles of the legislation must , at any event , always be observed , including by independent territorial legislation .
It is necessary for all possible procedures to be modernised and for the use of increasingly rapidly developing technologies to be permitted and codified .
The awarding bodies will thus benefit from the proposals made , adopting electronic systems not just for the management of competitions and the receiving of bids but for the actual auctions too .
Of course , auctions are required to be limited to the purchasing of codified , standardised materials .
We want firms ' freedom of organisation to be accorded due value and made use of , with every possibility of subcontracting left open for that share of the work which , once identified , can be entrusted to firms for whom the principal contractor is answerable .
In order not to complicate participation in the competition , it is appropriate for partners to be identified after the work has been subcontracted .
The complex issue - and this has been a very controversial point - of awarding design and execution contracts jointly , appreciated and appreciable for some specific categories of contracts , cannot be a hard and fast rule .
It is clearly appropriate and natural to separate services and works , just as it can be clearly appropriate and natural to treat them jointly , subject to prior justification .
By respecting this principle we are consolidating qualitative competition too , which would otherwise be in danger of being squeezed out in a purely economic and technological context , being moreover the prerogative of the company alone and therefore not always beneficial to the contracting authority .
This principle is the basis for the rapporteur 's proposals .
We must remember that we are dealing with a directive which is of high and singular economic importance and , as such , cannot and must not contain rules or principles which are governed by specific legislation such as specific social or environmental requirements .
The environmental and social dimensions have processes which are defined and can be defined specifically and therefore made mandatory by means of other vehicles and in other contexts .
However , some principles are laid down and proposed in the provision which refer particularly to respect for the needs of disadvantaged groups and the legislation on safety in the workplace .
The environment - the great victim of our time - is also dealt with exhaustively . Any further excesses in this area are to be avoided .
With contracts being awarded on the basis of the most economically advantageous price , there has to be a weighting criterion properly defined in calls for tenders , in that , otherwise , there would be a discretionary power in the a posteriori application of parameters which has created many legal problems throughout Community territory in the past .
The confidentiality of information which , according to the pre-established procedures , is provided to the contracting entity by the interested parties will be protected and safeguarded by specific rules .
As regards ' in-house ' contracts , there are conflicting points of view : the representatives of producers ' associations are decidedly against reserving contracts for an enterprise of which the contracting entity is part , even if it has independent legal personality , without a competition , and your rapporteur agrees with them .
It has been proposed to extend the causes of exclusion where there are sentences for subsequent offences relating to the tendering company on grounds of bankruptcy , unfair behaviour , failure to respect collective work contracts or drug dealing .
Lastly , it has been proposed to set up an independent agency to provide control mechanisms for contracts in the Member States .
Without prejudice to the possibility of instigating legal proceedings , we hope that this agency will be able to verify the procedures followed and also be able to cancel awards which do not comply with the legislation .
In conclusion , Mr President , the content of the rules under debate , because of their economic significance and because of their employment , social , environmental and economic implications , can be described without any shadow of doubt as essential to the organisation of modern-day society .
Differing political positions and different political or bureaucratic points of view mean that a widely supported process is not possible .
On the other hand , rejection and referral to committee or conciliation as the - not unproblematic - final stage in producing legislation is both possible and desirable .
All this is in the interests of the Union and in the interests of an internal market which must become increasingly consolidated and transparent .
The vote taken the day after tomorrow will confirm the democratic process , which there is no doubt that we must all follow .
. Mr President , I am happy that these two issues have now entered their second reading , as a quick but thorough examination is necessary to avoid the dangers of the proposals not being adopted before the end of this legislature .
Our common task and aim is to modernise and simplify public procurement rules and in this respect I believe that the texts agreed upon in Council already strike a fair balance among the different interests at stake .
Indeed , although there are a few issues that the Commission considers less than ideal , overall these common positions clearly represent an advance compared to the current legislation .
When I look at the substance of most of the amendments tabled to date by Parliament I feel even more convinced of what I said just now .
I am therefore fairly optimistic that the vote due to take place later this week will preserve our chances of closing this file in a way that is satisfactory to all three institutions , indeed , in my view quite a number of amendments are already incorporated in one form or another in the common positions .
I refer for example to the social aspects - other than social award criteria - where I understand that the main concern of this Parliament is to clarify that both contracting authorities and bidders respect the obligations laid down in social legislation .
That concern was also explicitly debated with Council .
It is therefore in my view appropriately reflected in the recitals of the current text .
I am ready to accept that it should be mandatory for contracting authorities and entities to indicate where information on the applicable social , fiscal and environmental obligations may be obtained .
Equally , with some redrafting , the Commission could accept Amendment No 29 to the public sector - or classic - directive and Amendment No 26 to the utilities directive , which emphasise certain possibilities which already exist in the social field .
As for the environmental aspects and in general on the issue of award criteria , the amendments which Parliament has tabled clearly show some differing views .
I am ready , as always , to debate further this interesting issue with Parliament through answers to questions , though in respect of the real aim of public procurement rules , as interpreted and confirmed by the European Court of Justice .
Indeed , I have no doubt that we all agree that our priority is to make public procurement rules a simplified tool for public bodies to spend taxpayers ' money as well as possible .
These differences of views have often meant that conflicting amendments have been adopted in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market which , if accepted , would make legislation incoherent .
We should perhaps all keep in mind our common stated goal of ' better regulation ' .
This inconsistency is well illustrated by the amendments to the utilities directive concerning award criteria .
Let us start by looking at how the common positions deal with this issue .
In full accordance with the current state of jurisprudence , the common positions already clarify that environmental characteristics may be used as award criteria and that it is not necessary to show that each and every award criterion taking individually provides an economic benefit for the contracting authorities or entities .
It is sufficient that , taken as a whole , the award criteria meet their proper function : to allow an objective evaluation and comparison of the intrinsic qualities of the product or service and the award of the contract to the most economically advantageous tender .
It is , therefore , with some concern that I see amendments to the utilities directive that would go well beyond this .
The effect of such amendments would be to allow vague , immeasurable elements , for the benefit of civil society in the broadest sense , to be used as award criteria .
That would not only prevent award criteria from playing their proper role , but also introduce an unacceptable degree of arbitrary choice , or perhaps even discrimination to the detriment of potential contractors .
In respect of social award criteria , we should also keep in mind that the common positions already clarify that such criteria may be used where they meet the same conditions as environmental award criteria .
However , these amendments to the utilities directive would permit social award criteria to be used to meet social policy objectives concerning the behaviour or the social responsibility of the tenderer , rather than the intrinsic qualities of the product or service in question .
This could lead to the award of contracts on the basis of considerations which have nothing to do with the principal of better value for money .
On the amendments aimed at favouring small and medium enterprises , I should like to stress that information available to us does not show that SMEs currently encounter any major difficulty in gaining access to public tenders .
Their European federation even told us that they would not support any positive discrimination in favour of SMEs vis-à-vis big enterprises .
In general , we should all be careful not to introduce changes which might de facto lead to national preferences which are incompatible with Community law and which might end up protecting economic interests .
Let me draw the attention of Parliament to the sensitive issue of thresholds , which may be the one where our divergence of views may be very hard to reconcile .
My aim is to ensure effective competition at European level .
If we increase the thresholds , not only would we breach our international obligations , but we would also reduce efficiencies .
If we raise the thresholds we do not necessarily simplify life for local authorities , which are in any case subject to an obligation of adequate publicity under the current case-law of the European Court of Justice .
That is why the Commission cannot accept those amendments .
In line with the interinstitutional agreement on better regulation we have recently reached , we all share the three objectives on modernising , simplifying and increasing the flexibility of the current rules .
It is in this spirit that I have some reluctance in accepting some further amendments relating to different subjects such as e-auctions , framework agreements , dynamic purchasing systems , the competitive dialogue and the choice between separate or joint awarding of contracts for design and execution of works contracts .
In fact , I fear that these amendments would multiply or complicate procedures unnecessarily or impose certain choices at Community level where the necessary flexibility could be better assured by making such choices possible at the national level .
I should now like to say something on some central issues specific to the utilities directive .
Concerning the amendments to the mechanism for exempting contracting entities from the directive - Article 30 of the common position - let me stress that the common position is based on two principles , legal certainty and real , effective liberalisation .
The Commission is therefore of the opinion that the presence of genuine competition should be established by a known procedure .
Otherwise , neither contracting entities nor interested suppliers would be sure of their legal position .
The Commission is also opposed to other initiatives regarding specific sectors , which would permit exclusion on the basis of free access alone , irrespective of whether or not this results in effective and real competition .
For essentially the same reasons , the Commission cannot accept the proposed changes concerning postal services .
Finally , concerning the ' intra-group ' exception of Article 23 , the Commission already made it clear that it has major difficulties in accepting the extension of this exclusion to works and supply contracts .
It does not however , want to make the directive less flexible than it already is .
For that reason , the Commission can accept the fact that the extension to works and supplies contracts should be eliminated , but not that contracting entities should be deprived of the existing flexibility for services .
In concluding I repeat that I am confident that by focusing on our main common goals to modernise , simplify and ensure an effective use of public money , we can provide a happy ending to the long saga of this reform to public procurement rules .
This result is impatiently awaited by European enterprises , public authorities and contracting entities .
It will be of great benefit to the European economy as a whole .
Finally , may I point out that the Commission 's opinion on the individual amendments has been provided in writing
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will refer to Commissioner Bolkestein 's article in last Saturday 's ' Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung ' - an article , Commissioner , that you published under your own name - and from which , with your permission , I will quote just one extract : ' It is important that authorities should get the highest possible return on taxpayers ' money , and that this important economic sphere should be fully opened up to competition in the internal market , as open and competitive procurement guarantees an improvement in services of general interest , ensures that public goods are used effectively , prevents corruption and stimulates both economic growth and the creation of jobs ' .
On that , Commissioner , I can back you 100 % ; the only problem I have is that I am one of those who believe that what we have received from the Council as a Common Position fails to comply with these very requirements and conditions .
I am one of those who take the view that the existing laws on procurement in the European Union have worked so far ; they are written down in four directives , to which one must add the settled case-law of the European Court of Justice , which was handed down over many years , and which has proved its value .
We have doubts as to whether this Common Position , this Council document , is indeed suited to maintaining the quality we have hitherto enjoyed .
Many of us are concerned that the new elements in this directive have not reduced the danger of manipulation , but will end up increasing it .
Many are worried that we will have , not more competition , but less .
Referring back to this article , let me point out that the representatives of industry to whom I have spoken , were not concerned that this document might result in increased competition , but that there could end up being less of it .
I believe that most of my group 's amendments had the specific aim in mind of improving a whole array of crucial points in this directive .
Another aspect I would like to address is that of the environmental and social criteria , which , as I am well aware , are matters of great contention in this House .
I do maintain , though , that European legislation should be right in terms of the legal system , and what that means is that I deal with environmental issues under the heading of environmental legislation and use legislation on social affairs to deal with social issues .
The law on procurement is not part of environmental law , or of social security law ; it has to do with business law , which means to say that the only issues to be considered in the field of procurement law are those of economic viability .
It is for that reason that I have my own grave misgivings as to whether it is in any way right to deal here with issues relating to the environmental and social criteria .
It is , though , evidently the majority view both in the Council and - to judge by the outcome of first reading - in this House , that if these matters are to be dealt with , we have to ensure that they are taken into account , not as part of the awarding of the contract , but in the criteria applying when the contract is put out to tender .
I regard as unacceptable anything that , in relation to the award of the contract - independently , as it were , of what the various service providers knew when the contract was put out to tender - can end up resulting in further decision-making , or can make it possible for that to be manipulated .
I speak not only for myself but also for my group when I say that I regret the fact that it has not been possible to come to a compromise beforehand between the groups on the issues raised by this proposal .
The end result of this will be a political showdown between the political groups in this House , while the Commission and the Council of Ministers get their directives through ; what I fear , quite simply , is that there is little prospect for qualified majorities on the reciprocal amendments .
I question whether that is a good thing for this House or for Europe .
That concludes the comments that I wanted to make on this proposal on behalf of my group .
Mr President , during the first reading of the directives being put to the vote , the European Parliament fought vigorously for the incorporation of social and environmental criteria in the procedures for concluding public contracts , confirming its role as the champion of the European social model and sustainable development .
To our great sorrow , we find that the Council 's common position has not accepted many of our amendments , which is why we need to continue our fight and stand firm by our initial positions .
Respect for the acquis communautaire on employment and environmental issues cannot be ignored in the procedure for concluding public contracts .
It is not possible for the European Union to be indifferent to such commitments by the Member States in public contracts , when the quality of employment relations and , more generally , the quality of life is now a generally recognised aim of all its policies .
In addition , just as we are willing to promote companies ' social responsibilities in the private sector , it is inconsistent for Member States to be indifferent to issues that constitute companies ' core social responsibilities when concluding public contracts .
Thus , quality criteria can and must be taken into account by the contracting authorities as a matter of obligation .
In the same spirit , infringement of the relevant obligations on the part of candidate companies must act as a reason to disqualify them from the procedure .
We would also stress that it is not enough to refer to social and environmental criteria in the preamble , they must also be included in the regulatory text of the directive .
The area of public contracts is also an ideal area for taking account of people with disabilities .
We therefore welcome the amendment introducing the obligation for contracting authorities to take account of accessibility criteria for people with disabilities .
To conclude , production agencies must understand that , by helping to implement European social policy , they do not incur an economic burden ; on the contrary , they have economic benefits , such as subsidies when public contracts are awarded .
Mr President , it is a very important matter that we discuss tonight , as Mr Bolkestein said .
He urged us , in his closing words , to make sure that we modernise and simplify European Community law and endow it with appropriate flexibility .
With this I believe we can all agree .
The issue is : which exact text will best achieve that ?
To establish the general orientation of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , we thought that the Commission 's original proposal was unduly timid and grudging on points such as the environmental and social points .
We , and others in Parliament , urged a broader and more generous view - the one that was in due course confirmed by the Court of Justice in the Helsinki tramways case .
That was a real advance .
It was not just our view , but Parliament 's view at first reading .
Then we have the common position .
To us , the common position seems to be in some measure a retreat from the high-water mark represented by Parliament 's first reading position .
We would like to see some aspects of that retreat again reversed .
I accept Mr Bolkestein 's point that the text , as it came to us from the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , is internally inconsistent .
I would put that down to the fact that in committee we had an unstable and varying majority , which meant that there was no clear golden thread running through the text that came from the committee .
But there is a way of restoring it to consistency , coherence and environmental and social sensibility , which is to adopt the string of amendments , which will pull it back towards Parliament 's first reading position and again exhort the Council and the Commission to take a bold step that will continue to serve these valuable goals of modernisation , simplification and flexibility .
My own group will put forward two amendments in particular relating to Article 53 where , for example , we will object to the idea that it must be a tender most economically advantageous for the contracting authorities .
We are told that sometimes social or environmental criteria are vague .
That seems to be fraught with vagueness - the insistence that it be , as it were , self-referentially back to the authority which is contracting .
That would give rise to all manner of disputes .
Leave it as we suggest : various criteria linked to the subject of the public contract in question .
Do not leave out characteristics , including those relating to production methods or the tender as equal-treatment policy .
If these are unacceptably vague then the whole of Community law is unacceptably vague because we are exhorted in the horizontal clauses of the Treaties to attend to these very values !
Let us be brave !
Let us go forward , colleagues !
Let us restore the kinds of values that we asserted in the first reading position .
Let us get rid of the inconsistencies , but let us get rid of them in the right direction .
What can this Parliament expect from a rapporteur at second reading ?
What line is a parliamentary committee to take if the Council 's Common Position differs from Parliament 's position at first reading ?
It is obvious that the key amendments , given this Parliament 's political vision , should be re-tabled .
At present , the promotion of sustainable economic development is high on our list of priorities .
We must also take subsidiarity into account , which means that we must not hinder municipalities and regions unnecessarily .
Studying the proposals of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , I rubbed my eyes in disbelief .
I had been used to a great deal , but the current product deserves to be marked down emphatically as a flop .
Some arguments would be enough to make you laugh if they did not concern serious matters .
What should we make , for example , of the justification to Amendment No 63 : I quote : ' Giving a weighting to each criterion is unrealistic and too mathematical an approach ' .
It appears that multiplying and adding up are already higher maths for the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
In summary , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has not acquitted itself of its task effectively , and it is up to plenary to undo the damage with regard to how this Parliament is represented .
A municipality should be entitled to take environmental criteria into consideration in the award of a public contract .
It is with good reason that Helsinki won its case when it procured clean buses .
It would surely be too crazy for words if it were not possible to draw a distinction between electricity generated in an environmentally-friendly way and other electricity .
Lower authorities should be able to acquire sustainable products and services .
This obviously also applies to the governments of the Member States .
With a market share of 16 % of the GDP , it is precisely the government that should advocate a policy that promotes sustainable products and services .
If we were to overlook this , that would give a totally wrong signal to private industry , especially at a time when the latter is starting to gain an understanding of the need for sustainable products and services .
The package of amendments , which I also signed on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities , makes the directive acceptable from an environmental perspective , and the subsidiarity principle is respected .
With this , we place the responsibility for a policy of sustainability firmly with governments that take concrete decisions as closely to the citizen as possible .
As an MEP , I would not like to come face to face with a citizen who learns from his local councillor that ' Europe ' does not allow him to secure environmentally responsible public contracts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I endorse the approach taken by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which has tabled a large number of amendments to the Council 's Common Position on the new rules for public contracts .
We have already had many discussions in this House which have highlighted the need to support small businesses and the self-employed , along with the need for bureaucracy in tendering procedures to be reduced at the same time as transparency and comprehensibility are increased .
Further economic and social progress in the Member States will depend on the fulfilment of both these important demands .
Parliament 's demand for threshold values for public contracts - depending of course on the utility involved - to be increased is absolutely justified if we want ( a ) to reduce the very high costs involved in tendering on a Europe-wide basis , and ( b ) to give small and medium-sized businesses better opportunities in the European Union .
It goes without saying that this heading includes the amendments aimed at reserving 10 % of the expenditure on public contracts for small and medium-sized enterprises and at increasing the threshold values in the event of authorities being parties to contracts for the work to be carried out .
Commissioner Bolkestein , I really cannot see what you are getting at !
I think my group , along with the others , did the right thing in emphasising the importance of invitations to tender containing conditions relating to the management of the environment and guarantees of workers ' health and safety .
In principle , this is in line with the sustainability for which the Council opted in Göteborg in 2001 , with the economy , ecology , and the social dimension being given equal priority .
That someone should argue against that is something that I find utterly baffling .
This must apply not only to the way in which the main contractors meet the specified criteria ; it goes without saying that it must be binding on the sub-contractors as well .
If firms do not produce evidence of how they deal with finances and with their staff , their tenders should be rejected .
I do , though , have doubts about compliance with data protection provisions when contracts are put out to tender electronically .
We also support the demand that enterprises or persons who have been declared bankrupt or against whom court cases are pending should be excluded from tendering for public contracts .
Rather than this being merely a permitted option , there should be binding rules on this .
It stands to reason that exclusion from tendering for public contracts should also be extended to enterprises that had breached the conditions of tender on previous contracts .
I also ask my fellow Members of this House , when plenary votes on Article 27 , to adopt the version of the text included in the Council 's Common Position , for if we do not , then 98.5 % of German collective wage agreements would be excluded as a criterion in invitations to tender , which would put German workers at a disadvantage when competing for the award of contracts .
Mr President , Commissioner , what we are dealing with here in these procurement directives is very definitely a multi-faceted problem .
In the brief time available to me , I would like to consider two aspects of it .
My first point is that we must fix the threshold values at the level that Parliament wanted at first reading stage .
Having them even higher would have been desirable , as experience shows that Europe-wide tendering brings with it a lot of bureaucracy and higher costs that bear no relation to the relatively few offers that are put in .
What I particularly want is for the costs and administrative burdens that international tendering entails to be kept down for public contracting authorities , primarily in local government .
It was regrettable that , at first reading , we managed an increase only from EUR 5 million to EUR 7 million , for example in building contracts , and the governments in the Council now want to reduce this at second reading .
Our second reading amendments in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market held out for at least these EUR 7 million .
I very much regret the fact that the demand for a higher - and actually reasonable - threshold value than EUR 7 million is unlikely to be possible in the final reading of the Procurement Directive .
What is every bit as important to me as playing for millions with the threshold value in the directive on European procurement is the protection of small and medium-sized enterprises from unfair competition .
Our self-employed , who abide by the law , must not have life made difficult for them by competitors who keep neither to collective wage agreements nor within the current labour law or health and safety provisions , and who do not give a fig for protecting the environment .
In so doing , we would be attaching a high value to local self-government , and rightly so , for it is clear that local authorities are the political level closest to the public .
Mr Bolkestein , you were right to say that taxpayers ' money must be spent in the best way possible .
I agree with you on that .
However , that does not necessarily mean the cheapest on offer .
' Best possible ' carries connotations of quality and sustainability , in other words , due regard for social , environmental and other issues .
Mr President , I shall concentrate on the proposal to award contracts for the supply of water .
In Denmark , the supply of water is decentralised and based on a principle of solidarity where accessibility and prices are concerned .
In Denmark , the water supply is owned by the consumer and managed locally , and those are very important prerequisites for being able to guarantee that water sources and the environment continue to be protected .
Water is a public good .
It must not be part of a strategy for the internal market or a means of promoting European industry .
In the future , those who control the water supply will be those who wield power over people and money .
The multinational companies are exceptionally aware of this , and there is money to be made in this area .
It is estimated that , in the EU alone , the market is worth EUR 80 billion per year and that , in 15 years ' time , large monopolies will control 65-75 % of what are now public water supplies .
A number of directives , including the two we are debating today , have now incorporated water as a commodity and are in the process of standardising countries ' water supplies with the purpose of liberalising them and guaranteeing that drinking water is subject to free competition throughout the internal market .
Experience in the UK and elsewhere is frightening . It demonstrates that , when the water supply is turned into a commodity and privatised , interest in the protection of resources also disappears .
In fact , London 's private water suppliers lobbied enthusiastically , and on equal terms with the European chemical industry , for our simply allowing larger quantities of crop sprays in drinking water when the EU negotiated limit values .
The world 's total accessible fresh water resources are scarce .
There are now already countries in which it is drinking water , rather than food , that is in short supply .
Liberalising the water supply would mean that the fight for water would overtake that for oil .
That is a frightening prospect .
At the moment , the EU is impeding Denmark 's efforts to safeguard our groundwater against pollution , while the EU is in the process of lifting a number of the bans on pesticides imposed in Denmark .
The EU must not also destroy the Danish principle according to which the water supply must be public and always owned by the consumer and managed by the owner - an important and crucial prerequisite for security of supply and the protection of water sources .
It must be up to the individual country democratically to decide which model they wish to adopt for the supply of their water .
Another little thing that naturally pleases me , since I live on one of Denmark 's many small islands , is that it has now been realised how completely useless it is to invite tenders for the running of our little ferries and that the process has now begun of drawing up a specific directive exempting these small ferries from the awarding of contracts .
This is something I of course very much welcome , but it illustrates the fact that there is something fundamentally wrong with the EU 's demand for tenders to be invited in connection with every task .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the directive on public procurement now before us is supposed to reflect the outcome of intensive negotiations extending over a period of years .
It appears from this debate that the opinion-forming process is not yet complete .
In committee , too , we were constantly arguing whether it is possible to modify the Council 's Common Position , or whether , in order to improve it , we first have to reject it .
This is a case in which I have to say that , for my own country , Austria , the advantages of this directive outweigh its disadvantages , not least because , on 1 September 2002 , we implemented a new procurement law which owes much to the directive and to the draft directive .
Whilst , on the one hand , the new rules modernise procurement legislation , the directives also incorporate important clarifications for their practical implementation , and the result is meant to be more transparent and fairer invitations to tender .
I want , briefly , to consider four points .
Firstly , the provision for the possible use of electronic media strikes me as being particularly important .
The introduction of e-procurement is one of the new directive 's key elements , and from the new electronic procurement instruments we can expect sustained good progress .
These instruments should , however , apply solely to standardised goods and services .
My second point is that , in Austria , there is in fact opposition to the increase in threshold values , as this would go against the opening-up of central , regional and local markets for procurement and , even today , covers only a small percentage of the contracts awarded under the EU 's procurement system .
We take the view that any further increase over and above what was proposed in the Common Position would restrict the scope of the directive , which is , after all , aimed at producing greater transparency and more fairness in invitations to tender .
I would like to mention , thirdly , the newly introduced procurement procedures and rules for central procurement offices , which make it possible to have a system of procurement organised on modern lines .
Fourthly , let me say something about the disagreement on secondary purposes .
One reason why I have no problem with these is that Austrian procurement law takes secondary purposes into account , although there is no target set by law .
I see it , however , as a requirement that all secondary purposes should be relevant to the contract , which means that they have a direct connection with it ; any alternative is a recipe for arbitrariness on the part of the body awarding the contract and for the foreclosure of the market .
If there are to be secondary purposes , they must be clearly defined , and that cannot be done anonymously .
Although I do not know what the outcome of tomorrow 's vote will be , I do believe it to be important that we should get this procurement law , and as quickly as possible , as it will benefit the internal market , bring about greater transparency , and make for more fairness .
In the debate between Council and Parliament on the award of public markets in the European Union , the eye is instantly caught by the extent to which the bitterest enemies of state control forget their reservations as soon as the contest for state contracts begins .
State money attracts them .
How could the great construction and public works consortiums have built their financial empires , indeed , without state contracts ?
How would armaments consortiums survive if there were no public money ?
The so-called market economy is on a life-support machine , kept alive by the state on a saline drip .
It is no coincidence that public market harmonisation is progressing so slowly .
The big industrial cartels would like to keep access to their own state 's money hostage even as they lay their hands on the public money of the country next door .
As to the conditions for award of markets , the rules which are beginning to emerge reflect , in their desiccated bureaucratism , a cynicism bordering on sincerity .
Under these conditions for the award procedure , the monetary value of the offer is the only thing that matters .
Environmental and health requirements have been forgotten , to the justifiable indignation of Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth . The same fate has befallen working conditions and workers ' remuneration in the companies which are pocketing public money .
Also forgotten are so many other aspects , such as archaeological research .
Forgotten , last of all , are the interests of society in general .
Returns are all that counts .
Social organisation has been reduced to a balance sheet .
Furthermore , under the pretext of coordinating procedures in the water , energy , transport and postal service markets , the Council is trying to enshrine these as intrinsically no more than that : markets , rather than vital services for the whole of society .
No !
Those water , energy and transport services , those postal services , must be and remain public services .
They cannot be surrendered to these private groups , who are concerned with their own profits and not with the interests of users .
Commissioner , I listened to your introductory speech carefully and have tried to understand what lies at the heart of our differences .
We are of course in agreement with you on the aims of simplification , modernisation and proper use of public finances .
Who would not be ?
You forget other aims , however . My fellow ecologists and I have reminded you what they are : the aims of sustainable development .
We feel that public markets and the means by which they are awarded are extremely important levers for realising those aims .
Why do you reject , as you have pointed out , the amendment introduced by us to Article 53 ( 1 ) of the classic directive , in which we allude to environmental characteristics , but also to modes of production ?
Why refuse to allow the contracting authorities to give preference to modes of production based on rational use of energy , for example ?
That seems incredible to me .
Furthermore , in Article 23 of the directive , why refuse to refer to another aspect of Community legislation , European eco-labels , justifying yourself by arguing that these are a non-mandatory set of guidelines ?
Very well , then .
Make the aforesaid guidelines into one of the criteria for awarding public markets and encourage businesses to respect this type of eco-label . That would fit in perfectly with the aim of introducing an integrated sustainable development programme , an aim promoted by the European Parliament and the European Council .
The tool of public markets could help us towards that aim . I deplore the extremely conservative and classical vision of commercial law revealed by you once again in your speech .
Mr President , I produced the opinion for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs at first reading and I would like to raise two specific points that still arise from that opinion .
The first concerns paragraph 2 of Article 27 in the classical directive and the equivalent text in the utilities directive .
It is important that we leave out the phrase ' collective agreements declared or deemed to be generally binding ' .
That phrase would create difficulties and legal uncertainty , most particularly in Germany and the Scandinavian Member States .
I have worked very closely with the European Trade Union Confederation and with the public service unions both at first reading and second reading and I have received - and a number of Members here will have received - a large number of representations from concerned individuals in those countries .
I hope , via split votes , that we can leave that text out of the finished text at second reading .
My second concern applies to Article 53 in the classical directive .
Several amendments will probably be on offer to align this text with that of Article 55 ( 1 ) , in the utilities directive , as it now stands following the adoption of an amendment by Mr Karlsson in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
I disagree with what Commissioner Bolkestein said earlier on this point .
If we align the classical directive with the text of Article 55 ( 1 ) of the utilities directive , we would be bringing them into line with the emerging jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice .
Not to do so would be a retrograde step .
The Commissioner and his services have consistently given far too negative an interpretation of ECJ jurisprudence on this point and that is why we have such clear difficulties emerging in our debate here over applying environmental and social considerations .
I hope that these considerations can be taken into account tomorrow .
Mr President , I want to come back to the remarks made by Mr Harbour .
We want to create innovation .
Would you agree with me that we will not create innovation by imposing standards on ecological or social issues ?
This is only the lower level .
In a market economy there are factors wish push the market and factors which pull the market : the stick and the carrot .
What we want , when we speak about introducing ecological criteria or fair-trade criteria , is to create a market for innovation in ecology , fair trade and social issues .
Therefore we need clear criteria on this in the directive .
That is the only thing we need .
That is why we are pushing this so much .
It has enormous leverage - 15 % of the European internal product .
If we are serious about sustainability we have to use this .
It is not via fierce competition in the private sector that this innovation will come .
It will be because the public sector takes more responsibility .
Commissioner Bolkestein , why do we disagree on this point ?
Because your Europe is a Europe of big multinational companies where there is no ecology , no social rights and where the poor people live in their poor working conditions .
My Europe is a Europe of citizens .
I am proud of this .
If we have to fight over this issue it is because you have a very new , liberal approach to Europe and we do not want that .
Mr President , I wish to concentrate on that part of the report concerning public procurement where , unfortunately , the untoward situation has arisen in which , even though we issued a sound report at first reading , the quality has , since then , gone seriously downhill , with regard too to the common position we have obtained from the Council .
I think it is a huge problem when the Council adopts a common position that is not in accordance with current law as laid down by the Court of Justice .
The fact that the Court lays down something of which the Council takes no account is a major problem , and matters are not made any better by our also having a committee that chooses not to take account of the Court pronouncements we have .
I believe that we in the EU have a clear obligation to promote our own objectives concerning sustainable development and to comply with our social responsibility . That means that we must also be able to incorporate social and environmental considerations into public procurement .
I should like to say to some of those on the right wing who , in Parliament today , have accused us of being rabid environmental campaigners , that what is important in this case is that we in actual fact want to make public procurement transparent and to make it possible for social and environmental provisions to be incorporated into such procurement without , of course , disturbing the internal market .
No one is talking about disturbing the internal market .
We are all of us concerned that the internal market should operate properly , but we just want to make it possible for those who invite tenders to attach importance to things other than just price , that is to say to a broadly-based labour market , social conditions and the environment .
It is in actual fact very simple , and fortunately we have a decision on this matter .
The second thing I have to mention is that , during the first reading , we tabled a number of amendments to Article 27 , in actual fact emphasising the aspect of labour market conditions .
As Mr Hughes said , a curious change has , however , again crept into the amendment whereby it has been made conditional upon the aforementioned agreements being made law in the Member States . It is therefore essential to have that clause removed before we vote on the recommendation for second reading on Wednesday .
There is no reason for interfering with the collective agreements we have in certain countries , and that is what in actual fact would be happening if the small clause in question were not removed . I recommend to the House here today that it consider adopting Amendment No 40 but that it avoid also accepting this clause .
I hope we can in that way support the split vote proposed by Mr Hughes .

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Zappalà , some 10 years ago , I sat on the municipal council in Eindhoven , in the southeast of Brabant , which is a technology region .
Philips and Daf were in dire straits .
It was a time of high unemployment as a result of all kinds of developments in international industry .
In those days , there was a covenant involving industry and the municipality on building in a sustainable manner .
There was little employment in the building industry .
Then , we discovered that in Groningen , there was a model for European contracts which was able to meet a number of criteria , for example with regard to equal working conditions and social legislation , but also to the regional labour market 's employment criteria and to environmental criteria .
We found this valuable and subsequently applied it .
This would , to a large extent , be allowed on the basis of the current proposals .
However , the problem that is causing anxiety for many is that the Christian Democrats , and particularly the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , have accepted a number of amendments on the basis of which it would no longer be possible to spend public funds in this transparent , non-discriminatory way that serves regional causes .
We are talking about socially responsible entrepreneurship to ensure that financial , social and environmental objectives are integrated into a strategic policy .
We should , however , be fighting for socially responsible government even more than for socially responsible entrepreneurship .
We could then , if we take transparency into account , also avoid the likelihood of fraud .
In other words , we agree to a number of the objectives that Mr Bolkestein mentioned , such as legal certainty and effective spending , but integral policy means that we should also include a number of other criteria , and that is what , in my view , we should vote for tomorrow .
Mr President , let me , in my capacity as my group 's shadow rapporteur , apologise to you , to the Commissioner , and to all my fellow Members for not having been present at the beginning of the debate .
Together with Mr Bill Miller , I was trapped on a Strasbourg city bus , the driver of which could not find the way , initially to Frankfurt and then back to Strasbourg , and got us to Strasbourg via many German autobahns and with something of a delay .
Belatedly , but not too late , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the great deal of work he has done and , in particular , for resisting his first temptation , that of giving in to quite understandable disappointment that the Council has taken up so little of what Parliament has proposed and therefore going all out for a rejection of the Common Position .
This was something we discussed in the committee , where a majority of us took the view that - even if it proved a wearisome exercise - we should attempt to make improvements to the Common Position .
The fact is , of course , that the debate about rejection of this Common Position is far from over .
I do not know if , perhaps , another amendment has been tabled this evening with this in mind ; that there is a great temptation to do so has to do with the fact that , whilst the Council took on board quite a bit of what Parliament had proposed , this tended to be harmless technical points , whilst the major issues of substance were utterly ignored .
What still counts from my point of view is that , in both draft directives , I can see substantial improvements over against the current legal position , and certainly as regards modernisation , simplification , the introduction of electronic tendering procedures or the use of electronic media in the tendering process , and the ways in which things are made easier for specific sectors .
For example , I am very glad that this Parliament 's initiative has succeeded in getting postal services included in the utilities directive .
If though , on the one hand , we can speak in terms of progress , we should beware , at the same time , of ending up going backwards .
There has already been much debate about the award criteria , and I would like to again shed light on something that is obviously not yet clear , namely that the text now provided in the Common Position represents a retrograde step vis-à-vis the current legal position and removes the legal basis on which the Court of Auditors could make very favourable judgments .
The result is that these award criteria will be more restrictive in future .
Being more restrictive in this area does not mean merely that I do not want options - of an ecological nature , for example - that are currently available to me ; my concern is , rather , with the issue of democracy .
Local authorities are among the most important bodies in Europe as a whole when it comes to awarding contracts .
Mr Bouwman mentioned an example from the one where he lives .
As institutions , local authorities enjoy direct democratic legitimacy , and if , for example , they come to realise that - even if it comes rather more expensive - they want wooden window frames produced by sustainable forestry , then let them in future be able to have them .
They are responsible to their own citizens and to their auditors , and nowadays they do not exactly have much money sloshing around .
That is also my objection to what Mr Karas said .
If we are struggling to make improvements , our primary concern here is with restoring the current legal position rather than with going back to what preceded it ; secondly , this is not about mandatory criteria along the lines of every contract-awarding body having to apply every conceivable criterion ; rather , it is about them being able to do so if that is what they would like to do and if they are transparent in the way they do it .
As it is at present framed , the obligatory part can have only one meaning , that these options are restricted .
Although the recitals reintroduce the possibility of a number of things , I find that rather unpleasing from the point of view of legal policy , and I do not think it does much for legal certainty either .
As reference has been made in this debate to the inconsistencies that remain , there is an offer I would like to renew .
Perhaps we could , by aligning our voting lists tomorrow , recover something of what the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market produced ?
I can also announce that we will no longer be supporting all the amendments that we supported in the Committee on Legal Affairs ; this will enable us to take with us rather fewer amendments into the conciliation procedure that now appears , unfortunately , to be unavoidable .
Mr President , it is important that we have transparent , workable directives .
It is important to give a clear lead to our local authorities or to our public - in some cases private - utilities .
Above all , it is important that we give a clear lead to the workforces operating within those contracting authorities .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market unfortunately did not provide that transparent , workable directive .
What we have is two directives , which are not in line with each other .
In fact , in certain areas , they are actually contradictory .
The Legal Affairs Committee missed an opportunity to advance the social provisions to workers .
It has advanced - to give it credit - the case of workers with disabilities .
But we could have gone further .
That is why I am reintroducing my Amendment No 166 , which was adopted at first reading by a large majority .
Now certain groups seem to have gone cold on it .
Amendment No 166 to Article 53 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) reintroduces the flexibility contracting authorities require when deciding on awarding contracts , not just being bound by the lowest price .
It should be made clear to all those companies that intend to tender for these contracts that they have to introduce social and environmental conditions for their own workforces or they will not get the contracts .
. Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor a second time on this important matter .
I would like to reply to some of the points raised .
I would like to elucidate what I said earlier so that no misunderstandings remain between what this Parliament would like to see the Commission do , and what the Commission itself intends to do .
Firstly I refer to what Mr MacCormick said right at the beginning of this debate , which was also repeated by other speakers .
Mr MacCormick referred to the current state of jurisprudence .
In accordance with that jurisprudence , the common position already clarifies that environmental characteristics and social clauses may be used as award criteria and that it is not necessary that each and every award criterion taken individually can be shown to provide an economic benefit for the contracting authorities or entities .
It is sufficient that taken as a whole the award criteria can carry out their proper function , which is to allow an objective evaluation and comparison of the intrinsic qualities of the products or services offered and by the award of the contract to the most economically advantageous tender .
Here I would also refer to Mr Harbour 's remarks , with which the Commission agrees .
Secondly , Mrs Thors and Mr Junker referred to production methods .
I should like to reply that regarding the amendments which aimed to insert explicit references to production methods , the Commission is of the opinion that it is superfluous to do so since production methods are a part of the environmental characteristics which , as I have just said , are already allowed for .
Furthermore , they are explicitly referred to as examples of legitimate technical specifications .
I then come to my third point , which was also raised by Mr MacCormick .
In Article 53 the words ' for the contracting authority ' are explained by recital 44 as meaning that the best tender will be assessed according to what the contracting authority will have defined as its requirements .
Recital 44 further clarifies that this encompasses requirements addressed to satisfy the needs of the public concern in the case of the ruling about the need to limit air pollution for the population of the City of Helsinki .
Mr Koukiadis gave us a further example of valid award criteria under Article 53 - the needs of handicapped people , which should be taken into account .
In the case of transport services - for example better access to buses for handicapped people - would certainly be a valid criterion .
There is no doubt about that .
My fifth point refers to the phrase ' economically most advantageous ' , which Mr Herman Schmid and a number of speakers mentioned .
In reply to those comments , the most economically advantageous tender would be the result of a combination of economic but also qualitative criteria , and the latter would serve not necessarily to calculate the costs for the contracting authority , but would certainly help that contracting authority to make up its mind .
My penultimate point refers to labels , which Mr Jonckheer mentioned .
As the common positions clearly show , the Commission is in favour of clarifying the role of eco-labels in public procurement and the possibility of referring to them when defining technical specifications .
It should be kept in mind , however , that unlike ' ordinary ' European standards , European eco-labels do not replace other competing eco-labels such as pluri-national ones .
The Commission 's proposals on eco-labels had foreseen such replacement , but this was not accepted during the legislative process .
The current situation is , therefore , that different eco-labels may exist side by side even if they cover the same aspects .
It would therefore not be appropriate - indeed , it would be contrary to established policy in the environmental field - to introduce a preference for European eco-labels over other eco-labels .
The Commission is conscious that references to the performances underlying eco-labels rather than to simply require the labels themselves may be more complicated for purchasers .
This task has been rendered easier through a database created by the Commission which lists the different performances defined in eco-labels that can be used in connection with award procedures .
I can add that a practical guide to green procurement will be published later this year .
Finally , I should like to deal with the questions put by Mrs Thorning-Schmidt and Mr Hughes as to why the Commission is going back on current law as interpreted by the Court of Justice in the Helsinki buses case .
My answer quite simply is as follows : it is simply not true that the common positions are more restrictive than the interpretation of current law given by the Court of Justice in the Helsinki buses case .
On the contrary , through the combination of recitals and Articles , the common positions consolidate and clarify the possibilities offered by current law .
They do not add anything to or subtract anything from current possibilities , but they have the merit of setting these out explicitly instead of having to rely on interpretations of jurisprudence with all the ensuing possibilities for different use and consequent legal uncertainty on this crucial issue .
Moreover , they clarify that under the same conditions as set out by the Court of Justice , the use of social award criteria is also legitimate .
I should like to end by expressing the hope that in its vote Parliament will support the common position so that we can get these directives onto the statute book as quickly as possible .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.34 p.m. )
Greek Presidency
The next item is the joint debate on the European Council report and Commission statement on the European Council in Thessaloniki on 20-21 June 2003 , and a statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the review of the Greek presidency .

Before I invite the Prime Minister , Mr Simitis , to address the House , I should like to place on the record , on my behalf and on behalf of the European Parliament , our gratitude to the Prime Minister , to the Foreign Minister and his colleagues - in particular to Minister Yiannitsis - for a very high level of cooperation with the European Parliament throughout the Greek semester in seeking together to advance the major dossiers .
We are also grateful for the assistance which they have offered in a number of areas of interest to Parliament , including the conclusion of our negotiations on an interinstitutional agreement on better regulation and law-making , the party political statute , and their considerable assistance - although we are still short of target - in working with us on the issue of the Members ' Statute .
I am pleased , in that context , to give the floor to Prime Minister Simitis .
Mr President , Mr President of the European Parliament , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to have the opportunity to present the results of the Greek Presidency from this tribune today .
Last January , when we held the first debate here on our priorities , I stressed that what we had to strive for was to support a strong Europe , which participates and acts in a multi-centre global system and works for peace , development and cooperation .
Six months of important events and developments have intervened .
I believe that , because of these events , Europe has grown up over these six months . Events have allowed it to see its weaknesses , such as the crisis in Iraq , but they have also allowed it to see its strong points .
Despite the crisis , there has been a feeling of unity , a feeling of cohesion , a feeling of a common mission .
Events have made it politically more mature and more determined to proceed with new actions and have highlighted the need to meet the challenges relating to its future .
It is highly illustrative that the Convention completed its work on the draft constitution and that this draft constitution was accepted by the Convention by a large majority .
It is likewise highly illustrative that the Council of Ministers started a debate on European defence and security , a debate which continued at the summit in Thessaloniki .
The problems resulted in an awareness of what has to be done and done quickly .
Greece had the good fortune to assume the Presidency in an exceptionally important six-month period .
A six-month period , as I said , of unexpected events .
Events which presented huge difficulties , but which were also a huge challenge , to which I believe we all responded , by which I also mean both the Member States and the Commission as well as the Presidency .
Today , the debate on foreign policy , defence , security , the global strategic perception of Europe which has come about over these months and the draft Constitutional Treaty , bears witness to the fact that work has now begun , work which will result in a different form of cooperation .
And it will , I trust , be positive for Europe and it will be work which will give us new momentum .
We have realised that we must take decisions as quickly as possible .
Ladies and gentlemen , in December 2002 , the Greek Presidency presented its priorities and specific objectives .
We said then that we had five main priorities .
First of all , to complete the enlargement of the European Union .
Secondly , to speed up the implementation of the Lisbon strategy .
Thirdly , to complete the work of the Convention on the future of Europe .
Fourthly , to deal with the phenomenon of illegal immigration and immigration in general and , fifthly , to promote specific priorities in the field of foreign relations .
I can state today , at the end of these six months , that we worked hard towards these objectives and that we achieved very satisfactory results , which I should like to set out for you briefly .
The ceremony for the signing of the Accession Treaty by the 10 candidate countries , which set the seal on enlargement , was a ceremony which marked one of the most important events in the development of Europe .
It confirmed the regeneration of Europe ; we celebrated it on the foothills of the Acropolis , our wish being to provide a particular symbolism for the continuation of European civilisation .
Immediately before that , the Greek Presidency dealt with a series of difficulties that had arisen , such as new requests from the new Member States for existing agreements to be adapted and for new funding and such as the debate we had with you , here in the European Parliament , on issues of enlargement and funding or funding of the enlarged Union .
Now the new Member States have integrated smoothly into the work of the Council of Ministers , at which they will participate as active observers pending the ratification of the Treaties by the national parliaments .
I should like to comment on the integration of Cyprus , which joined together with the other nine countries and constitutes the justification of the fight for political restoration , for the restoration of the principles of international law .
We were very close to having a united Cyprus in the Union , to overcoming the political problem , but unfortunately , the Turkish-Cypriot leadership did not want to complete the procedure started on the basis of the Annan plan .
In April , the Council adopted revised partnership texts with the three candidate countries .
As far as Bulgaria and Romania are concerned , the objective is to complete their accession negotiations by the end of 2004 .
We advanced numerous chapters in the negotiations with these countries .
The new partnership with Turkey includes specific terms on numerous issues , including the good neighbours policy , property belonging to minorities , religious freedom and limiting the role of the army .
As regards the second issue , ladies and gentlemen , the issue of Lisbon , we know how important the issues described under this title are and that , provided we resolve them , they will help us deal with the problems of development , environmental charges and the creation of a knowledge-based economy .
The most important results , briefly , are as follows : the agreement on better coordination of financial policies and the adoption of the new economic policy guidelines for the period from 2003 to 2005 .
We shall now have economic policy guidelines for three years and this is , I believe , important so that we can plan better .
A second point was the new employment strategy .
We introduced the tripartite social conference which was informal and has now been formalised and which , of course , allows us to broaden the social dialogue .
There was agreement on tax arrangements in relation to tax evasion to third countries and taxation of energy products .
The agreement on tax arrangements in relation to tax evasion had been discussed for a very long time in the Council without our coming to any conclusion and I am glad that we managed to overcome the problems under the Greek Presidency , problems which also arose because certain countries felt , and still feel , that they should try to make special arrangements of their own on such basic issues .
We overcame that .
Another arrangement which had been discussed for a very long time was the European patent .
We completed the relevant debate and there was agreement , as there was on the action plan to increase investment in research and incorporate new technologies into European education systems .
I think that the adoption of the Small Business Charter , the decisions to improve the regulatory framework and the agreements on integrating the European stock exchanges were important .
The decisions on the liberalisation of the energy market , on the carriage of freight by rail and on the new trans-European energy network and on extending the transport network were the subject of long discussion , but we completed them .
The adoption of the new strategy for sustainable development , the introduction of environmental objectives in sectors such as renewable sources of energy , decisions to withdraw single hull tankers and the agreement on environmental liability close this brief report .
I should like here to emphasise that the decision to withdraw single hull tankers , on which all the interested parties cooperated , was an important decision for environmental protection , a decision which in previous efforts years ago , after the accident of the Erika , was not taken .
Ladies and gentlemen , that brings me to the third subject , the Convention on the Future of Europe .
At the European Council in Thessaloniki , as you know , the Convention 's final proposal was presented by Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
Discussions were held for 18 months in the Convention and your participation was a determining factor .
The draft Constitutional Treaty emerged with a high degree of support .
We discussed in Thessaloniki whether this draft is a draft for starting negotiations at the Intergovernmental Conference and whether it is a good basis for discussion .
And we agreed that it is a good basis , which will help to get the negotiations started , because we realised that the terminology should not create confusion with respect to reality .
The agreement in the Convention shows that the frameworks within which we can change things are frameworks which need to be based on broad acceptance .
The Convention expressed broad acceptance and that is a basis for us to resolve the problem .
We must not start discussing everything from square one at the Intergovernmental Conference , nor must we focus on one issue or another and fail to reach a solution which has politically predefined margins , as referred to in the decision taken in Halkidiki .
We must close the Intergovernmental Conference by 1 May and we must sign after 1 May , so that the new members can sign and the text is ready before the elections on 15 June , so that the European citizens know what they will be voting on .
This is the timetable - if the matter can be closed earlier so much the better - but the final cut-off date for the presentation of the signed text must be 15 June .
We also agreed that the Convention will continue for a certain period of time to examine the text in order to process the third chapter , which concerns policies , as the text states , on technical matters .
In Thessaloniki , ladies and gentlemen , we also discussed immigration policy .
What was the problem ?
The problem is that in Seville and Tampere we had a great many decisions and that we could not complete and apply these decisions , the first and main reason being the lack of funds .
The European Commission stated that it had approximately EUR 140 million at its disposal .
We noted that this sum was available and we then decided to promote coordination and cooperation on guarding the borders , because it is clear that the problem of illegal immigration , as we saw a few weeks ago in Italy , for example , cannot be dealt with by one country alone , given that illegal immigrants come in , for example , by boat and try to disembark in one Mediterranean country or another and there must be overall monitoring of the area .
The second point we emphasised was the undertaking to repatriate illegal immigrants .
We called on the Commission to examine the possibility of new ways of safeguarding repatriation .
However , because there are already numerous treaties and agreements on repatriation , which essentially do not operate , we said that the Commission would need to evaluate cooperation with third countries on all issues relating both to immigration and cooperation with the European Union on the basis of specific criteria and take this into account when making agreements or policies with these countries , because it is not possible - this is not stated in the text but it is generally accepted - for us to make a policy of active help and cooperation while , at the same time , the countries we trade with are indifferent to the obligations which they have to combat the phenomena of illegal immigration .
We decided to proceed to create a common information technology system for issuing visas to third country nationals , which will allow illegal immigrants to be controlled , and we took certain decisions on the integration of immigrants into our societies .
Ladies and gentlemen , as you know , following the Thessaloniki Summit , an agreement was reached on the reform of the common agricultural policy .
Here again , the Presidency played an important part and we believe that this agreement is particularly useful because it sends out three central messages .
What does the agreement mean to farmers ?
It means that they will have a multiannual , guaranteed , predictable framework of income support similar to that which they enjoy today , as well as large margins as regards their production and business options .
For European citizens , the agreement means a better quality of life , because farmers ' income support will depend on compliance with European legislation on the environment , public health , food safety , hygiene and animal welfare .
Thirdly , shifting a very large part of common agricultural policy subsidies from products to income support to farmers will seriously strengthen the position of the European Union at the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
With this agreement , the Union will speak with one clear voice .
Ladies and gentlemen , as far as foreign relations are concerned , I can report that there was agreement between the Member States of the Union , followed by agreement with the countries of the Western Balkans , confirming the accession prospects of the countries in the region , adopting a new procedure for regular political dialogue and promoting the harmonisation of their legislation with the Community acquis and an important increase in financial support .
Iraq , as we know , was the most difficult chapter of our Presidency .
Many people expected it to take up all our time .
It did not , of course , and what the Presidency aspired to was to overcome the differences , not by discussing if certain people were or were not right to support one position or another , but to overcome the differences by pointing out what would need to be done in the future .
And following the United Nations Security Council resolution , there is now a framework for cooperation and we are in constant contact with the United Nations so that we can help with the reconstruction of Iraq within the framework of its resolutions .
As far as the Middle East is concerned , you know that the timetable for peace in the region , the so-called road map of the Quartet , was published and that the European Union is participating in this Quartet .
The Presidency had repeated contacts with the countries in the area and with the other countries and I believe that the truce achieved is the result both of the actions of the Quartet and of the European Union .
As far as trans-Atlantic relations are concerned , the Greek Presidency made every possible effort to defuse the tension which had arisen in trans-Atlantic relations and I believe that the visit to Washington demonstrated that we have good cooperation .
A principle was accepted which I believe to be self-evident ; in other words , that we must cooperate for the necessary reasons , for economic , political and security reasons , with the United States .
We can agree , we can disagree , when we disagree we can agree to disagree and continue our cooperation on this basis .
The Greek Presidency promoted a substantial improvement in relations between the European Union and Russia at the summit held in St Petersburg .
Finally , I should like to move from political issues to defence and security policy .
Our aim was for the European Union to have full operational capability .
And it acquired it during this period .
It acquired it by settling outstanding issues , such as the contribution of forces on the part of the partners , the application of the programme of manoeuvres and the development of crisis management procedures .
As a result , a European Union force is now in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , there is a policing mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina and we are also discussing the military mission to Bosnia-Herzegovina to take over the current activities of the ? ? ? ? force there .
At the European Council in Thessaloniki , the report on the strategy to gradually formulate a European defence and security doctrine was presented and discussed .
The informal Council of Foreign Ministers had asked for this report from Mr Solana .
Mr Solana will continue work in connection with this report and we believe that the report and the relevant debate will be an important step towards clarifying our common objectives in relation to defence and security and the means with which we shall achieve the common objectives .
The report helped to overcome the opposition which had appeared - and which I do not believe really existed - between certain countries cooperating to promote defence and security issues and other countries which did not want any such particular cooperation .
We are now sitting at the same table and the discussion will show how we can address these issues .
To close , I should like to refer to two issues relating to Community institutions .
The first is the review of the status of Community staff .
This is the first radical reform of the salary and pension system and the career system since the European Community was founded .
Finally , two issues of immediate interest to the European Parliament were the Interinstitutional Agreement to improve the regulatory environment and , secondly , the regulation on the status of European political parties .
With these two arrangements , we put an end to discussions which started a long time ago .
Ladies and gentlemen , this was the brief presentation of what was done during the Presidency and I should like to close by thanking , first of all , the President of the European Parliament , Mr Pat Cox , for his cooperation , and all of you in the European Parliament .
We consider that you are pivotal to promoting European integration and defending the Union 's interests , which is why we aspire to close cooperation with you .
And we had your direct support and cooperation in our work .
I thank you warmly for your contribution , and I wish you all every success during the forthcoming Italian Presidency .
. ( IT ) Mr President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , we have reached the half-way stage of a year full of ambitious projects and intense debate on the nature and destiny of Europe .
I would like , first of all , to heartily congratulate Prime Minister Simitis and all those who have worked alongside him to achieve our political and institutional goals .
I should like to focus on four of these goals : the conclusion of the work of the Convention , the Commission reforms , the substantial progress made in implementing the Tampere agenda and the new statute for European political parties .
Before addressing them in detail , however , I must mention some of the other major events of the last six months : the winding-up of the accession negotiations - a momentous event which Prime Minister Simitis has already discussed - and the handling of the difficult internal and international situations caused by the war in Iraq .
The reform of our common agricultural policy also deserves a special mention , the agreement last week bringing these six months to a close on a high note .
One of the essential elements in this success was the opinion issued by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , chaired by Joseph Daul , which I would like to thank heartily for its work .
Despite the extremely complex and thorny nature of the issue , the committee managed to deliver its opinion in good time for the conclusion of the negotiations .
This is a real innovation , for the decoupling of Community production subsidies , partial though it is , combined with land-management , environment and food-safety measures , is a genuinely revolutionary step for our agricultural policy .
We now have a good springboard for entering the WTO negotiations , and I expect our international partners - who are always lecturing us - to match our commitment and do their part too , for they too must do their part .
In these six months , the Greek Presidency has steered us safely through the most troubled waters with that wisdom and sensitivity that has characterised the Greek people since the dawn of our civilisation .
As regards the first point I wanted to mention , within the Union , the first half of the year was dominated by the work of the Convention , which was almost - although not completely - finished in time for the Thessaloniki European Council .
We have found a method that has worked and that we could use to amend the Constitution if ever it needs to be revised in the light of the constant flow of new developments reserved for us in the future .
As for the actual draft Constitution , there are positive and negative points in the Commission 's eyes , as you know .
It certainly makes the Union more transparent by simplifying and reducing the number of legislative instruments and by proposing a better division of powers between the institutions .
It strengthens our democratic legitimacy by extending the codecision procedure so that it applies almost across the board , and this is something that is extremely important for Parliament .
It increases our ability to make our voice heard in the world through a newly created foreign minister for the whole Union , through the establishment of a single legal personality and through new provisions on the foreign , common security policy and defence policy .
Lastly the text of the Constitution now includes the Charter of Fundamental Rights safeguarding the rights of all European citizens .
These are the high points , and they are very important high points , but there are also a number of weak points where the compromise brokered does not go as far as we would have liked .
Although the draft Constitution extends qualified-majority voting , it certainly does not go far enough .
The proposed solution carries the risk of paralysis in a 25- or 30-Member State Union .
When it comes to the institutions , moreover , it will be difficult to convince the citizens that only half of the Commissioners should have a vote in the College , at least in such a complex phase in our institutional life as this .
Furthermore , the potentially overlapping roles of the newly created position of President of the Council and President of the Commission will be just as hard to understand .
Some advances in economic governance are made but it is imperative that we also set up the external representation of the euro , lack of which leaves the euro , without a doubt , more vulnerable and our economy more exposed .
These are not just technicalities but issues which require us to muster the courage to overcome the misgivings and fears of the present and look to the future .
We must realise that , if we do not make the leap today , Europe will no longer have any influence on the international stage in 30 or 40 years ' time .
Viewed as a whole , however , the Convention 's draft is a sound basis - and a joint effort which I support - for the Intergovernmental Conference that will have the task of approving a final version .
The Commission will play its part in making improvements in this regard , starting with the opinion that will be published in September in time for the start of the IGC .
The second point is the reform of the Commission and the staff regulations .
We are approaching the last year of the Commission 's term of office .
When I arrived , I made Commission reform one of my priorities , and I remember that we issued a White Paper as early as March 2000 .
A crucial part of this reform was an overhaul of the staff regulations for EU officials .
Here , too , I must thank the Greek Presidency for driving forward these negotiations , which were , in actual fact , extremely difficult .
Thanks to these valuable endeavours to mediate and drive forward the process , we reached a consensus on the best possible compromise , a compromise that respects - and I would stress this - the general approach of the Commission 's initial proposals .
As a follow-up to this agreement , the Commission will submit a second proposal in the autumn that will , of course , take account of this House 's resolution of 19 June 2003 and the talks between representatives of staff , institutions and the Member States taking place in the consultative committee .
The aim is to bring the new regulations into force on 1 May 2004 , the same day on which the new Member States will become part of the Union .
In addition to this goal , however , I am interested in the ultimate political aim of the exercise , which is to ensure continuity , independence and quality in our departments .
I have to say that I have worked with many administrations in my life , and rarely have I encountered such hard-working , high-calibre employees as I have observed in the EU institutions .
I therefore believe that the new staff regulations will allow our staff to work with renewed energy and pride , especially when their colleagues from 10 new Member States arrive .
It will not be an easy matter to absorb new cultures , precisely because 10 countries are arriving together , not just one .
The third point I want to focus on is immigration and asylum policy and the management of the Union 's external borders .
The Commission would like to congratulate the Greek Presidency on sustaining a consistent and balanced position on these matters .
Moreover , I am happy to note that the European Council conclusions were inspired by the Commission 's communications of 4 June .
More specifically , looking at the issues still on the table , I would point out that Community financing should gradually rise to match the scope of our political goals and objectives .
In other words , on no account can we pretend to be able to achieve all the goals we have set ourselves with the funding we have come up with .
We have , of course , produced an estimate of resources which does not exceed the limits of the budget - we have remained strictly within the limits of the budget - but we have estimated the resources needed at EUR 140 million for the years 2004 to 2006 , and at EUR 250 million for a multiannual cooperation programme with non-Member countries over the period 2004 to 2008 .
This will take us through to the new funding provided under the post-2006 Financial Perspective , which , as the Thessaloniki conclusions confirm , must reflect this political priority of the Union .
Otherwise , clearly , if we do not succeed in giving the citizens security , we will be jeopardising the very identity of the Union .
As far as relations with third countries are concerned , the new programme of cooperation proposed by the Commission on 11 June will provide substantial support for the common readmission policy , which is another milestone , and it is crucial that you and the Council approve this proposal before the end of this Parliamentary term .
Negotiation of Community agreements , with the support of the Council and the Member States , should also be stepped up .
As I see it , Russia , Ukraine and Morocco , three key countries for these agreements , are the main priorities .
The European Council has asked the Commission to proceed towards integrated management of external borders , and we believe that the best solution is to set up an agency ; this will make it possible to improve implementation of the Council 's strategic guidelines , in agreement with the relevant national authorities , in such a way as to constitute a network of coordination .
We are also laying the foundations for what is known as the VIS , the ambitious European Visa Identification System , which is also a common instrument for implementing a policy which will reassure our citizens and give them peace of mind with due regard for individual freedoms .
Indeed , the main thing is to strike a balance between security and our commitment to upholding freedoms , a commitment which we have made , which we confirm and which we can on no account go back on .
Combating illegal immigration must therefore go hand in hand with measures to facilitate the entry of legal migrants into the Union .
In this connection , let me remind you that we already have some proposals on the table , notably those on admission and residence for purposes of work , study , vocational training of immigrants and voluntary work to facilitate integration .
Parliament has already delivered an opinion on these proposals , which are still being discussed by the Council .
The Commission welcomes the European Council 's call to draw up an overall policy for integrating legal immigrants .
We need better coordination of national measures at Community level as well .
I feel that an annual progress report would certainly be a step in the right direction .
There has been so much talk about benchmarking , dialogue and so on .
I believe that , in such a complex matter where so many different factors are involved , a report taking stock at European level could be useful to both you and us .
We must show the same political drive in the field of asylum .
In this regard , I am very disappointed to have to report that the Council was unable to reach agreement on the directive defining the concept of refugee and harmonising subsidiary forms of protection .
We must achieve this , again within the framework of the debate on rights which we mentioned just now .
Indeed , this directive , together with the directive on procedures , is at the heart of the common system .
I want to take this opportunity to promise that the Italian Presidency will have the Commission 's full cooperation in getting these two directives adopted by December at the latest , the deadline set by the Thessaloniki European Council .
I will now come to the last point , the statute for political parties .
We welcome the recent adoption of the statute for European political parties by this House .
This is the fourth success of the Greek Presidency that I want to mention today .
Let me add to the many others my own words of appreciation for your contribution in settling an issue which had become never-ending and which it was imperative to resolve .
A number of factors have helped us achieve this result : the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice , the new proposal drawn up by the Commission , the use of majority voting and , above all , first-rate cooperation between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
The issue of political parties was a complex one that had remained unresolved for two years .
This welcome settlement was achieved only thanks to majority voting and the codecision procedure .
We must learn from this for the future .
At last , European political parties have a clear and transparent framework in which to work and can count on a source of financing that will be borne , at least partially , by the Community budget .
This is an absolute prerequisite for running a democracy and a measure that is part of the broader process of putting European integration on a constitutional footing .
The proposal adopted lays down some clear and simple conditions but avoids being overly restrictive or too formally bureaucratic , and so I feel it is a sensible measure which will have positive political effects .
Indeed , as we all know , the political parties are the key element in the Union 's democratic structure : without them there can be no integration and no European awareness .
Ladies and gentlemen , this brings me to the end of what I have to say today .
As I said at the outset , there are many other issues worthy of mention but I think it is preferable to stop here so that we can focus properly on a few events of the past six months which have been of particular political importance .
Lastly , I would like to thank Prime Minister Simitis and the entire Greek Presidency team once again .
In these six months , they have taken some huge steps forward for Europe , and I am not praising and thanking this Presidency out of mere politeness but because they really do deserve it .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the PPE part of which is today celebrating its fiftieth birthday , has consistently provided very positive support to the Greek Presidency , in close cooperation with our Greek colleagues under the chairmanship of Antonios Trakatellis , but also with our friends in Greece , Nea Demokratia under the leadership of Konstantinos Karamanlis .
This is what we promised you in Athens , Prime Minister , and we have kept our word because we know that your success is our shared success .
The highlight of the Greek Presidency - and you were able to build on the good preparatory work done by the Danish Presidency and also on the European Parliament 's decision of 9 April - was unquestionably the signature of the accession treaties on 16 April in the Stoa Attalou .
When we alighted from the bus - and I should particularly like to thank you for inviting the group chairmen to this event , something that should set a precedent for other ceremonial occasions in the European Union - I had the good fortune to be able to accompany the first freely elected prime minister of Poland , Tadeusz Mazowiecki , down the steps at the side of the Acropolis to the Stoa Attalou , and we talked about the great change in Europe and the desire of the people of Central and Eastern Europe to live in freedom .
The fact that the end of this process was marked as it were with the signature of the treaties in Athens is something that will never be forgotten , and we are grateful that we now have 162 observers with us from the accession countries .
Unfortunately , however , your presidency has not just been a presidency of high points . As you mentioned yourself , your presidency has been overshadowed by the war in Iraq .
I do not wish to look back in anger today either : I prefer to look to the future , and we must learn the lessons from the mistakes that we have made .
Our first conclusion is that if national positions are to be adopted on an issue of foreign policy or if two or three countries wish to take a stance , then they are obliged first to consult all of their European Union partners and to resolve the issues together .
We must act together and Europe , the European Union , must not go into these difficult decisions when it is already divided into two , three or four camps . Europeans must act together !
The second point concerns the Convention .
On certain issues , including our foreign and security policy , we must have the courage to decide by majorities , albeit by large , qualified majorities .
If we keep unanimity we will not be able to reach common positions and this is one of our demands .
My third point is that clearly partnerships are not easy , particularly when one partner is a superpower .
But it is precisely if we in Europe want to be on an equal footing with our American friends that this European Security and Defence Policy needs to be formulated in such a way that it does not see America as an opponent , but as a partner , a country together with which we wish to solve problems on this earth .
You referred quite rightly , Mr President-in-Office , to the difficult issues of asylum and immigration , and the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , whom I should also like to thank very warmly for his work , mentioned the joint administration of external borders .
This is an important matter : we need to reach agreements with those countries from which these really pitiful people come , from which they set out in their boats , agreements in which they undertake to secure their borders .
But I would insist that this is not solely a law enforcement issue , a task for the police .
It is a problem that needs to be resolved above all in the countries of the Mediterranean and in North Africa , and that is why we need European Union assistance for these countries , and these countries have to reform so that the young people in them have a genuine future and do not put their lives in danger by setting off on their travels .
We see this problem of immigration not only as a policing problem , but also as a fundamentally human problem and the key is to give people the chance of a future in their home countries .
A further point is the Convention .
I should particularly like to thank its President , Mr Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , for his work , but also the two Members in the Convention Praesidium , Iñigo Méndez de Vigo from our group and Klaus Hänsch from the Socialist Group , as well as our group spokesman , Elmar Brok .
We must now call for this draft constitution to form the basis for the work in the Convention and for the decision to be made in the Convention now on the basis of this draft constitution .
We very much hope - and I will be saying this again tomorrow to the future President of the Council - that we can reach a result by the end of this year , so that swift and speedy progress can be made , and we also hope that the European Parliament will enjoy appropriate and effective representation .
When the Heads of State and Government meet , the President of Parliament must be present ; when the foreign ministers act , our parliamentary representatives should be there and not be as it were consigned to the level of administrators .
The task before us is immense , but I believe that we can achieve it .
I should like to thank you in particular , Mr President-in-Office , for your contribution to the Statute for European political parties .
Admittedly this still needs to be formally adopted under the Italian Presidency , but the approach adopted was , I believe , the right one . As far as the Members ' Statute is concerned , I hope that it will be possible here too to make further progress in the next few weeks and months .
Finally , may I say that this presidency has had its highs and lows : I did not envy your position as President during the Iraq crisis and all that went with it .
I was pleased for you on 16 April ; you did your duty , as we would expect from a presidency , and I should like to thank you very much for this .
Our group has provided you with fair , objective and positive support ; I hope that you share this impression , because this is our shared Europe and a success for Europe is a success for us all .
Mr President , Mr President ? in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , please allow me , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to congratulate the Group of the European People 's Party on their fiftieth anniversary .
It is an important date for the PPE-DE and also for democracy in Europe .
Mr President , I have a problem .
It is difficult for me at this point to say anything more positive about the Greek Presidency than Mr Poettering and the Financial Times because my family ties and solidarity with the Greek Prime Minister are well known .
I just want to say one thing , your Presidency has not been a cruise around the Aegean Sea , but rather an ' Odyssey ' .
I believe it is fair to say , moreover , that you have captained the European ship with leadership and decisiveness , and I believe this should be stressed at this point .
In line with the thinking of the Presidency , firstly , with regard to enlargement , the ceremony of 16 April in the Stoa , in the Market Square next to the Acropolis , was an important event .
I would like to thank you for the way you treated the representatives of the European Parliament , headed by our President , but above all I would like to thank you for the historic opportunity which took place in what was the cradle of democracy and also , in relation to an issue which is very close to the hearts of all Europeans and very dramatic for Greece - the case of Cyprus and relations with Turkey - the intelligence and flexibility being shown by the current Greek Government in establishing and developing relations with such an important ally .
Secondly , with regard to the Lisbon strategy , I believe we must stress the implementation of the employment guidelines , particularly with regard to gender equality - and in this regard I would like to welcome the work being done by Commissioner Diamantopoulou .
In the current situation we are largely concerned by the deadlock affecting the directive on temporary workers , as well as the fact that the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines are not responding to reality : they are more of an intellectual exercise than a political one , and they do not in fact respond to our need to make our European economy more dynamic and defend our common currency .
I believe we should also stress , as the President has done , the progress that has been made on maritime safety , particularly in view of Greece 's role as the main European power .
Furthermore , with regard to an aspect which is important to our economic future ; the reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , I believe we should also welcome the fact that we have achieved a reform which puts us in a very significant position in terms of the future , particularly for European agriculture and also for the negotiations in the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
With regard to the future of Europe , the fact that the Convention has concluded its work during the six-month period is an important step , producing a text which does not contain options , which does not contain red cards , and which , as the President has said , and I take good note of this , only needs to be subjected to technical modifications .
Of course , we would have liked a constitution with more qualified majority voting in social areas , on taxation , on foreign and security policy and with a better interinstitutional balance .
The best is the enemy of the good , however .
We believe that the important thing now is to consolidate what has been achieved and not to move backwards .
In this regard we are also concerned about the participation of Parliament . We believe that the President must be represented at the highest level , that we must have representatives in the Intergovernmental Conference and , furthermore , now that the future of Europe has been debated for the first time in public , in our Parliament as well , in plenary and in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , this House must be the public forum which the Presidency is obliged to report to .
I believe that this also corresponds to the times we are living in .
I would like to add one further point on the Statute for Political Parties .
All the parties and parliamentary groups have worked together to achieve a statute for the parties .
Now , however , we are in the dramatic situation of having a statute for parties but no statute for Members of Parliament . This is like having rules for an army but not having rights for soldiers .
I would genuinely like , therefore , to draw the attention of the Council Presidency to the fact that it makes no sense to block such an important step , which is of constitutional value to Europe .
Finally , a comment on external relations .
You have faced a dramatic crisis which tested the reciprocal loyalty laid down in the Treaties between European allies .
You acted firmly with regard to transatlantic relations ; you maintained European representation in a dignified manner at the summit with a very important ally with which we can have relations without agreeing on everything .
I believe , therefore , that the Greek Presidency deserves our recognition and our applause .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , looking at the balance sheet of the Greek Presidency , the items on the plus side of the ledger well outnumber those on the negative side .
Given Europe 's difficulties in the last six months with the Iraq war and economic stagnation , that is a remarkable tribute to your government .
Your first priority , rightly , was to meet the timetable for enlargement of the European Union .
The signing of the Accession Treaties beneath the Acropolis and seven successful referenda have amply met this goal .
Our joy at Europe 's reunification is nonetheless tinged with sadness that Greece was unable to exploit its privileged relationships to bring in a united Cyprus .
Please do not cease your efforts .
We also regret the tensions which surfaced between ' new ' and ' old ' Europe over Iraq , despite your best efforts and two common positions to your credit .
Bringing the Convention 's draft Constitutional Treaty safely into port also deserves to be chalked up as a notable success of your presidency .
The Liberal Democrats in this House agree with you .
The draft text agreed by the Convention provides a good basis for the Constitution , and we will hold Member State governments to the commitments they have made .
We welcome the extra time given to the Convention to complete its work on Part III , though for the Council to describe the remaining discussions on majority voting and codecision as ' purely technical work ' is a masterpiece of understatement worthy of the British Government 's description of the whole process as just a ' tidying-up exercise ' .
The vanity of victory teaches us far less than the humiliation of defeat and Europe 's failure over Iraq seems to have had some beneficial consequences , notably in driving forward European cooperation in security and defence policy .
The establishment of the rapid reaction force , the launching of operations in Bosnia , FYROM and the Congo are certainly pluses .
However , the weaknesses in the quality and coordination of European defence spending are clearly negatives , which we hope will be remedied by the new Armaments Agency .
Our failure over Iraq also helped you adopt two remarkable documents at Thessaloniki : Mr Solana 's EU security strategy and the Council 's declaration on weapons of mass destruction .
The security strategy provides a fitting European response to the US doctrine , resting as it does on the European principles of multilateralism and prevention rather than pre-emption .
The statement on WMD makes clear to our American friends that we are taking the threat of these weapons seriously , and offers a framework for Europe 's response to Iran and North Korea .
You made Justice and Home Affairs the centrepiece of your presidency programme .
Much has been achieved , though justice and freedom still play second fiddle to security , to the European Union 's discredit .
Commitments to further progress on legal migration and the integration of third country nationals are a fitting riposte to those who sought to repeat in Thessaloniki the kind of headlines which shamed Seville .
However , my group regrets that you did not provide for proper parliamentary scrutiny , at European or national level , of the recent EU-US extradition agreement .
On economic reform the Hellenic Presidency has made good progress , notably reforming the Stability Pact to target underlying deficits , concluding the energy liberalisation package and adopting the much-needed pensions directive .
All in all , this has been a profitable six months for the European Union , despite the huge costs of war and the difficult economic position .
Let us hope that , as you hand the baton to your successors , they too will run hard to keep up the Olympian lead that you have established .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , in my speech I shall concentrate on a subject which was dealt with at the European Council in Thessaloniki , a subject that has hardly been mentioned up to now , but which is one of considerable scope .
I too would like to talk about the document presented by Mr Javier Solana entitled ' A Secure Europe in a Better World ' .
On several occasions I have called in vain for a response from the European Union to the publication , on 20 September last year , of the new strategic doctrine of the United States , which was first applied in practice in the ' pre-emptive ' war against Iraq .
Nine months after Washington , therefore , the Council has just given birth to its own strategic doctrine .
No doubt it is purely by chance that this text first saw the light on the eve of the Transatlantic Summit .
What , then , does this document say ?
Let me give you a few quotations . ' With the new threats the first line of defence will often be abroad .
The new threats are dynamic .
Left alone , they will become more dangerous ' .
This quotation explains the meaning of that other enigmatic phrase contained in the document , ' Pre-emptive engagement can avoid more serious problems in the future . ? . we should be ready to act before a crisis occurs ' .
Then , just in case things are still not clear , I quote again : ' In failed states , military instruments may be needed to restore order ? ' and , more generally , and still quoting , ' We need to develop a strategic culture that fosters early , rapid , and where necessary , robust intervention ' .
Finally , there is the inevitable , ' Acting together , the European Union and the United States can be a formidable force for good in the world ' .
We cannot believe our ears when we hear such mimicry of the ideas and even the language of the current tenant of the White House .
If we can believe the press agencies , even Mr Prodi , in the crowd , showed his enthusiasm for President Bush by declaring that when Europe and the United States were united , no enemy would be able to stand up to them .
On what basis , however , are we to be united , and for what purpose ?
That is the question , Mr Prodi !
It is not by complaisance that we shall earn the respect of an American administration which despises Europeans , including the most conciliatory among them .
Of that , for my part , I am convinced .
Europe will exist as an essential actor on the world stage when it has the political will to use its economic clout , its political influence and its capacity for forming strong partnerships , particularly with the South , in order to help to create rules that are different from those that prevail at present , so as to achieve a globalisation with greater solidarity and greater democracy , and so as to create a peaceful world .
The document presented in Thessaloniki turns its back on such a prospect and gives us an apocalyptic description of the threats , without ever examining their causes in any depth .
The conflict in the Middle East is dealt with in four and a half lines out of a total of fifteen pages of text .
The concept of fighting for security that is described therein gives precedence to the military dimension , even though this approach has proved ineffective from Kabul to Baghdad , and even in the United States itself , whose vulnerability was so tragically emphasised on 11 September 2001 , despite the fact that that country alone accounts for 40 % of the world 's military spending .
In this context , the references in the Council document to the multilateral system have a hollow ring to them .
After all , the main issues here have to do with the WTO , the international financial institutions and NATO .
The United Nations is mentioned only in order to ask that in future the European Union should be ready , and I quote , ' ? to act when their rules are broken ' .
We can recognise , in this allusion , a call to order addressed to those member countries of the Security Council who opposed the ' material breach ' argument quoted by George Bush as grounds for going to war with the backing of the UN .
For all these reasons , my group believes that the taking of this first step towards a new strategic doctrine of the European Union would be a turning point , the implications of which we would have to explain , and the dangers of which we would have to emphasise , to our fellow citizens .
Given the power of the recent mobilisation of European public opinion , in both East and West , against the argument in favour of war and American supremacy , you can be certain that you will have to explain yourselves .
I would ask those Members who are motivated by the knowledge that it is civilisation that is at stake here , to join , at 3 p.m. today , in hearing the views , on this subject , of two eminent experts , one , Mr Pascal Boniface , from Europe , and the other , Mr Philip Golub , from America .
Let us debate the issues with frankness , for it is the whole significance of the Europe of the future that is at stake .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Greek Presidency fell at a difficult time , and it has been a success .
I should like to congratulate you on this achievement , Mr President-in-Office .
Incidentally , you have proved that the principle of a six-monthly rotating presidency of the European Council is a creative and enriching force , and this is something that the future permanent Council presidency will have to prove .
The Chalkidiki Summit was also a success .
This was not a foregone conclusion .
The Heads of State or Government came together and nearly all of them had a long list of national ambitions that , even at the last minute , they wanted to salvage from the Convention 's draft constitution .
But when our Heads of State or Government saw each other they were deeply moved and left the Convention 's draft in peace .
This was a great success , except for the moment when it was decided to regard the Laeken mandate as fulfilled and to inform us - and I should now like to address this point , Mr President-in-Office - that Part III now only required some purely technical work .
This was the first that we had heard of this : otherwise , why on earth are we continuing our work in the Convention in July ?
Because there was no consensus on the Praesidium 's draft .
Hundreds upon hundreds of amendments - 1 700 of them - have been tabled and not on technical issues .
Essentially a very clear question is at stake in this work : namely whether we are going to deliver on the promises , values and aims set out in the first and second parts , whether we are actually going to make the competences , responsibilities and principles of democracy , that we enshrined by consensus in the first and second parts , a reality , or whether we are simply setting ourselves new objectives without freeing Europe from the chains of the past .
I should like to illustrate how critical this situation is with the aid of a few examples .
In the first part , of course , we declare our overarching support for the principles of democracy and the rule of law , but in the third part there are still key areas where only the Council can legislate , for example on European social policy .
National parliaments lose the right to ratify international treaties without this House gaining that right .
In one of the most difficult cases , concerning the reduced powers of the European Court of Justice to supervise one of the most sensitive areas in the constitution , that of police and judicial cooperation on home affairs , 80 % of the Convention have demanded the deletion of the exemptions .
No policy without judicial control , no law without Parliament - these are clearly not technical issues , but issues of self-determination and the definition of Europe .
The ability to act is a key principle , but in the last few nights of the Convention whole swathes of policy disappeared from the majority voting list and reappeared under unanimity .
We were put under pressure by governments . The majority of the Convention wants more ; the people of Europe want more .
We know that the European public demand far more of Europe than the governments of Europe are willing to give .
The Convention does not need to make technical decisions here ; it needs to achieve fundamental reforms .
Take public services of general interest , cornerstones of European social policy ; the vast majority of the Convention want them to be explicitly protected in the constitution .
So far this request has been turned down .
I am not saying this to belittle the work of the Convention or the current draft , but to make this House aware that a great deal of what we have enshrined in the first and second parts still needs to be delivered and that we will not be keeping our promises to the people if we do not make one further effort to bring about a genuine reform in the third part .
Mr President , the Greek Government assumed presidency of the Union at a time of great international uncertainty and political instability .
It was clear that at the start of this year different governments in Europe had diverse viewpoints when it came to facing up to the growing political problem of Iraq .
The Greek Government sought to put in place in Europe a common political position on Iraq .
This was always going to be difficult to achieve but the Greek Government approached this political issue at all times with determination and with true sensitivity to all the parties involved .
The international difficulties which surrounded the war in Iraq were many , but I believe that in the context of its presidency of the European Union the Greek Government dealt with this difficult political matter as even-handedly as possible .
The last six months have also seen a great momentum in the work of the European Union Convention .
The Greek Government has worked very closely with all the representatives on the EU Convention and this has contributed in ensuring a new draft Treaty that will pave the way for new structures within the Union .
The Treaty forms the basis for future discussions at the IGC , which will finalise the provisions of a new European Treaty .
We are all aware that the internal structures operating within the European Union must be modernised and by 1 May next we are hopefully going to be living in a Community of 25 Member States comprising a population of over 500 million people .
Decision-making procedures must change so that we can guarantee that decisions can be taken within the different EU institutions in a streamlined and structured manner .
We want to enact a new Treaty that will command the support of the people of Europe and which will oversee the smooth running of the European Union for the next 50 years .
We must recall that the European Union has been a success because the interests and concerns of both the smaller and the larger Member States are respected within the institutional structure in Europe .
In fact , the last six months have been testament to the fact that the smaller countries in Europe can run an effective and focused presidency of the European Union .
This is an issue that we will return to again in the run-up to the next IGC .
The Greek Government has supported recent peace efforts in the Middle East .
After the war in Iraq the Middle East region has become more unstable and it is incumbent on us all to ensure that we get the peace process in the Middle East back on track .
This is a matter that should not be left to the United States alone ; the European Union has a very positive and central role to play in promoting the road map to peace in the Middle East .
I would like to commend the Greek Government for the manner in which it has overseen the running of the presidency of the European Union for the past six months .
The vast majority of the political goals that it set at the start of the year have been met and that is a commendable achievement .
The Greek Presidency has set a good example of how a presidency should be conducted on behalf of all the Member States and others will do well to follow this example .
To the President-in-Office I would like to say that you have won respect and support from this institution for the semester .
On a personal basis I would like to wish him some short period of relaxation in one of the many beautiful Greek islands which some of us had a opportunity of visiting in recent times , during the presidency .
Might I suggest to President Simitis that I could recommend no place better than Platy Yialos and he would know what I mean when I say that .
Mr President , the climax of the Greek Presidency was a special summit involving the new nations of the West Balkans .
They too are making efforts to enter the EU . They will be sincerely welcome , and I am pleased that the EU Charter of Human Rights contains the recognition of the rights of ethnic minorities that is deserved by everyone in the Balkans .
The EU may have 25 Member States on 1 May of next year , and perhaps 30 in 2007 and 35 in 2010 .
The process may suddenly go very fast , because the countries concerned find it difficult to see any alternatives , given that , in practice , the EU also legislates for its neighbouring countries .
We must reform the EU that much more quickly in order to obtain more supple and flexible decision-making structures suited to Europe in its entirety , with very big differences between countries .
An Estonian language teacher can earn ten times as much by working in Brussels .
It is not easy to secure a proper language education in Tallinn .
It will be possible for MEPs from Prague to earn 20 times as much as their colleagues in the national parliament , so it will be no fun returning over the Charles Bridge in Prague .
One hectare of land in the Netherlands costs 30 times as much as Polish agricultural land .
It is scarcely Polish farmers who are buying up Dutch land .
The majority of Polish slaughterhouses and dairies are to be closed down when the EU rules come into force .
Why not be more flexible in introducing EU rules into the candidate countries and the new partnership countries .
There is no one in the EU who is lining up to pay subsidies to unemployed slaughterhouse workers in Poland .
The high point of the Greek Presidency was the solemn signature of the agreements to extend the EU to include ten new Member States .
Here we were in the cradle of democracy , welcoming a range of countries that could only enter the EU because they had become democracies .
It is one of the Copenhagen criteria that countries can only be accepted when they have stable parliamentary democracies .
That is why it is all the more absurd that the concluding summit in Haldidiki accepted the Convention 's draft constitution that would remove the greater part of democracy in both the new and the present Member States .
In our case , power is not to reside with those who are elected but with people who were once elected and can now no longer be .
When prime ministers can no longer be re-elected in their own countries , they can be appointed to lead us in Europe , without being answerable to the electorate .
The national parliaments and the electorate are losing far more power than the EU is gaining , and that is not a guarantee of increased voter turn-out in the EU elections .
Hold referendums on the constitution in all the countries . Ask the voters if they want to participate less in elections .
Imagine its being possible , in the birthplace of democracy , to accept Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's getting away with quoting Thucydides , when what the draft constitution does is precisely to remove power from the majority of the electorate in the Member States and give most of it to the bureaucrats in Brussels .
Mr President , the Athens Accession Treaty signed on 16 April was a historic landmark in the history of Europe .
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall my party has been consistent and determined in its support for the enlargement of the Union , and we unreservedly welcome the positive results of the referendums that have already taken place in many of the accession states .
However , we are less supportive of the presidency in other respects .
On Iraq , the damage to transatlantic relations arising from the ' gang of four ' summit , attended by Germany , France , Belgium and Luxembourg , also severely undermined NATO .
At a time when many of our citizens in Europe are facing economic stagnation and deflation , there has sadly been little progress in advancing the Lisbon agenda of economic structural reform .
Instead , we have seen that we again prefer to devote most of our time to institutional reform , whilst persuading ourselves that this is the sort of progress that European citizens are crying out for .
I doubt it .
The presidency conclusions begin by stating that the Convention was successful in bringing our Union closer to its citizens , strengthening our Union 's democratic character , enhancing our Union 's ability to act as a coherent and unified force in the international system .
I fear that such warm , optimistic rhetoric is little more than that .
The results of the Convention 's work have again shown the inability of a European political elite to reflect the real concerns of the people of Europe .
We are asked to believe that what our citizens really want is an EU with a legal personality , a legally binding Charter of Fundamental Rights , the removal of the pillar structure , an extension of majority voting , an EU president and foreign minister , common asylum and immigration policies and a European public prosecutor - in short , that people want a fundamental change in the relationship between the Union and its people .
The British Prime Minister 's now infamous view that the Convention is merely a tidying-up exercise has attracted derision from Eurosceptic and Europhile alike .
I repeat today that the people of the United Kingdom have a right to a referendum on this constitutional treaty , just as other Member States intend to do .
If the governments of the Union really wish to bring their citizens closer to the Union , then it is in their interests and those of their people to ensure that referendums are held in order to legitimise what is being proposed in their name .
My party believes in a different kind of Europe : a Europe where the nation state is the fundamental building block of cooperation and intergovernmentalism is preferable to one-way integration , which I fear is being reinforced by the Convention .
It is a different kind of Europe to the integrationist agenda , but it is no less European for that .
I wish the Convention had chosen this route .
I hope that the governments of the Union look afresh at the results of the Convention when the Intergovernmental Conference begins its work .
Finally , I noted that the presidency adds that the accession countries will participate in the Intergovernmental Conference on an equal footing with current Member States .
I hope that means that they will be given the same voting rights as Member States .
It would be outrageous for the IGC to conclude a new constitutional structure for Europe just weeks in advance of accession and try to present this as a done deal .
No democrat should put up with that .
Just for your information , the conclusions from Thessaloniki make it very clear that the accession states will play a full part in the Intergovernmental Conference on an equal footing , which , as you said , is ideal .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the chairman of the socialist group of the European Parliament spoke just now about the Odyssey of the Greek Presidency .
It was indeed an Odyssey which floated between the Circe of the war in Iraq - perhaps I should remind you that Circe was a wicked witch who had the ability to turn men into pigs - and the good goddess Calypso of the Convention on the Future of Europe which may guide the European Ulysses to the safe haven of the Europe of his dreams .
As Europeans and as Greeks , we can be proud of this success , however unhappy we are about the incidents of war we had to address .
The Greek Presidency undertook to address both the issue of Iraq and the differences which this war provoked between the Member States of the European Union and between the European Union and the United States .
At the summit Councils in February and March , with the promotion and exploitation of the role of the United Nations , the European Union acquired a material presence on the international stage .
Public opinion in the European countries recognised and welcomed the contribution by the Community institutions .
The European Union is based not only on the principles of democracy , but also on the rejection in principle of war in international relations .
The Member States , who have a very bloody history of conflict between them , no longer arm themselves against each other .
These principles now need to be consolidated between the Member States , the candidate countries and Europe and its new neighbours as a whole .
The Greek Presidency was persistent in its efforts to disseminate these principles in the new and sometimes dangerous areas of responsibility into which enlargement has led Europe .
Problems in sensitive areas , such as Cyprus , which the Foreign Ministers in the area have called a sort of powder magazine of the Eastern Mediterranean , were addressed methodically and consistently .
Cyprus , if there is the cooperation expected from the Turkish side which , unfortunately , there has still not been but we hope that there will be , can constitute a standard for the coexistence of different nations within the same state .
In the same spirit , the Greek Presidency especially promoted the peace process in the Middle East .
The current diplomatic procedures in this region are also the result of initiatives by the Greek Presidency .
From a wider perspective , it is worth highlighting the guidelines given for the formulation of a new strategy by the European Union , which was worked out down to the last detail by the Council 's High Representative .
The promotion of European pacifist positions in the Western Balkans and the summit in Thessaloniki resulted , with its decisions , in a significant turn round in relations between Europe and the Western Balkans .
With these efforts the world did not become completely safe , but we can say that , thanks to these efforts , the Greek Presidency has bequeathed a much easier or , at least , less difficult task to its successor than it would have had without the methodical , consistent and sometimes inspired work of the Greek Presidency not intervened .
Mr President , firstly I would like to pay tribute to Mr Katiforis for his work for the Greek Presidency within the Convention .
The European Council was quite right to resist the temptation to deconstruct the Convention 's work .
The result would certainly be greatly inferior .
As far as the revision of Part III is concerned , I am prepared to turn myself into a technician , pure or not , for the final phase of the work .
I quite agree with President Prodi that it is vital to extend the scope of qualified-majority voting as far as we can if the Council is in the future to be able to enjoy the capacity to take decisions .
But what about Part IV concerning the revision and the entry-into-force procedures ?
The European Council was completely silent upon this point .
Was it brought up and , if so , what was said ?
Would Mr Simitis agree with me that unless we can modify the future revision procedures we will be forever trapped in the dual lock of unanimity plus national ratification procedures - frequently protracted and problematical ?
Surely it is desirable that the Union avoids putting itself inside such a straitjacket .
We must find a sufficiently flexible form of modifying the Constitutional settlement if we are to be able to move with the changing circumstances we will face in the years to come .
Mr President , unfortunately , as we predicted at the beginning of the Greek Presidency , decisions were taken during the past six months of the Greek Presidency which reinforce the anti-grass roots , reactionary and aggressive character of the European Union .
The increase in the retirement age , the reduction in pensions , the privatisation of social security and the extension of part-time and temporary employment were promoted .
In the name of competitiveness , the general economic policy guidelines of the European Union were approved , the main feature of which is the attack on the workers in order to increase the profits of the monopolies .
The citizens of the Member States of the European Union were handed over to the United States bound hand and foot with the disgraceful agreements on judicial cooperation .
The Greek Presidency aligned with the USA in its interventions in Cuba , with the pretext of Iraq 's weapons of mass destruction , which proved to be non-existent , and the objective of oil , in order to impose the global sovereignty of the USA .
During the Greek Presidency , the European Union , despite the unprecedented protests of its peoples , found excuses for and ultimately legalised the savage attack by Anglo-American troops and the occupation of Iraq , with its well documented disastrous results for the Iraqi people . .
Fortunately , the occupation is being resisted by the Iraqi people .
Who the Greek Presidency was serving is clear from the warm congratulations of Messrs Bush and Powell , but also from the outcry by the peoples .
On the pretext of crushing terrorism , further militarisation of the European Union was promoted , by completing the formation of the European army for imperialist interventions all over the world jointly with ? ? ? ? and the USA , as was the more general strengthening of the repressive mechanisms to armour the interests of big business inside and outside the European Union from hostile peoples .
The idea of increasing military spending so that we are reliable partners of the American imperialists with whom , it is said , we are united by common values , also advanced .
The mid-term review of the CAP was approved , reducing and uncoupling subsidies from production , with disastrous consequences for small and medium-sized farmers , quality and the environment .
The strengthening of fortress Europe was promoted with new expulsions of immigrants and stricter terms of asylum .
The signature of the enlargement of the European Union marks new hardships for its peoples and legalises the division of Cyprus as a result of the invasion and occupation by the army of Turkey , which is a candidate for accession .
Finally , during the Greek Presidency an abortive text was approved , the creation of an anti-democratic Convention , which strengthens the pro-monopoly , anti-working class character of the European Union , the power of the strong and the militarisation of the European Union , in order to claim a more active role within the frameworks of international imperialism at the side of the USA .
Mr Simitis and his friends are proud of all this .
We are angry and we are extending our fight with the peoples against these policies .
Each of us shall serve his cause .
Mr President , as a member of the Convention I noticed that very early on it became a commonplace - at least certain governments tried to make it so - that the six-monthly rotation of the presidency of the Council leads to inefficiency , a loss of momentum , a loss of direction and , sotto voce , that if too many small countries have the presidency it will not work .
I congratulate the Greek Presidency most sincerely for having shown that this is completely false .
It has been the case during the last five years that the small-country presidencies have proved to be models of how this system can work .
We should take pride and pleasure in that and congratulate the Greek Presidency on it .
Last Friday , at a meeting in London , a document produced by the London Office of the European Parliament remarked that the Convention was proposing that the Council should have a permanent , powerful presidency .
Anybody who believes that ought to have a look at the draft text .
The presidency of the Council will have no constitutional powers .
The Council is denied any power of legislating .
The Council may - and ought to - have influence , but the idea that the presidency will be ' powerful ' is a great mistake .
Since it will be a presidency chairing a meeting of prime ministers and heads of states , it will not be so much a case of primus inter pares as of less than par inter primos , unlike the position of the President of the Commission in future , for which again I am glad .
Although we have rightly heard a certain sense of alarm about the dual presidency , it may not be as bad as it sounds , like the music of Wagner .
At the Convention I had the honour of representing - as alternate member - the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and in particular the European Free Alliance subset representing the stateless nations of Europe - the small countries .
I rejoice , as I said the other day , to see the flags of the new countries that come in .
But not all the little countries of Europe are as yet - or intended to be - Member States of Europe .
It is therefore vitally important to ask ourselves , as we contemplate a new constitution for Europe , about the future position of Catalonia ( comparable in size to Hungary ) , of Scotland ( comparable in size to the Slovak Republic ) , of Galicia or Wales ( comparable in size to Latvia ) .
What will be the way in which this Union works ?
Mr de Gaulle was happy to pour contempt on the idea of subsidiarity .
If we do not recognise that this is going to have to be a Europe of democracy at many levels , which takes subsidiarity seriously and takes it in a transitive sense right through the Member States , to all the countries of Europe , it will not work .
I hope that will not be the case .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Thessaloniki European Council was dominated by the presentation of the draft Constitutional Treaty drawn up by the Convention .
In that respect , it could thus be said that a political process which began at the Laeken Council has come full circle .
At Laeken , less than two years ago , the Heads of State or Government decided to set up a convention whose aim was to consider the main problems facing the future development of the Union .
As we all know , the Convention 's task was to draw up a final document which under the terms of the Laeken conclusions themselves , may - and I quote - ' comprise either different options , indicating the degree of support which they received , or recommendations if consensus is achieved . ' .
Very much under the impetus of its President , the Convention rose to this challenge issued at Laeken by seeking out a third way . This consisted of drawing up a complete draft Constitutional Treaty , a kind of closed structural framework for the future of the Union .
It is worth saying that the text of the Convention was not a consensual one and nor could it have been .
Without going into detail , we must recognise that there were many contradictions , controversies , omissions as well as successes which , taken together , resulted in a necessarily imperfect synthesis . This synthesis will put to the test the ability of governments of Member States to cooperate and take decisions at the next Intergovernmental Conference ( IGC ) .
This is why the Convention 's work was rightly considered by the Council to be a mere starting point , not a final destination .
A good starting point , it is true , but no more than that .
Mr President , I would like to outline two final points .
The first is to note that , if the solution favoured by the Convention for the future of the Presidency of the European Council goes ahead , the Greek Presidency will remain inextricably linked to the beginning of the end of the excellent democratic practice , carried out every six months here in the European Parliament , of assessing the work of the Presidencies .
These regular debates on major European issues will come to a ruinous end without the least profit or advantage being drawn from it , as far as I can see . To my mind , the opposite is the case .
This is undoubtedly due to my own shortcomings , but that fact does not prevent me from expressing one desire . This is the desire that the balance-sheet of the Greek Presidency that we are drawing up today should not be a final balance-sheet , the beginning of the end of a way of undertaking the Presidency of the Union which we consider crucial to safeguarding equality between Member States .
To sum up , and I will end on this second point , we would like to congratulate the Greek Government on the excellent results of its completed Presidency . We are sorry , however , that this is the last time we will be able to pass on our congratulations to Greece in the same circumstances .
Mr President , the favourable comments heard in the House on the Greek Presidency , like the favourable comments in the past on other Presidencies are , I think , the most decisive argument in favour of maintaining this system of rotating Presidencies at the helm of the European Union and , of course , not in favour of what is being proposed in the new Constitutional Treaty , which has clear disadvantages .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we are here to criticise the work of the Presidency of the Council constructively , honestly and in good faith on the basis of your report .
I shall focus my attention mainly on the issues on which no progress was made , not in order to grumble , but because it is good for us to remember the things that were not done , so that we can put them in order and make progress with them .
I would say that there was a delay in the immigration sector , because there is not one word in the conclusions of the summit Council about the question of setting up a European border guard , while the Commission is absolutely convinced about it and has announced it .
Why this standstill on such an acute problem ?
Similarly , the issue of financial solidarity and an equal division of the burden in the immigration sector has essentially been lost , even though it was also a priority of your programme , in that no special funding means have been adopted , as proposed by the Commission .
Similarly , I would say that the common European asylum system was not introduced and , finally , we have no readmission agreements .
What readmission agreements were concluded ?
How can 2 000 to 3 000 illegal immigrants from a country which maintains relations with the European Union , I am talking about Turkey of course , be caught and readmission not be accepted ?
Readmission applications are being made - if I remember correctly over 1 400 - and only 14 have been accepted .
Where is the strength and will of Europe on such an important issue , which has not only economic , but also , more importantly , humanitarian consequences .
I would hasten to emphasise that guarding the external borders of the Union would also help in the foreign policy and security policy sector , where the Union is suffering , because this precisely constitutes the cornerstone of foreign policy and defence .
Now , on the Lisbon strategy I cannot but find that the political and economic uncertainties remain .
The prospects for sustainable development in Europe appear to be a distant hope .
For the reform of the CAP , I believe that you realise that the debate on the mid-term review carried out has not been completed , in that a series of products have not been included in the decisions .
Finally , as far as the future of Europe is concerned , I absolutely agree with President Prodi that the Constitutional Treaty does indeed contain some very important and positive points ; however , it also contains certain elements which give a great deal of cause for concern .
I shall start with your phrase , that we share the future in a Community of values , to ask , how do we share the future ?
Divided into blocs of large and small countries , with the reinforced ability of the former to affect decisions ?
With duality ?
Double structures ?
In other words , something which the most simple company or government official knows leads to adversity , confusion and , ultimately , inefficiency ?
Or by cutting the right of each Member State to equal representation by a Commissioner in the Commission ?
Under these conditions , how will the interest of countries and , above all , their citizens , be maintained ?
And what Community of values ?
The Community in which it is not the Community model of the European Union but intergovernmental cooperation that is being extended ?
And , finally , what values ?
Those which we do not dare refer to expressly in the preamble to the Constitutional Treaty , offering the citizens - whose support we crave - the political education and values of a last-minute compromise ?
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to start with , I could not reply to you in a language other than that which we spoke when we were at school together fifty years ago .
First of all , I want to thank you and warmly congratulate you for the particularly successful presidency which the Greek Government has brought to a close .
As you have heard from the honourable Members ' interventions - and the interventions which do not come from the same political family are more valuable - there is generally a feeling that the Greek Presidency was a great success .
Nonetheless , I do not want to refer to the issues already raised , but to another issue : during the Greek Presidency , what you euphemistically refer to as the ' Iraqi crisis ' took place .
I think that the Greek Presidency took the best possible reaction to the division which the European Union underwent in relation to this issue in convening the Extraordinary European Council in Brussels on 17 February 2003 and with the outcome of that Council .
The Greek Presidency is not to blame for the fact that some of the participants did not honour their own signatures before the week was out .
I shall continue in German , the language of the country which I represent here in the European Parliament , knowing also that you will not therefore need to wear headphones .
The European Heads of Government in Thessaloniki spoke almost continually of the need for speaking with one voice .
That is what they all want , as long as that voice is their own .
If they do not let go of this attitude , little will change , despite the Convention and despite Mr Solana 's interesting document .
There is little one can say in the way of criticism about his analysis , but therein lies at the same time its weakness .
The report speaks about what unites us but is silent about what divides us , and that , in practice , is precisely the problem with 25 Member States .
The threats in an enlarged Union do not only lie beyond Europe 's borders but also within them .
We can see eye to eye with Mr Solana at the abstract level , but God forbid that this should become a little more concrete .
I fear , above all , an internal rift about the attitude with regard to America 's role in the world , and hence about how to tackle the major breeding grounds of conflict .
Mr Solana is right to say that an effective European Union could have a considerable impact , one that is conducive to a fair , safe and multilateral world .
We must develop our own security policy , but we have not managed to do this to date , unfortunately .
The Iraq crisis was not only about Iraq , but also about a new distribution of power in the world and inside the European Union .
Since the fall of the wall , external policy in the European Union has been re-nationalised .
Heads of Government , especially those of major Member States , seek to compensate for the loss of national sovereignty and identity in many areas by raising their own national profile in the area of foreign policy .
Unfortunately , the Convention bears out current practice by maintaining the rule of consensus .
Even the voice of a European super-Minister for Foreign Affairs can only be heard when the cacophony of his national colleagues has fallen silent .
Mr President-in-Office , in Thessaloniki you made progress on the issue of the Western Balkans and their prospects of acceding to the European Union .
That is very good .
However , you did not succeed in laying down a timetable .
I greatly fear that we shall not anticipate the new conflicts on their way .
Secondly : the invasion of Iraq has been followed by military occupation , with the logic behind a military occupation , men in balaclavas , police spies and so on .
The occupying forces are , as we learned yesterday , building a new Guantanamo .
Politically , what do we say to these gentlemen , whom we sometimes call allies and certain of whom are also members of the European Union ?
I do not understand .
I do not think that we resolve any problems by politically appeasing allies .
Thirdly : you have signed an agreement with the USA .
The European Parliament accused you on the grounds that this was democratic infringement .
The article which you chose excludes the parliaments ; however , it says that the Member States can express objections if their internal order so requires .
Will Greece do so ?
Fourthly and lastly , the matter of the Constitutional Treaty really did progress , but with opaque and , in my opinion , very dangerous procedures , which may even change the essence of everything the Convention has done .
Question : how will we safeguard the politicisation of the unification of Europe and the limited cooperation which can give impetus to those who really want to do something different against American efforts to reduce everything to the lowest common denominator ?
Will Greece hold a referendum as part of this effort at politicisation ?
I do not say this to detract from all the positive things said , but to remind you that politics go on and that there are very serious issues outstanding , including for the continuation of political life in Europe .
Mr President , I want to talk about one of the annexes to the Council declaration , in particular that on non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
This is to be welcomed , and I know we will return to this many times in the future .
We particularly welcome the statement in Paragraph 2 that ' weapons of mass destruction and missile proliferation puts at risk the security of our states , our peoples and our interests around the world ' .
However , I regret that meeting this challenge is only taken up in terms of European Union external action .
We should hope that the efforts regarding non-proliferation will apply to all states already in possession of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction and those which may develop the capacity , and not just states which are seen as unfriendly , as opposed to those which our foreign policy supports .
Turning to other questions , my group certainly welcomes the efforts made by the Greek Presidency on the question of temporary agency work , currently blocked through more political game-playing by particular Member States .
It is clear that we need more progress on workers ' rights and the implementation of existing rights , for example in terms of mass redundancies , as in the case of Schiesser-Palco in Athens , and the questions about retraining and social protection which follow that .
The Council really needs to start questioning whether Lisbon is working as well as people think it is in terms of the provision of high-quality jobs and the social cohesion which was sought at Lisbon .
In one of those areas we need to look at the relationship between that and the World Trade Organisation agreements and proposals we are currently following , and to see whether we will be able to safeguard social and environmental rights within the European Union and encourage and support such development in poorer countries under the current regime .
Finally , I want to pick up the question about tax evasion , which the Prime Minister mentioned , and hope that future presidencies - I do not hold out much hope for the next one - will look at this question of tax evasion within the European Union and beyond it , because at the moment we are losing fortunes from our public budgets due to the non-payment of taxes by corporations .
Mr President , the conclusions of the Thessaloniki Summit relating to immigration represent an encouraging milestone insofar as major decisions are made with regard to the management of external borders and the policy on the return of illegal migrants , not least in terms of the European Union 's financial undertaking .
However , on this extremely serious issue , the European institutions continue to suffer , so to speak , from an endemic reluctance across the board to address , head-on , the challenge represented by the activity of the criminal Mafia organisations which organise the despicable trafficking of human beings , which frequently causes tragedies such as those portrayed on television screens in the houses of all European citizens throughout the world , where a picture is painted which certainly discredits the European institutions as well .
There are still a number of questions on this matter which were not clearly raised at the Thessaloniki Summit .
Europe is not addressing the relationship between illegal immigration and terrorism , and yet Al Qaeda members are identified daily in the ghettos of illegal immigration .
Just recently , a criminal network has been identified in my country whose members have even penetrated the reception centres .
What if , instead of merely aiding the criminal trafficking of illegal immigrants , these had been members of Islamic terrorist organisations ?
Furthermore , why are adequate health protection measures not laid down , not least in the interests of the immigrants , given the extremely unstable health situations endemic in the countries and regions of origin of illegal immigrants ?
Consider the situation in Algeria , with the plague crisis .
Moreover , has Europe considered , or does it intend to consider , the need to protect , not least from the point of view of protecting the Union and its natural resources , areas such as the islands and coastal regions of southern Italy , where illegal immigrants leave the ships of traffickers ?
The island of Lampedusa , with its extraordinarily beautiful countryside - one of the last strips of European land before Africa - and the Costa Domiziana are parts of our European heritage which are unique in their beautiful scenery .
For how much longer must they continue to be transformed into reception camps for floods of illegal immigrants ?
In this sense , the UK proposal to place reception centres outside Europe 's borders is to be welcomed .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I believe that the Greek Presidency will be forever associated with the picture at the foot of the Acropolis , where the reunification of Europe took place .
We will also forever associate it with a sense of gratitude .
We will also see , however , that this presidency saw a great failure on the part of Europe - not that the Greek Presidency is responsible for this ; we all are - namely the inability of us Europeans to have a common position on an issue of war and peace .
Lessons were learnt from this and it gave the Convention impetus to make perhaps greater progress on aspects of the foreign , security and defence policy than we had initially thought possible .
This is also true of the discussions on a strategic concept for the European Union that have been taking place and will continue in Thessaloniki , so that we are better prepared in terms of content in the future and have our own system for weighing up interests , from which a better operational policy will emerge at Community level in the future .
We must be aware that what has been achieved in the Convention is marred by several mistakes .
At the last moment the Convention 's courage failed it and in its final 14 days it clearly does not wish to try to move more foreign policy issues to majority voting .
The idea that in the future one country would be able to block 25 others on an issue of foreign policy , with no way out , is a painful one , and there is the risk of an opportunity being missed .
I would ask you once again , Mr President , to define what is meant in the Thessaloniki Conclusions in respect of Part III by purely technical work , so that we can make progress on majority decision-making - particularly in foreign policy but also in other areas - and so that this does not serve as an excuse for our not being able to discuss anything further .
The proposals that have been made by government representatives in the Convention seem at least not to be technical , when I look at the proposal that the German Foreign Minister has tabled on behalf of the Federal Government about a foreign service .
If a footnote in Part III - this being declared to be technical - leads to our own foreign service being set up , drawing its staff from the Commission or the Council and including national civil servants , under the exclusive competence of the foreign minister , this will constitute a dramatic change in the balance between the institutions and a dramatic weakening of the Commission and ultimately also of Parliament .
It is unacceptable for us now to create further bureaucracy for the important position of foreign minister .
Ours is a twofold task : we are to merge areas and not create anything new that will make life even more difficult in the future and will be harder to monitor .
We do not need any new fiefdoms ; instead we need to integrate areas and I hope that attempts will be made with your help to gain control of this .
I would therefore urge you to help us in this matter , and I would ask you once again to define the word ' technical ' , so that we can still make progress in the Convention this week and next , and in this context also to tell us why Part IV cannot be touched .
The Convention has not yet debated Parts III and IV .
It should have the right to do so , and governments should not prevent it from doing so .
Mr President , I am going to refer to the Thessaloniki agenda in relation to immigration and asylum .
Compared to the Seville conclusions , I find it genuinely interesting , although , having heard Mr Borghezio , I am wondering whether my analysis may be mistaken .
Seriously , I believe that the Council has returned to a more global and balanced vision of immigration , reducing the decibels of its declarations , but in a more measured way increasing the intensity of the measures adopted .
I take a positive view of the option of guaranteeing border control by means of a Community operative structure for cooperation .
Border control is necessary , but it is only one part of immigration policy , Mr President , and it has its limits : in terms of security , because criminals do not normally use their documents or cross borders by the usual routes , and in terms of the management of migratory flows , because the majority of immigrants currently residing in Europe , without documentation , crossed the borders originally in a legal fashion , as students , with an initial work permit or as tourists , but the border was crossed legally in any case .
In fact , the situation at maritime borders is dramatic and people have a very negative perception of it , since they feel subjected to a dual tension : fear of a phenomenon which appears to be out of control , and a tremendous compassion which we all feel when we see , sometimes , bodies reaching our coasts .
In terms of numbers , however , this is very limited compared to the overall phenomenon of immigration .
The Tampere element is needed , and its application does not require money , but does require political courage .
It is also necessary to create a common legislative framework for legal entry and for the harmonisation of asylum .
Similarly , readmission agreements are just one part of the relationship with third countries .
We should use a little imagination so that , in a world such as ours , in which everything has the potential to move within a global framework , the movement of people can become a virtuous circle , generating a little wealth for third countries , for our neighbours and for us .
We will need this imagination .
Furthermore , Mr President , please allow me to end by congratulating you on having accepted , for the first time , the need for a European integration policy and on having correctly identified its objectives and the need to implement them with local and regional authorities and social actors .
We have a lot at stake in this field .
The co-existence of our Member States is at stake .
I only hope - and I congratulate you on your Presidency - that your successors will deal with this issue with the same care as you .
Mr President , I too appreciate greatly that the Greek Presidency has taken an enlightened approach to facilitating legal migration and integration , not just fighting illegal immigration .
In an important presidency conference on the theme in Athens and in securing agreement on the family-reunion and long-term-residents directives you have gone some way to rebalance the EU agenda which has been much too focused until now on control and rejection .
The EU 's role in offering refugees protection has been under assault from some governments , notably the UK .
I am glad that Thessaloniki rejected the preposterous suggestion that all EU asylum seekers should be driven back towards the Third World or EU fringe countries .
The prospect of vast detention camps , raising the spectre of concentration camps , was rightly a step too far for some Member States .
We need to get order in our asylum systems with a common EU system that does not shift responsibility but shares it .
This would end the damaging rotation whereby first one country then another sees its numbers peak .
We can only have a true partnership on migration with third countries if we offer their people adequate alternative opportunities , especially in agriculture .
The CAP with its export subsidies and import protection is a gross barrier to trade justice .
You have made some reform progress but not enough .
My colleague Mr Watson rightly deplored the manner and content of the EU-US legal cooperation and extradition agreements .
I agree with him .
However , I welcome that the summit issued a clarion call of strong support for the International Criminal Court .
The EU must stand up to the outrageous US bullying to undermine the court .
Finally , the accession signing ceremony took place at the foot of the Acropolis where the new Parthenon museum is also located .
I represent London where the British Museum is located , but I take a rather softer line than its director on the so-called Elgin Marbles and I hope some arrangement for transfer , even if only a loan , can be reached before next year 's Olympics .
Mr President , the President-in-Office of the Council has discussed various aspects of the process of the EU 's enlargement , and these were also addressed in Thessaloniki .
From this , the impression is created that the process is currently going hand in hand with less stringent criteria .
In the past , we most definitely did not want to set down any dates for the start of negotiations , the end of negotiations or for accession to the European Union .
Nowadays , dates are being suggested quite spontaneously which , in themselves , are also being interpreted in all kinds of ways .
With regard to Romania and Bulgaria , our resolution was reported to state initially that we appreciate it that those countries have set themselves a target date , namely 2004 .
We have not given an opinion either way , but we are increasingly hearing that we assume that the negotiations can be finalised by the end of 2004 .
One cannot help wondering whether conditions are also being prescribed for the implementation of what is being laid down in law .
Will , for example , Romania be a country that functions normally by 2007 , or will it still be weighed down by corruption and political power-play that overlook the interests of the general public ?
We never imagined that what we used to call the two waves would follow each other in such quick succession .
We are therefore surprised about those dates 2004-2007 for Romania and Bulgaria .
The western Balkans and Kosovo are also being mentioned in the same breath .
I should note in this connection , and it must be patently clear to the authorities in Kosovo , that nobody here wants an ethnically-based Member State .
Could this be a case , perhaps , of misplaced guilt in respect of the candidates left behind ?
This feeling is not present among Union citizens .
The people have become more critical ; the importance of a well-functioning Europe has become greater .
The economic political problems of the new accession states have also grown and meanwhile , it seems as if the Council and Commission have become more lenient .
Then , as the President-in-Office of the Council also mentioned there is the largest potential enlargement : the accession of Turkey .
Unfortunately , a date has also been set for the start of negotiations while no conditions have been laid down for this .
According to Turkey 's interpretation , this is an unconditional date .
It would be unfortunate if the Council and the Commission were susceptible to Turkey 's criticism that they are not reacting quickly enough and that surely , Turkey has now waited long enough , while it is we who have waited for the changes in Turkey to take place .
Luckily , the President-in-Office of the Council mentioned the minorities , religious freedom and the position of the army .
The Commission on its part has promised an inquiry into the role of the army .
This strikes me as extremely important , provided this does not simply look into the extent to which the current situation at the start of the negotiations about other chapters can be maintained as much as possible .
It appears to me that a priority has been set here which we must handle with the greatest of care .
We must also deal with the changes in Turkey required by us with due care .
These cannot simply be made in the course of a few years without causing major damage .
We should not be guided by a fear of driving Turkey away in this .
After all , the introduction of quasi-Iranian conditions is probably the last thing the army will allow .
This calls for staying power and caution .
The solution to the Cyprus problem , in particular , will be one of the benchmarks for Turkey 's accession , because that is where the army 's role is felt most acutely .
The Balladur initiative on borders and good neighbourliness are , in fact , the basis for Copenhagen 's political conditions .
It would be naive to think that no country would use its veto if Cyprus were not re-united .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the Greek Presidency of the Council on what it has achieved in its six months , in a difficult situation : on Iraq - as we have heard - and also on specific dossiers like the European Statute for Political Parties , where a lot of hard work was put in .
The ministers will know that I do not say this just out of politeness because I have also voiced friendly criticism of some aspects of the Greek legal system .
I did so , for instance , when a constituent of mine - Mr David Wilson - who is now facing an appeal in the Greek courts , was arrested and sentenced within 24 hours of his arrest to 12 years in jail , after some stowaway asylum-seekers were found hidden at the back of his lorry without his knowledge .
So you know that my praise is genuine because sometimes I do not hesitate to criticise .
The key issue of the period of the Greek Presidency is the constitution .
In the long run that will be the most significant thing .
I congratulate the presidency on getting the form of words agreed in Thessaloniki - that the constitution will be the basis for the negotiation of a new treaty in the IGC .
The Convention has not quite finished its work .
Part III , at least , is going to be subject to a technical revision : such technicalities as how to vote in the Council , the technique of voting by QMV or unanimity .
That shows that technicalities can sometimes also be of the highest political significance .
It is important that progress be made on that .
But once we have a completed result from the Convention the battle then moves on to getting it intact through the IGC .
The IGC must not unravel the Convention , must not pick it apart .
As soon as we start moving one little bit of the constitution , there will somebody else who wants to remove another bit of it , and the whole thing could fall apart .
On the contrary , we must all unite to say that this must be the basis on which we move forward .
If there are going to be changes they should only be small , detailed and technical changes to the constitution .
I welcome the reference in the conclusions of Thessaloniki to the participation of Parliament in the IGC .
The details still need to be spelt out but we now have an acquis from the Amsterdam and Nice negotiations that the European Parliament participates via its President in the meetings at the level of ministers and via two representatives at the level of the working group that does the negotiating .
That at the very least should be the basis on which Parliament participates in this IGC .
Mr President , I too should like to wish that a Greek prime minister will pass through the European Parliament in a few years ' time under the rotating Presidency , which is a useful institution , to thank Mr Yiannitsis for the good cooperation we had and , in the short time which I have , to wish that the President-in-Office of the Council and Prime Minister of Greece will resolve , not in the remaining hours of his Presidency , but over the coming days , an important issue to which the letter sent to him by 90 members of the European Parliament also referred , in other words , the application of Directive 70 / 1999 on fixed-term workers .
I would like to believe that , taking account of the views of the Commission and the European Parliament , as well as the decisions by the Greek courts , the Greek Government will set a good example in this basic sector , which concerns tens of thousands of workers and in which fixed-term contracts are being abused .
There are still people who sign unilateral fixed-term contracts for 15 years .
I would like to hope that the Prime Minister will address it positively and I should like , if he can , for him to take a position on this issue in his second speech .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , without a doubt these six months of the Greek Presidency have been some of the most dramatic in the recent history of the European Union , and I think that we can compliment the Greek Presidency on doing its job with great sensitivity , consistency and energy .
Three major issues have dominated this period as they do this debate : enlargement ; the war in Iraq and the significance that it has had for Europe and will also continue to have in the future , and the Convention .
Enlargement - the great historic project of our generation - is well on the way to being completed successfully .
For us enlargement already has a human face , in the shape of the colleagues who are already working here as observers .
As an aside , I should like to mention that we in Germany were interested to note that after Parliament 's decision on enlargement the Czech Government for example issued a statement on the injustice of expulsion , which is along the right lines and gives us hope that here too the process of reconciliation may reach a successful conclusion .
The war in Iraq made it clear where Europe 's borders lie and showed where we need even more Community : primarily in the field of foreign and security policy .
So far Europe has played no role at all here or at best a pitiful one .
It really should strike people that where Europe uses the Community method , such as on internal market issues , we operate on an equal footing with for example the United States of America , but that where we work on an intergovernmental basis , we play no part at all .
This has to change in the future and the Convention needs to make a contribution to achieving this .
I hope that it will still succeed in doing so before 10 July of this year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Prime Minister , Greece was not found wanting in its encounter with history .
Indeed , the draft Constitution , whose preparation Greece showed it could oversee so clearheadedly , makes a decisive contribution to European history .
After a period of national constitutionalism , we are now witnessing a period of European constitutionalism .
Moreover , though sceptics may criticise this European constitutionalism , which will not replace national constitutions . Instead , it represents a break , a highly creative shift in the European spirit .
Greece has also , however , shown itself worthy of the classical humanism as expressed by Gorgias , who said ' man is the measure of all things ' .
It also showed it could resist those who wanted to turn immigration policy into a tool of repression against those immigrants who are attracted to Europe as a land of work , prosperity and peace . Greece showed that it could resist , furthermore , by pointing the way to a suitable immigration and asylum policy .
When confronted with the storm over Iraq , the war in Iraq , moreover , Greece showed it could remain upright and clearheaded , and could once again point to the way forward , which took the form of an independent European defence policy and identity , still within the framework of the Atlantic Alliance .
Greece , which , we should remember , invented the democratic city-state in ancient Athens , showed that it could contribute decisively to developing and strengthening a new form of democracy , typical of the European character : the European Union on a continent-wide scale .
Greece showed it could also contribute to that process of enlargement by proposing that the western Balkans join the European Union in the long term .
In the same way , Greece , and especially its prime minister , Mr Simitis , showed it could restore its troubled relations with Turkey . It showed it could move beyond their historic dispute and prove that nations do not have to be permanently at war .
Greece showed it could open up to Turkey , that great country which has always been present on the European political scene , in the good times and in the bad .
Just one reservation : the CAP , which perpetuates serious inequalities in the distribution of resources between farmers and countries .
Lastly , the Greek Presidency showed it could reconcile the world of Platonic ideas with Aristotelian realism .
The art of politics in Greece cannot be separated from philosophy , just as the art of politics in Europe must not be separated from philosophy either , otherwise it will always be susceptible to the temptations of religious fundamentalism and repressive ideologies .
The spirit of Europe today is the spirit of Greece , and the spirit of Greece is the spirit of Europe .
It is my earnest wish that the future permanent presidency of the European Union , which I support , unlike so many , will always show it can be like the Greek Presidency . I hope that the latter will be an example for the permanent presidency of the European Council in future .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I should like to echo the positive words about the Greek Presidency .
I should immediately like to follow this up with the comment that this is yet another example of how small countries often make better presidents than large ones , and that we should not be so quick to give large countries priority .
Greece is a case in point .
You have dealt with a number of very heavy dossiers , and the finalisation of the accession dossiers on the Acropolis on 16 June gave us a stunning picture , also for those who were only able to follow the proceedings on television .
I do not think we could have imagined a more beautiful spot and a more beautiful image .
It was , of course , coincidental that these dossiers happened to be finalised during the Greek Presidency , but it was a very happy coincidence .
The Convention 's work has also been guided in a very positive manner .
Greece assumed a hands-off approach and gave latitude to the Convention itself .
I myself was - indeed , I still am - a member of that Convention , and I can vouch for the fact that the result that is now before us is mainly due to the way in which the MPs and MEPs have joined forces .
The MEPs and members of the national parliaments worked together much more effectively than some government representatives .
There is , therefore , the risk that the governments are going to put a spanner in the works .
An amazing amount has been achieved : values and standards have been established , the Charter has been adopted , the pillars have disappeared , decisions will be taken by qualified majority more often , democratisation has moved on by quite a long way , parliamentary control has been stepped up , transparency enhanced and the institutional structure improved , the only discordant note being that we are now , after all , getting a President , something that many did not actually want .
Unanimity in foreign policy is , in my view , a major disadvantage , and it really should not have been adopted .
During the Iraq crisis , we saw what became of Europe if everything is to be decided unanimously .
If any changes are yet to be made , therefore , then this aspect is a definite contender .
I also share Mr Prodi 's view that it is odd that half of the Commissioners are entitled to vote and the other half are not - this is somewhat out of order .
We should , however , change as little as possible to this proposal and try to guide it through the process as well as we can .
If we manage to do this during the coming six months under the Italian Presidency , then Europe will have taken another big step and we will have a bright future ahead of us with those 25 countries .
You have helped to make this happen .
Mr President , when the President of the French Republic , Mr Chirac , referred to the Greek Presidency as brilliant , he articulated not a diplomatic , but an historic speech .
I shall refer to just three of the many and useful successes of the Greek Presidency that justify Mr Chirac , allowing - especially today - my national modesty to take second place to my satisfaction as a European .
First , Greece had the misfortune , but Europe had the fortune , that the Greek Presidency coincided with the huge moral - without doubt moral - crisis which the European Union underwent in the consciousness of the European citizens with the stance taken by certain of its members on the illegal war against Iraq .
This sort of incident could have resulted in the break up of the European Union .
The Greek Presidency managed not only to prevent it from breaking up , but also to express the European Union with a word of consent , which will certainly withstand the criticism of tomorrow 's historians .
Of course , in the future we shall have work to do to restore the moral credibility of Europe as a whole .
The second major historic event during the Greek Presidency was the positive decision on the Constitutional Treaty submitted to the European Council in Halkidiki by the Convention through its chairman .
The text submitted takes historic steps , it interconnects the European institutions more firmly , it safeguards more than ever before the social state , crowned with the concept of full employment , for which Georgos Katiforis deserves particular thanks .
However , it also has serious shortcomings , some of which have already been pointed out by previous speakers .
The European Parliament , in the report which I have the honour of having undertaken together with President Gil Robles , will expose these weaknesses in the Treaty .
The Greek Presidency respected the institution of the Convention and its results and thus politically - and this is important - the institution of the Convention was established as one of the major accomplishments of European democracy .
Finally , I would refer to the likewise historic fact that , after seven years of being unable to take a decision , common positions were found with the European Parliament so that the regulation on the operation and funding of political parties could finally enter into force .
This is extremely important in consolidating the European democratic institutions .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , when we review the Greek Presidency we can say with complete justification that it is hard to see how a permanent Council President could have done better .
After this presidency we will clearly have to explain to the public what additional benefit Europe is supposed to derive from the creation of a new post such as that of Council President , a president appointed from the ranks of the Council .
Obviously the Convention , which has already been mentioned here several times , has resulted in a compromise and the Intergovernmental Conference , too , will ultimately result in a compromise .
Nevertheless , the Convention 's weak points should not be overlooked , even if the worst has been avoided .
There is however still the issue - which the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , mentioned - of the dual presidency of the European Union .
Even if the Council President has no legislative competence , that person will still represent the European Union to the outside world and it will be their personality that will determine what they make of the office .
This may give rise to conflicts within the EU .
On the arduous path to a Common Foreign and Security Policy , a post of common foreign minister has now also been created , which is supposed to combine the two functions carried out by the previous agents .
This undoubtedly constitutes progress , but creating a post does not yet mean that a common policy has been created .
The foreign minister - who is yet to be appointed - will embody the schizophrenia of the European Union .
Above all , however , subdividing the Commissioners into those with voting rights and those without is a real structural defect , particularly where the Commission remains a collective body .
I can certainly understand that , when faced with an EU of 25 or more Member States , some may long for the times when there was a Community of six .
But artificially scaling down the European Union by dividing it into a core Europe and the rest undermines the European Union 's cohesion and also public trust in the European institutions .
This weakness should therefore be remedied .
Mr President , the Greek Presidency of the Council has managed to do good work under tragic international circumstances and in an economically and politically unpromising climate .
For that reason , I too should like to congratulate the Presidency of the Council .
Much has been achieved in many areas , but the Presidency of the Council will , of course , be best remembered for the kick-off of the final decision on the constitutional treaty .
I hope that this will result in an Intergovernmental Conference that will decide to sign a treaty that is actually based on the Convention 's conclusions .
Not only was the method of the Convention a sound choice , the leading triumvirate was one too , and it is fortunate that the Convention 's ordinary members have also added value in a significant manner .
Anyone taking part in European debates nowadays is mainly faced with criticism , and I admit that we are keen to join in .
What we agree on is something that we believe to be already as good as established , something we believe to be very much a matter of course and for which we have been asking for a long time .
As regards the things that we think are less successful , we hope that they can still be rectified , obviously in the direction we indicate .
We should not overlook the fact that there is still to be an IGC , and that we still need to convince the public .
We should therefore not be tempted only to focus on our minor or major disappointments , but rather look at the whole picture and , with a sense of balance , point at the increased opportunities for transparency and at the Union 's decisive policy .
Despite this , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I too should very much like to know whether the mandate which the Convention has with regard to Part III still leaves enough room for the Convention to file down a few layers of the remaining veto rights , whether the Convention now has the authority or not to change anything to Part IV and whether the European Council actually believes itself that the Union can hold out beyond the period of the next financial perspectives to work with the current financing mechanism .
I am really happy today to be a Christian Democrat ; not because we are celebrating our fiftieth anniversary , but mainly because our ideology takes as its starting point the need to believe in people .
You cannot rely on structures alone .
The structures with which the Convention provides us will not , on their own , enable us to move mountains .
We will therefore need to rely on responsible people , and I hope that there are many of those left in Europe .
Mr President , representatives of the Council and the Commission , in common with many others , I wish to thank the Greek Presidency for fulfilling its responsibilities so well during a difficult period .
For me , the high point of this Presidency was the signing of the accession treaties on 16 April .
It is an historic event , meaning that our divided Europe has come to an end .
The future entails not only a more peaceful Europe but also a more democratic one .
I must just say a few words about the Lisbon strategy .
A great deal has been done during the Greek Presidency , for example on coordinating the economic and employment guidelines and the social process , something that I applaud .
You also listened constructively to Parliament 's points of view on the employment guidelines .
In particular , you took account of what Parliament had to say on the matters relating to equality between men and women .
I also want to commend you for the pensions strategy put forward during your Presidency , which I believe strikes a sound balance between economic and social aspects .
That is important now that we have to review our pensions systems throughout Europe .
I regret the handling of one issue , namely sustainable development .
Sustainable development is as yet still only a matter of words , and we have not done very much to give more specific content to sustainable development , for example in the form of indicators .
I also regret that we did not succeed in reaching an agreement on the matter of staffing companies .
When it comes to the Convention , I agree with what many others have already said , namely that it has been a success , partly due to its content and partly due to the way in which the work has been done .
As Mrs Berès said , this must now be followed up at the Intergovernmental Conference too , and Parliament must be involved in the ongoing handling of the issue so that the transparency that has now been achieved can be maintained .
When , finally , it comes to asylum and refugee policy , I welcome the fact that the proposal for protection zones was removed .
At the same time , I regret , however , that we have still not obtained a common asylum and refugee policy with common minimum rules .
In the future , we need a common asylum and refugee policy based upon generosity and humanity .
Mr President , even applying the principle that nothing is ever perfect in life , I have to say that I have difficulty in imagining a better Presidency than that which is coming to an end today .
The Greek Presidency has succeeded in combining the major themes , already widely addressed - such as enlargement , supporting the Convention and establishing a very balanced , wise position in foreign policy - with everyday issues which are important for the citizens of Europe .
Over these past six months , a relatively short time , we have brought a number of extremely important dossiers to a conclusion .
We have made progress in financial dossiers , closed the energy dossier and implemented and extended major programmes such as Erasmus and eLearning : I therefore endorse your work .
I can see only one flaw : the conclusion of the position on agriculture .
I am fully aware of the macroeconomic situation ; I am fully aware of the need for the European Union to adopt a clear foreign policy with regard to the developing countries too .
Nevertheless , the conclusion of the agriculture package last week is causing me some concern , for , in actual fact , we have instigated a process of dismantling our continent 's primary sector and we have , in reality , started to destroy the one genuine policy which has allowed the European Union to claim the title of Union thus far .
I hope that there will be a rethink once Cancun is over , for , otherwise , Commissioner Fischler 's position , promoted by the Agriculture Council , will affect what is not just a key sector for the economy but , most importantly , a key sector for consumers .
In other words , we ask farmers for investment and commitments to safeguard the quality of foodstuffs and then we dismantle the various measures protecting the sector : this is a policy which I really cannot understand .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the Financial Services Action Plan has been fast-tracked , the accession treaties signed - bringing the reunification of Europe one step closer - the Balkan Initiative launched and the first two parts of the draft constitution presented . Nevertheless , in the last few weeks we have been forced to recognise that where the war in Iraq was concerned personal vanity and national egoism proved to be stronger than the aim of a common foreign policy and that as a result we did not play a part in the ' war or peace ' decision .
We succeed when we act as a Community ; we fail when we reduce Europe to the level of an intergovernmental enterprise .
Acting as a Community means not having a national veto with the system of unanimity , but having greater public participation with qualified double majorities .
The internal market will become a domestic market for 25 only when they all have the euro as their currency and Parliament is given a right to codecision on tax issues that are relevant to the internal market .
The EU foreign minister will be more than an important and necessary job title only if we have codecision for foreign policy .
Europe is more than the sum of its parts .
Europe is more than the sum of the governments .
All of us are Europe !
Each individual carries a degree of responsibility for the future of the whole .
This way of seeing ourselves is however not yet a reality but still a dream , and that is why I propose that we do not move on to the agenda but have a more in-depth round of communication , information and social dialogue about the results of the last six months .
That is also why I call for us to continue to apply the characteristics of the Convention - transparency , proximity to the people and democratisation .
The Convention itself fostered this and that is why I think that a public opinion poll on the result of the Intergovernmental Conference would call for regions , nations and members of the public to be directly involved .
It would give domestic policy a European dimension , it would make national movements European ones ahead of the forthcoming European elections , and it would inform the public that we are all part of Europe and successfully active in it .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I should like to focus on just one point in your debate today .
You mentioned it in only one sentence .
I should like to say something about the Balkans and south-eastern Europe .
I very much welcomed your initiative and I am also delighted that the Thessaloniki paper , that was prepared together with the Commission , has been adopted , because it contains much of what Parliament has demanded .
Obviously I now hope , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that as an ordinary Member of the Council you will work together with the new Council Presidency to implement its content .
We are still waiting for it to be implemented in the countries of the Balkans .
It would be nice if the EU and the Council could actually agree to implement the decisions that they make in papers of this kind .
This involves , for example , opening up education and youth programmes to the young people of these countries , which sends out an extremely important signal to them .
It also involves annual reports on progress in the individual States , and the reinforcement of the twinning programme so as to modernise the administrative structures in these countries and make them ready for the accession that they have , of course , been promised .
We expect there to be more cooperation in the region , particularly between Greece and Italy and these countries , on human trafficking and cross-border crime .
We also hope that you will perhaps consider , together with your colleagues in the Council and the Commission , easing the visa requirements in a number of fields and for particular professions , so that people are able to gain faster entry to the European Union .
I very much hope that positive progress is made when we start , as we are now doing , to initiate discussions between the Serbs and Kosovo Albanians .
I would be very pleased if you , as a country bordering the Balkans , could help to move this forward .
I very much hope that the Serb , Roma and Ashkali refugees will at last be able to return to Kosovo so that the conditions can be put in place to enable them to live there side by side .
I think that the Council and the Commission need to step up the pressure on the Albanians in Kosovo in this regard .
We did not wage a war to have a situation today that is not wholly dissimilar to the unpleasant state of affairs that we have seen there over the last ten years .
I believe that we need to be more deeply committed , because of course we want these countries to return to stability and peace .
That is also the case in Serbia and I would urge you to use your influence to stop the Serbian Government continuing to gag journalists , as it is now doing .
Media freedom in Serbia is under threat .
Please give your word .
Do not tolerate it !
Otherwise , thank you very much for your commitment .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the statement issued by the Thessaloniki Summit on the European Union 's security policy was an important step towards a common European Security and Defence Policy .
The United States have set out their security policy in clear terms , and it guides their actions on a day-to-day basis .
A constructive response to it from the European Union is overdue and necessary .
The paper tabled here is the beginning of a joint reply of this kind .
If we take a closer look at it , we see that when it comes to analysing new threats in the world , joint statements are made that are extremely detailed and also completely accurate .
But when it comes to defining the answers to them and saying what now needs to be done , we see that the system of unanimity makes it extremely difficult to come up with a coherent statement .
That is why this paper can only be a beginning , a beginning with important statements .
Nevertheless , we need a broad debate about this in the European Union , including in Parliament , so as to gradually formulate a common security strategy .
We need clearer statements on our relations with NATO , on our relations with the United Nations , and on the roles that Russia and also Turkey will play in this security concept , and we need a clearer mandate - this too is addressed to the Intergovernmental Conference - for the arms agency that is now being proposed .
Above all , however , we need a step-by-step plan .
We have seen that the European Union has only ever carried out projects successfully when it has first had a plan setting out clear tasks and deadlines .
Our job now is to formulate a more precise strategy of this kind for the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for your comments and thoughts .
Your many , very many positive criticisms fill all of us who participated in the Greek Presidency with great joy .
Of the comments expressed , I shall pick out two or three issues .
The first core issue to which you referred was the issue of the new Constitutional Treaty and the Convention .
Ladies and gentlemen , as President-in-Office of the European Union , I visited the 24 Member States for the first time in order to prepare the summit in Halkidiki and to help so that the Constitutional Convention could finish its work .
I thought I knew Europe well .
However , I found that there are significant differences , not only social and political differences , of course , which were visible and known , but also as regards the perception of the issues of the European Union , the progress of Europe and European cooperation .
There were countries which have a completely different perception of the Presidency from the perception all of you have and from what is happening or has happened in past years .
I do not believe that we can find a solution to European issues unless we take account of these differences and try to find compromises .
The new Member States in central Europe are living with the past , a past of repression by the Soviet Union .
They are living with the fear of similar developments , they want to pay great attention to relations between the European Union and Russia , they set particular store by security issues , cooperation and participation in ? ? ? ? .
We also know that the old countries in the European Union now have a different perspective , because they have seen that the European Union has overcome these problems .
Therefore , compromises are needed on all issues .
And a number of steps - either big or small - need to be taken .
Besides , we cannot achieve the objectives we would like right from the start , the objectives , for example , of a Union which operates to a federal standard , with advanced central policies , a Union which has a uniform foreign policy without difficulties on all the issues etc .
On the basis of these conclusions , I want to repeat that the compromise contained in the Convention 's text is a good compromise .
A good compromise , a good basis for further discussions , which will take place at the Intergovernmental Conference .
The issues of the Intergovernmental Conference will be resolved by the Italian Presidency , which will convene it , as agreed in Halkidiki , during October .
That is also where the answers will be given about the participation of the European Parliament and the working method .
That brings me to the question of what the technical issues mean in relation to the third chapter of the Constitutional Treaty .
As we remember , the European Council decided that the work of the Convention should be completed by June and it insisted on this , as did the summit in March and the extraordinary informal summit held in Athens for that reason .
We therefore said in Halkidiki that , as there is this decision , the Convention should not continue its work by changing this text or this compromise which was presented .
Mr Giscard d 'Estaing said that the third chapter needs to be brought into line with the two previous chapters , that the method of expression or form of the third chapter are a method of expression and a form that need correction , which is why it was decided to extend the Convention , so that the work could continue within the framework of what had been agreed , on the basis of what had been agreed , and the third chapter could be brought into line with the previous chapters .
Having said which , the Convention will , of course , have to decide what this harmonisation work will be , but the Council was clear that it does not want to reverse this arrangement or the compromise reached .
So I think that good work was done and the Intergovernmental Conference will be able to finish according to the timetable .
That brings me to the second issue raised , the issue of immigration .
There is misinformation here .
I was asked whether or not the single border guard had been decided or discussed .
Of course it was discussed .
The three Scandinavian countries and numerous countries of central Europe stated that , for constitutional reasons , they would not agree under any circumstances to this sort of guard and that this sort of guard is not possible .
Consequently , because the objective is not for there to be a guard , but for there to be common action and coordination , we emphasised in particular in the decision taken in Halkidiki the need for common action and coordination , and various proposals are contained in the Commission text , which is also the basis for the decision on how this coordination will be achieved .
As far as the distribution of the burden between the Member States is concerned , it exists .
However , there is an erroneous perception , that decisions will be taken so that , for example , Germany will give Italy money to deal with immigration .
That is not what it is about .
It was decided that there would be common programmes , of the Union as a whole which , because they were applied in the Mediterranean , for example , or on the Union 's eastern borders , would benefit a number of countries .
This is the distribution of burdens .
The common programmes help those countries or the areas in which there is a problem , or those countries which have some special need to address the overall problem .
Similarly , as far as readmission agreements are concerned , I would like to point out , because it was said that Turkey has a readmission agreement with the Union , that it has no readmission agreement with the Union , which is why we said that the Union needs to conclude readmission agreements .
We therefore decided that there should be a series of criteria for the application of these agreements , because a country cannot cooperate with the Union and refuse to accept the return of immigrants .
I agree with all those who pointed out that this policy must also continue under the Italian Presidency , because we have taken a step , I believe an important step , but more needs to be done both on asylum and on immigration to complete that step .
The third issue which I wish to mention concerns the issue relating to Mr Solana 's proposal .
Mr Wurtz commented that this proposal by Mr Solana needs to be debated and we agree entirely .
Mr Solana has undertaken to process his proposal by December and , of course , afterwards , as with Economic and Monetary Union , so too with security policy , whatever form it takes , and defence policy , we need a broad debate here in Parliament and in the Union .
I believe that Mr Solana 's proposal has much to commend it .
It does not generalise , it concerns specific issues and correctly identifies the dangers .
And these dangers arise from weapons of mass destruction , because modern technology allows weapons of mass destruction to be manufactured without the technical means needed in the past .
Therefore , such weapons can also be made in other countries and prevention is needed .
Prevention does not necessarily mean that the means for military intervention must exist .
Prevention for immigration was also what was said , financing for other countries .
Prevention of terrorism is monitoring these developments , controlling trade , signing agreements governing the provision of information .
We need prevention .
We need a policy for this , so that we can stay ahead of such situations .
Mr Solana has made a proposal , a step , and I believe that we need to continue it , because Greece is convinced from the visits it made , that we need a common defence and security policy .
Mr Papayannakis said that there is continuity on major problems .
Of course there is continuity and it has never been maintained that the Greek Presidency resolved all the Union 's problems .
That would be ridiculous .
In the Balkans , for example , to which one honourable Member referred , both the next Presidency and Greece , now in the capacity of a Member State of the European Union , will need to follow up the solutions found .
But , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , if there is to be a follow-up , we need to talk creatively .
And I think that the Greek Presidency , as you have confirmed in your comments , gave a creative direction to the approach to the problems .
Why , what did we want to do ?
I should like to close by repeating our aspiration .
We wanted to create a stronger Europe and we followed up the Lisbon policies so that there would , for example , be a stronger Europe in the social and economic sector .
We wanted the cohesion of Europe , hence our policy on Iraq .
We wanted prospects for Europe , which is why we worked for the Constitution and the security policy .
We wanted to make Europe a world power , hence our policy for the Middle East , our policy with Russia , the USA , Japan and Canada .
I believe that we progressed and we progressed thanks to cooperation with you .
We progressed thanks to the great help of the European Commission , which submitted a series of proposals , thanks to the contribution made by Mr Prodi , and we also progressed , I believe , because something particularly positive happened during these six months : all the European countries realised that we need to progress .
We need to create .
We cannot stay put .
As long as we stay put , there is an increasing risk of our losing what we already have .
In order to keep it and to gain even more , we need to progress .
. ( IT ) Mr President , Prime Minister , I will be very brief , not least because , as you have rightly pointed out in the House , Mr President , you are anxious to move on to new activities .
There are two points on which I would like to focus , however , for I feel that they are particularly important and supplement the Members ' speeches and Prime Minister Simitis ' response .
The first point concerns immigration .
I have noted that this subject has attracted the attention of a large number of Members of Parliament and I am therefore anxious to stress the long-term principles which the Commission intends to apply in this sensitive , key area .
Firstly , close , ongoing cooperation with third countries .
We cannot solve the problem of illegal immigration just by clamping down at this end : that is a sure , confirmed fact and it is the basis of our initiative , but our partners will have to cooperate responsibly in this initiative of ours .
Secondly , solidarity between Member States .
This is a problematic point because of the different perceptions , the different attitudes - which the Greek Prime Minister has already highlighted - but we must remember that , after Schengen , the issue of immigration became a European issue , which must be resolved , which can only be resolved in a European context .
We are an economic area : we have to learn to become an area of freedom and security too - there is no alternative .
Thirdly , we need to facilitate and simplify legal immigration .
Europe must continue to be a land which welcomes the stranger , but with strict regard for the law .
There can be no tolerance of modern-day slave traders .
Lastly , we must not confuse rigour with inhumanity .
There must be no deviation from the pursuit of our values of equilibrium and respect : it is a question of civilisation and of European identity .
My second point is equally brief .
Mr Wurtz raised the issue - most appropriately , it would appear , seeing as it was picked up on in other speeches - of relations with the United States , foreign policy and Europe 's role on the world stage .
I would like to make just one point in this regard .
The bilateral meeting with the United States , with President Bush , was extremely interesting and extremely friendly , and both parties outlined their positions clearly .
I was struck by one aspect , namely that where Europe is able to act in a united fashion - as Mrs Maij-Weggen said in her speech - the United States is ready to listen to us and to follow us .
I can bear witness to the way Mr Bush was impressed by our account of the economic dimension of the Union , of the number of citizens there will be following enlargement , of the nature of enlargement itself , of the way we have conducted the negotiation process with due regard for democracy - the way we have discussed with each individual country , with all the parliaments , chapter by chapter , the components , the statutes of our democracy , in order to create a genuinely shared democratic vision .
This has been and continues to be a European vision that nobody can take away from us .
This is progress .
It is a way of extending democracy that we can pursue in the world .
In this regard , we are listened to with great respect , for nobody has ever carried out an experiment of this kind .
The other thing which has made a lasting impression on President Bush is the role of the euro .
So many of the issues and questions which we are addressing today derive precisely from the fact that we are starting to see the results , the effects of the euro .
We expected this but many sceptics did not believe it would happen : the truth is plain to see .
When , as in the discussion with the United States , I point out that well over half of transactions with Russia and other countries are now carried out in euros - for the euro is a driving force , it can only go on to be used in sectors currently outside its scope such as energy or other sectors because we are being carried that way by the momentum - then Europe is heeded , then Europe is a genuine political entity and not only an economic entity , even though we are talking about purely economic matters .
Lastly , we were heeded when we outlined the future strategy for the Balkans , to resolve once and for all an issue to the solution of which the United States has contributed greatly , although it stopped when it reached a certain point because it could go no further .
At that point , Europe has put forward the definitive solution : it has provided the political solution , the solution which brings to a close one of the most serious issues of contemporary history .
At these times Europe is strong , when it succeeds in making its voice heard , in matters on which we stand united .
That is why the Convention must take these facts into consideration , promoting majority decision-making in order to give Europe the ability always to speak with one voice .
It is important that it has become clear and is being accepted - albeit in a light-hearted manner , with a half-smile - that neither the wisdom of Old Europe nor the youthful ardour of the United States is alone sufficient to save world peace : both are necessary .
That is why , as I see it , the guarantee of peace lies precisely in a strong , close relationship with the United States .
However , this relationship can only be maintained through dignity and strength , and we have dignity and strength only in those areas where there is no right of veto , in those areas in which we can establish our will , as happens in all other democracies .
There you are : these are the comments I wanted to make .
I would like to end by thanking Mr Simitis once again .
Sophocles ' Antigone contains the sentence , ' ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ' .
I do not know if my - now hazy - memory of Greek has reproduced it accurately , but it means something very precise : that the exercise of power puts a man 's nature to the test .
Mr President-in-Office - Prime Minister - your nature has passed that test with flying colours .
( Loud applause )
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
I have received 6 motions for resolution on the Greek Presidency under Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12 noon .
WRITTEN DECLARATION ( RULE 120 )
At the recent Thessaloniki Summit , certain very worrying decisions were taken on the process of European integration .
The most notable of these relate to the Convention and the so-called European constitution , to confirmation of the immigration decisions taken at Seville , which aim to create a ' fortress Europe ' , and to the maintenance of the monetarist policies of the Stability Pact and of neoliberal objectives for reforming the labour markets and social and health services , as well as for privatising most public services .
We do not believe that the aforesaid European Constitution can serve as a basis for the work of the Intergovernmental Conference scheduled for October . This conference represents a fresh qualitative leap forward in the process of integration , consolidating the fundamental bases and strands set out in the Treaty of Maastricht .
These aspects were developed later at Amsterdam , but above all at Nice , whose treaty came into force a few months ago .
The proposals for altering the European Union 's institutional model are completely unacceptable , since they strengthen the federalist nature of its institutions and its domination by the major powers .
I am thinking especially of proposals to end the rotating presidency of the European Council , to elect a president according to rules which give preeminence to the larger countries , to end the practice of each country having a Commissioner , and to extend qualified majority voting at the expense of the right of veto .
Ladies and gentlemen , I wish to inform the House that our dear friend and former colleague , Pier Ferdinando Casini , who is now President of the Italian Camera dei Deputati , is in the official gallery .
We welcome him and look forward to working closely with the Italian Parliament ...
... in order to ensure that the Intergovernmental Conference under the Italian Presidency is a success .
We also thank him for the efforts he has made for Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
Mr Frans Weisglas , President of the Dutch Upper House , is also in the official gallery .
He is visiting the European Parliament in order to meet with colleagues .
We warmly welcome him and wish him every success in his contacts here .
( Applause )
Mr President , I would like to make a short statement - which I had intended to make yesterday - about events yesterday at Charles de Gaulle Airport .
I was on a flight from London to Paris with 28 other passengers , including Mrs Lynne and Baroness Nicholson .
The plane was half an hour late .
We were then told that , even though there was half an hour until the departure of the Strasbourg flight , we would be transferred to a flight five hours later .
Some of us decided not to accept this proposal and made our way to the check-in desk for the original flight , which was then closed .
At that gate I found other colleagues , including Mr Hume , who got the Nobel Peace Prize for dealing with the hard men of Ireland - but they are nothing compared to the ground staff at Paris Charles de Gaulle .
( Laughter and applause )
I then proceeded , because I wanted to talk to the pilot down the ....
( The President cut off the speaker )
.
Mr President , I do not wish to speak until Mr McMillan-Scott has finished saying what he had to say .
Mr President , I was just about to say that , contrary to some speculation , I was not arrested at this point .
We have received a number of tributes to my late friend , Mr Dankert .
He used to chair a small committee of this Parliament , in which I sat , which had as its sole motivation the achievement of the rights of this Parliament to decide where it sits .
I understand that Mr van Hulten and others are pursuing that work and I want to encourage them .
We cannot be taken seriously until the Council allows us to decide where we sit and where our staff meets .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , I just wish to say that I was one of the people who tried to take the flight .
I have always supported Strasbourg and have never voted against sitting here .
However , I have decided that I really cannot come to Strasbourg any longer .
None of us should be coming here .
If Air France cannot get its act together and get Members of the European Parliament to Strasbourg , then we have to decide for ourselves that we meet in Brussels .
It is not anti-French : it is anti-Air France .
I am asking Air France to get its act together and the President of Parliament again to appeal to Air France , to appeal to the President of France , and say that , unless something is done , every single Member of the European Parliament will be against meeting in Strasbourg .
It is just not acceptable to spend at least 12 hours travelling here and miss a whole day 's work .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , I understand the frustration of my colleagues .
It arises from the fact that we are legally obliged to meet in Strasbourg 12 times a year .
The only way to change that is by a new unanimous decision of the Heads of Government .
We have perhaps an opportunity with the forthcoming IGC to do that .
There are a number of written declarations in the register on this subject , which are available for colleagues to sign .
They are not contradictory .
I suggest that colleagues who feel strongly about this sign all of them .
I would draw particular attention to my own one , which envisages compensation for Strasbourg , because we are not going to get Parliament 's sittings to Brussels without compensating Strasbourg .
I think it should be the Heads of Government and the European Council who should travel to Strasbourg four times a year and have their meetings here .
Mr President , at the part-session here last month I raised this very question of the problems of flying to Strasbourg .
Yesterday I left home at 7 o 'clock in the morning and , because of the behaviour of Air France at Charles de Gaulle , I arrived here at 9 o 'clock yesterday evening .
I could have flown to America and back in the same time !
Here is my boarding pass - but Air France would not let me on the aeroplane .
Nor would they allow nine colleagues on board and , as a result , we had to wait several more hours to get on the next plane .
Given that this is the European headquarters of the European Parliament one would have thought that every mechanism would be in place to ensure that Members get here .
That is a primary factor : that Members attend Parliament .
If the current arrangements prevent us from doing so then they should be investigated .
Mr President , we Members of Parliament ourselves have adopted numerous provisions on liberalising air transport .
Any European airline can link any European airport with the city of Strasbourg , so I do not see any reason for criticism .
The criticism might be justified in this case , but why should it necessarily be Air France which has to link Strasbourg with the other European cities and not British Airways or , I do not know , Alitalia , Iberia or even airlines which are not what are known as national airlines .
It is true that there is a problem , but we cannot put the blame on a single airline , seeing as we are for the liberalisation of the markets .
Mr President , a number of Members would have noticed that at the last Strasbourg part-session there were a number of very close votes .
It is fortunate that Mr McMillan-Scott decided to travel a day before any votes in this particular part-session , because it is my concern and the concern of many of my colleagues that the inadequacies of the transport arrangements to Strasbourg are having a direct impact on who is here to vote on certain subjects and could sway an issue in the vote in this place .
Once our accession colleagues arrive , this problem is only going to get worse because they have even worse connections to Strasbourg .
It is obviously an issue that is not going to go away .
My French colleagues who are going off for their very good lunch now should remember that this Parliament will only legitimise itself when it can choose where it sits .
I share the rapporteur 's position and give my express support to the promotion sought for the proposal for a directive on the adoption and promulgation of best laboratory practices and the verification of their applications for tests on chemical substances , to be achieved through harmonisation of laws , regulations and administrative provisions . As stated in the Commission 's original proposal , it is important that the various Member States adopt common methodologies in this area , as well as common inspection and checking procedures .
This will facilitate communication between the various operators . It will also improve cooperation between them and opportunities for technical and scientific development .
Reason dictates that I should agree with the proposal to codify and simplify the relevant legislation .
I voted with the rapporteur , in favour of adopting a European Parliament and Council decision on the continuing application of schemes approved in 2000 for a supplementary period of four years .
It is a fact that these schemes , both the LUCAS Project ( Land Use / Cover Area Frame Statistical Survey ) and the MARS Project ( Monitoring Agriculture with Remote Sensing ) , have contributed to a better understanding of areas and crops in the Community .
They have contributed to improving measures on land use and land cover , as well as to an understanding of the impact of rural climatic phenomena on harvests and to making yield predictions for the principal crops .
The extension of these projects should therefore be encouraged because of the good results which have been achieved and presented by the European Commission .
Mr President , the representatives of the Vlaams Blok and also the Front National have approved this report without necessarily agreeing with Mr Camre .
The European Parliament must resolutely take the lead in upholding the right of freedom of speech .
In a democracy , everyone must be free , and have the opportunity , to express their opinion on any subject , even if this opinion is felt by some to be disturbing .
Freedom of speech applies a priori to the representatives of the people .
Not only is it their right , it is also their duty to place their electorate 's problems and complaints on the political agenda .
Moreover , parliamentary immunity should be interpreted as broadly as possible , because MPs are not only active in an assembly , but also in the political arena in a broad sense , such as meetings , debates and any possible political and electoral communication .
Another worrying development is that any criticism of Islam meets with legal and other actions .
Since the majority of Islamic states are not democracies , it is of particularly great importance that there should continue to be the possibility of debate within Europe on this religion 's potentially totalitarian , intolerant and archaic aspects .
.
( EL ) We are categorically opposed to and we condemn and are fighting against racist and fascist perceptions such as those contained in the statements made by Mr Camre , which are the cause of the request for waiver of his immunity .
The condemnable statements made by the member in question are intolerable , provocative and humiliating for a large group of religious people .
However , they were made during the performance of his duties and are part of his political activity .
Woe betide us if we end up waiving parliamentary immunity , the precise purpose of which is to safeguard the free and unimpeded expression and movement of ideas , when someone expresses views which are contrary to our own political convictions .
What is the raison d 'être of parliaments and Members of Parliament if we deny them freedom of speech in practice ?
The content and the quality of the ideas expressed by individual Members of Parliament can only be judged by the people who elect them .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece condemn Mr Camre 's views , but we vigorously defend freedom of expression and everyone 's right to state their opinion freely , even if we radically disagree with it .
Let us remember what Voltaire said : ' I disapprove of what you say , but I will defend to the death your right to say it ' .
That is why we are against waiving Mr Camre 's immunity .
I would normally vote against waiving MEPs ' immunity in connection with political statements , but I do not have a mandate to allow the European Parliament to block a lawful Danish decision .
I have voted against the recommendation by the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market not to waive Mr Camre 's immunity .
It is possible to hold many opinions , both for and against the racism paragraph and freedom of expression .
Every other Danish citizen would , however , want to be brought before a court to have their case tried .
Even Members of the Danish Parliament would have their immunity waived so that their cases might be tried before the courts .
The EU enters into agreements whereby ordinary citizens may be extradited to countries other than their own , solely on suspicion . Indeed , we would also extradite our citizens for prosecution in the United States , where the use of the death penalty cannot be ruled out .
In this situation , I find it completely unprecedented for a Danish parliamentarian to be able , on a relatively innocent matter , to hide behind a majority of the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market .
Mr Camre is risking neither his life nor his freedom in a matter concerning racist statements .
At most , he is in danger of the courts ' confirming the view taken by ordinary people , namely that his statements go beyond what is acceptable in terms of spreading lies and hatred concerning people from religions other than Mr Camre 's own .
I am voting in favour of its being possible to prosecute Mr Camre in Denmark .
It is a sound democratic principle that a Danish court should decide whether there has been any breach of Danish law .
Important objections may be raised to Paragraph 266 b of Danish criminal law ( the racism paragraph ) , but for as long as Paragraph 266 b is a part of Danish law , matters concerning the significance of the racism paragraph must be decided by Danish legal bodies .
It is a serious warning of the EU 's growing power over the Danish legal system that an EU institution should have the power to prevent Danish courts from carrying out those tasks that fall to them under the constitution .
In line with Mr Chirac and Mr Berlusconi , Mr Camre is hiding behind an anachronistic immunity and thereby significantly helping to undermine the constitutional state that his party chairman nowadays attacks openly .
I approve of the European Commission 's caution regarding the proposed length of the transitional period proposed for all vehicles , because I too consider it excessively long . I must nevertheless congratulate the Council on its unanimous adoption of the common position in question .
Road safety has to be a top priority , and is becoming a matter of urgency in my country . The type of improvements suggested in the European Commission 's proposal must also be introduced .
Enhancing what car , bus and lorry drivers can see behind them by introducing new technologies which increase the resolution of rear-view mirrors is a measure which must surely deserve all our support and encouragement .
Madam President , I was present at yesterday 's sitting but forgot to sign the attendance register .
Would you please correct my mistake ?
Do not worry , Mr Nogueira Román , the correction will be made .
( The Minutes were approved )
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this draft regulation seeks to guarantee a high level of protection for human life and health , animal health and welfare and the interests of the environment and consumers in connection with genetically modified food and feed .
The high level of protection for human health and also environmental interests is achieved by means of a very demanding authorisation procedure .
This needs to be said right at the outset , because many Members continue to confuse this with health concerns in connection with the limit value for adventitious and unavoidable contamination that we will be discussing later .
If I may start with authorisation , the placing on the market of genetically modified food and feed will only be permitted after an independent and stringent assessment of their possible risks to human and animal health as well as to the environment .
In the future , the assessment will be carried out by the European Food Safety Authority , while the authorisation will be granted by the Commission .
In its first reading , Parliament called for a greater degree of decentralisation .
We have had only limited success here .
One point that is important for us , and which has also been taken on board by the Council , provides that the environmental risk assessment for seed will be carried out by the Member States ' authorities .
Turning to labelling , I am very pleased that the consumer-friendly system of labelling genetically modified food and feed has been accepted .
As you will remember , at this time last year we had a very controversial and also very emotional debate in this House .
I have been able - and as rapporteur this does of course make me very proud - even in the face of opposition from the largest group in this House , that of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , to gain acceptance for a very consumer-friendly system .
At this time last year we also discussed the possibility of having a GMO-free label .
I was and still am strongly opposed to this .
However , the question no longer arises in the second reading , because it was already answered in the first reading .
I should simply like to remind you once more that we know from numerous studies and surveys that a majority of European consumers want to know when foods contain genetically modified ingredients .
A further aspect of this legislation that constitutes significant progress - something that is always forgotten because of the other hotly contested points - is the labelling requirement that is imposed for the first time on genetically modified feed , particularly when you consider that a large proportion of the genetically modified organisms imported by the European Union are used as feed .
One of the most controversial issues in this debate is the question of thresholds .
Here too , I should like to correct something at the outset . I know that it will not do any good , because the Members who repeatedly make this claim have already written their speeches , but I should nonetheless like to say this once more .
This 0.9 % threshold does not relate to a conscious use of genetically modified organisms , where people might say , ' it is only labelled above 0.9 % ' . It is a necessary threshold for technically unavoidable and adventitious contamination .
In its first reading , Parliament set it at 0.5 % , and the Council is now proposing 0.9 % .
At second reading , I have focused on the issue of coexistence , which clearly affects how we are going to retain different forms of agriculture in Europe in the future , but is also directly related to consumer choice .
I wanted European legislation to be logical ; if genetically modified organisms are authorised centrally then the rules for coexistence should also be laid down centrally .
There was no majority in favour of this .
The compromise on the table , with which I am very happy , and which nearly all of the groups in this House support and which has also been endorsed by the other European institutions , is very good in my view .
Through this compromise we give the Member States the possibility of taking appropriate measures to guarantee coexistence and thus also freedom of choice for consumers in the future .
As a Member of the European Parliament , I would obviously have liked the Member States to be placed under an obligation to do this .
Unfortunately , the short time available meant that it was not possible to negotiate this .
I believe , though , that this compromise does put the onus on the Member States not just to sit back and point the finger at Brussels where this important issue is concerned , but also to fulfil their own responsibility in this respect and to protect consumers ' freedom of choice .
I should like to take a few more seconds to thank Members from the other groups for their fruitful cooperation .
. ( EL ) Madam President , the two regulations we are debating today add to a series of Community legislative acts on genetically modified organisms relating not only to the restricted use , but also to the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment , new foodstuffs and new ingredients and compulsory information on soya seed and genetically modified corn labels .
These regulations add a panoply of legislative arrangements , with rules on the marketing and sales of food and feed products which consist of , contain or are produced from genetically modified organisms .
In addition , consumers are given the necessary information , so that they are informed when they want to buy a product .
Thus , when a product consists of , contains or is produced from genetically modified organisms , the words that this product consists of , contains or is produced from GMOs must be written on the packaging .
The Council 's common position reinforces the proposal for a regulation for which I am acting as rapporteur in connection with the traceability and labelling of genetically modified organisms and products and the traceability of foods and feed , the European Parliament 's amendment to Directive 2001 / 18 and the Commission proposal , particularly those provisions designed to ensure the regulation is implemented more efficiently .
Thus the Council attempts , mainly on the basis of traceability , to ensure that the market will function smoothly and to achieve a high level of consumer protection in cases where it is not possible to use analytical methods to distinguish between conventional products and products produced from GMOs , in the following ways : introduction of systems to recognise the identity of GMOs by assigning a unique identifier , a requirement for undertakings to transmit information on identity of the product , a requirement for undertakings to retain additional information for at least five years .
Consequently , I think that the fast adoption of this regulation without proceeding to the conciliation procedure with the Council is what we are asking for .
If the Council and the Commission accept just certain amendments which , I would say , make traceability and labelling requirements for genetically modified organisms slightly stricter , it will be possible to introduce rules at European level .
Similarly , as far as the question of mixed crops is concerned , I would like to emphasise that we are talking here of foods and feed , which is why we call on the European Commission to develop guidelines for the coexistence of genetically modified and conventional crops .
Finally , I think the added amendment concerning the creation of a register for the publication of technical guidelines on sampling and testing for the methods is useful , because this both reinforces transparency and helps to achieve a coordinated approach and efficient implementation of the regulation .
Fast approval of the regulation in question and of the regulation on genetically modified food and feed will ensure consumers are informed about foods and feed produced from genetically modified organisms , so that they can make an informed choice of products .
This will result in the lifting of the de facto moratorium on the approval of new GMOs and prevent a trade war with the USA , Canada , Argentina , Egypt and other countries .
I am basically of the opinion that Europe is lagging behind in these new technologies and in biotechnology , as described in the Council 's conclusions and the road map and the significance of this development , with these two reports today and the vote tomorrow , will be considerable for Europe , because we are noticeably lagging behind our competitors as regards this promising technology of the twenty-first century , with adverse consequences at all levels : economic , social and even environmental .
I therefore propose that we proceed to vote for these amendments , which do not change the substance of the legislative text and , consequently , that we avoid conciliation and that we have these two regulations in force as quickly as possible .
The problem of being unable to keep up with the speed of developments in biotechnology was what basically resulted in reservations and I think that it is time the European Union moved in a positive way towards this technology .
That is the intention of these two regulations , so as to give consumers the chance to be informed and the European Union the chance to make progress at last in this technology compared with its competitors .
I think that we should proceed to vote for a text which is as close as possible to the Council 's position .
. Madam President , I am very pleased that we have now reached the final stages of the deliberations on the GM food and feed proposal - which I first presented to you almost two years ago .
The discussions have been intensive , complex and have often provoked strong emotional reactions and divided opinions .
It is now important to draw the discussions to a close .
Allow me to draw your attention to the three principal elements of the proposal .
First , it will ensure a high level of protection of human and animal health on the basis of a streamlined , efficient and more transparent authorisation procedure .
Animal feed produced from GMOs will , in future , be subject to authorisation .
The simplified procedure based on substantial equivalence will be abandoned and authorisations will be limited to a period of 10 years .
The public will have the opportunity to make comments prior to decisions and to the authorisation of products .
Second , the proposal provides consumers with what they so overwhelmingly demand - an indication of whether or not food and feed ingredients are produced from GMOs .
This will provide consumers with the freedom to choose between GM and non-GM products .
Similarly , feed produced from GMOs will have to be labelled to facilitate the freedom of choice for farmers and other operators dealing with animal feed .
Third , the proposal increases the legal certainty for operators and traders , which they need to carry out their daily business .
The common position adopted by the Council in March is both balanced and rational .
It represents a major step forward in building public confidence in the application of biotechnology to food .
I am pleased that a compromise package has been tabled to facilitate the final adoption of the proposal .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and also the shadow rapporteurs for their hard work towards arriving at this compromise package and for their willingness to ensure a balanced result as well as a timely resolution of the outstanding issues .
The compromise package includes provisions concerning the issue of coexistence between different forms of agriculture .
The Commission agrees that this is an important issue for which appropriate solutions need to be devised .
The Commission would have preferred to address coexistence separately in the context of Commissioner Fischler 's current work .
However , the Commission is prepared to support the compromise package and - as outlined in the package - to develop guidelines on appropriate measures to be taken at national level .
Such guidelines are on course to be adopted by the Commission later this month .
To conclude , let me state the Commission 's position on the amendments as tabled .
The Commission can adopt the compromise package , consisting of Amendments Nos 1 , 7 , 8 , 9 , and 44 to 48 , provided all the other amendments are rejected .
. Madam President , we all know that the GMO issue is a political one as well as a technical one .
As policy-makers and legislators we have a clear responsibility to provide a high level of safety for European citizens and to enable them to exercise choice .
The European Union has been building a system that allows us to base decisions on whether or not to authorise the use and release of GM products on the best available scientific and technical advice .
Once that base is secured it is then a matter of ensuring that the consumer is correctly informed so that he or she is able to choose whether or not to buy GM products .
The two proposals now being considered in second reading are important parts of the overall design of our system for dealing responsibly with GM products .
They have been fully debated inside all the political groups and different committees .
Turning to the proposal for which I am responsible , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , and the presidency for their efforts to finalise the proposal on labelling and traceability .
I hope that Parliament and the Council will be able to agree on the amendments to be adopted later in plenary , so that we can reach agreement on both food and feed and traceability in labelling in this part-session .
This proposal will provide an important complement to the existing regulatory framework .
You will all be aware of the difficult negotiations leading up to the adoption of the common position .
The gap between the different positions has narrowed , as many of the amendments adopted at first reading were introduced in the common position .
As was to be expected , the issue of coexistence has surfaced as the key issue at second reading of both proposals .
The new Article to be introduced into the directive under the political agreement for the proposal on food and feed will provide for a legal base under which to work .
This , linked with the forthcoming initiative from the Commission on guidelines for coexistence will provide Member States with the possibility of implementing appropriate measures to deal with coexistence .
In terms of the key issues , the Commission can support the amendments that provide clarification of the common position .
These include Amendment Nos 1 , 3 , 4 , 18 , 24 , 26 and 27 , as well as the second part of Amendment No 17 , and the first parts of Amendment Nos 8 and 13 .
Conversely , Amendment Nos 22 , 23 , 25 , and 28 seek to introduce texts on coexistence that are identical to that which would be laid down in Directive 2001 / 18 / EC and the regulation on GM food and feed .
The Commission considers this to be duplication but we could accept it .
The remaining amendments , the majority of which are retabled from first reading , cannot be supported .
Amendment Nos 2 , 9 , 10 , 14 and 15 refer to exemptions via thresholds .
Acceptance of these amendments would undermine the political agreement reached on the proposal on GM food and feed .
As I have previously said , consistency and coherence between the two proposals must be ensured .
In addition , the first part of Amendment No 15 seeks to reinstate national provisions for traceability under Directive 2001 / 18 / EC .
To accept this would only create legal uncertainty , given that the proposal on the table will provide Community rules for traceability as well as labelling .
Amendment No 7 refers to the ' may contain ' clause for food and feed products in the original Commission proposal .
This was also the subject of a very difficult debate and to reopen it now would have serious consequences for the operability of our system and the forthcoming WTO Panel .
Amendment No 6 , which refers to the definition of the placing on the market , was also subject to considerable debate in the Council , following adoption of the same amendment at first reading .
The wording of this amendment was included in the common position via reference to the full definition of placing on the market from Directive 2001 / 18 / EC .
The Commission cannot support further amendment of this definition particularly as the tabled amendment would contradict definitions already laid down in Community legislation .
Amendment Nos 5 and 29 refer to the precautionary principle .
I would point out that the Council addressed this amendment in the common position as supported by the Commission .
The precautionary principle relates to risk assessment which is why it appears in Directive 2001 / 18 / EC and the proposal on GM food and feed .
Traceability is a facilitating measure , but it is not based on risk assessment .
To go further than the current wording of the recital is not appropriate and the Commission cannot support these amendments .
Amendment Nos 11 and 12 refer to traceability and labelling requirements for processed products and acceptance would again impinge on the agreement reached under the proposal on GM food and feed which covers such products .
The second parts of Amendment Nos 8 and 13 seek to extend the time-period for the holding of traceability information from five years to ten years .
Even if traceability were still possible after ten years this information would be of no practical value .
Amendment No 20 addresses the reporting obligations of the Commission , which are duplicated in Amendment No 3 .
Reporting obligations are already reflected in Article 12 of the common position and further requirements are not necessary .
In terms of coexistence , Amendment No 16 in a similar manner to an amendment on the proposal GM food and feed , seeks to introduce text to address this issue into a new Article 26a of Directive 2001 / 18 / EC .
However , the text of Amendment No 16 is not in line with that proposed for this new Article under the political agreement for the proposal on GM food and feed and therefore we cannot accept it .
Finally , Amendment No 21 refers to the date of application of the regulation .
It should be noted that the applicability of the regulation was referred to in the Council and Commission statement , accompanying the common position .
In this regard the Commission points out that Member States have already endorsed a Community format for attribution of unique codes to GMOs based on the OECD format .
Of course the Commission will make sure that this system is accounted for in terms of new authorisations as required under Directive 2001 / 18 / EC .
To conclude , it has been a very intensive debate on the whole issue of how the European Union should handle GMOs .
With some difficulty we have put together a system which will offer security and choice to our citizens .
I hope that the vote tomorrow will give us a workable compromise and I thank you all for the discussions we have had and for finding a good solution .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the swift entry into force of these proposals for a regulation is a precondition for the final lifting of the de facto moratorium on green genetic engineering , which has been in place for several years .
It is the current ban on growing and importing GMOs that for years has cut off Europe 's scientific community , its consumers and farmers from the positive developments in the field of green genetic engineering .
Moreover we are facing complaints before the WTO from countries that wish to export genetically modified products to the EU , but may not do so because of the moratorium .
The USA has already filed a complaint .
What escapes all of those who want - often for purely ideological reasons - to prevent GMOs from being used here is the fact that genetically modified food and feed have been a reality throughout the world for some considerable time already .
And particularly where protein feed is concerned we are dependent on imports from third countries , where the growing of genetically modified plants is the order of the day .
In 2001 the EU imported over 16 million tonnes of soya from the USA and South America : in the USA the proportion of the total soya crop that is GM is 68 % ; in Argentina it is 100 % .
This is the reality that is facing uncertain consumers and farmers in Europe , as well as a research sector that is unable to plan ahead .
Consumers and farmers treat green genetic engineering here with suspicion because they do not know what the issues are .
This is due to a policy of insufficient information , which - at least in my home country of Germany - is entirely intentional .
We are not making policy to order here .
Through these draft regulations we need to secure freedom of choice for consumers , and my group as much as any other , Mrs Scheele , is in favour of protecting human health and therefore also in favour of robust consumer protection .
But with this legislation we also need to cater for agriculture , the environment , small and medium-sized seed producers , industry , the retail food trade and many other branches of industry .
And we need a labelling requirement so as to be able at long last to assess imports from third countries properly .
To do so we need to employ reasonable , realistic thresholds , admittedly political thresholds , which are based on what is technically feasible and workable .
It is a great success , particularly for our group , that all of the other groups are now supporting the Council 's common position on the limit values : 0.9 % for authorised GMOs and 0.5 % for GMOs that are ready for authorisation and in a backlog because of the moratorium .
The same applies to the decision that this regulation should not include provisions on seed .
Seed needs its own rules and we cannot have the coexistence issue , that is , the coexistence of genetically modified and conventional plants on agricultural land , being used as a vehicle to place a general blockade on green genetic engineering .
It was only on this condition that my group agreed to the compromise .
The Commission is now under an obligation to ensure that the de facto moratorium is not artificially prolonged by some Member States .
Madam President , I think there is cause for saying a big thank-you to Mrs Scheele for the huge efforts she has made in order to obtain a package and arrive at a compromise .
It has , I know , in large part been an uphill struggle , with a Council and a large number of Members of this Parliament not having been interested in what might be regarded as the ideal legislation .
There are still three problems with the outcome , which lead me to think that it cannot be characterised as ideal .
Firstly , I think that the limit value for labelling in the case of adventitious pollution by GMOs is still too high and , secondly , we are coming , over a period , also to accept adventitious pollution by non-authorised and unlabelled GMOs .
The third point to which I would draw attention and which I still think is a defect is that we have not obtained the best rules concerning the co-existence of GMOs and other crops .
There will now most certainly be many instances of GMO pollution , with lengthy compensation cases in their wake .
If we are not very careful , we are in danger of actually destroying the basis of ecological production and of general agricultural production throughout Europe .
In spite of these defects , we are in the position of not having any choice , and I too shall therefore support the outcome with which we have been presented , including Mrs Scheele 's report .
The alternative would be far more frightening , namely that of not obtaining any rules at all .
I believe we are obtaining some sensible rules on traceability .
In that connection , I hope that Parliament will decide that data concerning transactions involving these products must be kept for ten years , and I also think it important that the results of inspections and controls carried out by the Member States should be kept in a central register so that the best possible data is always available .
Only time and the first cases of matters going wrong can reveal whether the rules on traceability have been secure enough .
It is quite crucial for me that the de facto moratorium should only be lifted when the system for developing and assigning unambiguous identifications of GMOs has been fully implemented , that is to say when the rules are in place and there is full traceability from day one . In that connection , I should like to thank Mrs Wallström for the assurances she gave in her speech .
I hope that European consumers who are as critical and aware as the majority of them appear to be will demand the necessary rules on co-existence from their governments , leading to action being taken nationally and the correct rules on co-existence put in place .
I also hope , moreover , that this large group of critical consumers will exert a natural restraint upon the demand for these artificially modified foods which consumers have not of course asked for but which chemicals groups and certain European governments definitely want us also to consume .
Madam President , this issue divides our Member States as it does people across the world , sometimes with an intensity comparable to religious conviction .
I confess to having no such absolute certainties .
I am a sceptic rather than an opponent of genetically modified crops .
I acknowledge that they may bring about benefits in terms of the reduced use of pesticides and herbicides , that there are no proven health risks - or none yet established - and that GM crops could , across the world , be grown in circumstances which would not permit the growth of conventional crops .
However , I see no certain gains from growing GM products in Europe .
I believe changes in European and American trade policies are likely to prove of greater benefit to developing nations , and I have fears that we could be making mistakes that will have unforeseen consequences for our environment .
A common framework of policies is needed if we are to avoid the risk of a trade war with the United States , with appeals to the WTO , and to curb the risk of divisions amongst ourselves across the European Union .
I await with interest the result of the field trials currently being carried out in my own country , to see whether they provide any evidence on the effects of biodiversity .
I am pleased to hear that the Commission 's proposals for guidelines on the subject of coexistence are on schedule .
It is vital that these ensure that conventional and organic growers should not lose out as a result of this technology .
They must be protected from the risk of financial loss , and the proposals here should allow individual Member States to take significant steps to prevent cross-contamination - at least that is the hope .
There is a strong sense that we are all being driven too fast by narrow commercial interests , mainly concentrated in the United States .
As a result , I have no doubt that this is an imperfect package and we will have to return to this subject .
In the meantime consumers must be given the information to make their own choices and , if this ultimately slows the development of this technology while more research is undertaken , then that may be no bad thing .
Madam President , the labelling of genetically manipulated food and feed is a milestone for consumer protection .
At long last , consumers will no longer be able to be sold genetically manipulated food under false pretences .
When , as was the case in Germany , 90 % of all genetically manipulated soya products were not labelled , this was tantamount to saying that consumers were incapable of making their own decisions .
Now , at long last , they are getting freedom of choice .
Foods such as oil and sugar , up to 100 % of which consisted of genetically modified raw materials , finally have to be labelled .
The products of gene technology must be transparent from the field to the fork .
The threshold is admittedly too high for our liking , but it counts as a huge success that we are enabling the Member States to take measures to ensure that GM , traditional and organic farming are able to coexist .
We have also very clearly enshrined the ' polluter pays ' principle here ; otherwise in the long term freedom of choice would not be guaranteed at all .
Unfortunately , we in the European Parliament have no influence on the lifting of the moratorium on genetic engineering .
If the Commission lifts the moratorium under pressure from the USA , labelling will enable consumers to respond with a moratorium on purchases .
We will move from a political moratorium to a practical moratorium on purchases imposed by consumers .
The litmus test for the genetic engineering industry is not authorisation but sales .
Genetically manipulated products will have to maintain their hold on the market .
I am sure that at the moment no manufacturer will dare to bank on genetic engineering .
Manufacturers are as afraid of labelling as the devil is of holy water .
They also know that more than 90 % of consumers reject genetically manipulated food .
We regret the fact that products of animals that have been fed genetically modified feed will not be subject to the labelling requirements , but we are relying on the labelling requirement for animal feed and on the fact that farmers know what consumers want .
Where seed is concerned too I expect the Commission - and I would ask them to comment on this - not to play any tricks ; we really need EU seed legislation with a zero detection limit value .
Anything else would amount to deceiving the consumer .
Otherwise , these two regulations would quickly become wastepaper .
Our expectations here are quite clear : that the Commission should implement this zero detection limit value for seed , because we know that it is possible to have seed with a zero limit value as it is already on the market in Austria and other countries .
This is not about unavoidable technical uncertainty .
I would therefore ask you , Commissioner , to give your views on this once more .
My final point is that we all know that Bush 's claim that the EU is responsible for hunger in Africa was cynical .
The problem there is not one of technology , but of distribution .
We also know that these countries are certainly in no position to buy expensive seed from the US genetic engineering industry .
I therefore hope that tomorrow will indeed mark a milestone for consumers and that consumers will indeed respond to the lifting of the moratorium with a moratorium on purchases .
Madam President , I would like to start by expressing my appreciation of the wearisome work carried out by the rapporteurs , and I am completely serious in saying this , for it has certainly been no mean feat to reconcile positions which were initially so very far apart and achieve the present position , which has backing across the board .
However , I have to mention the fact that today 's consensus is the result of a compromise which is not really particularly satisfactory , adopted purely because of the unyielding reluctance of the Commission and , in particular , the Council , to build a better basis .
Indeed , the resulting framework certainly cannot be said to be complete .
That is not so much because the issue continues to be addressed by 35 different reports without even the slightest attempt being made to link them , nor because , for the present phase , it has been decided to split the matter into three different regulations - one of which is not to be debated in this part-session , moreover - as because the framework which emerges is in itself highly dysfunctional , a fact which has been purposefully disregarded in the name of the urgent need to regulate the matter .
I could cite many examples , such as , for instance , the fact that authorisations are to be valid for ten years and the obligation to keep correspondence and the results of tests carried out for only 15 years .
In addition , it will be a long time before we have identification codes and the sampling techniques are random , with no standardised procedures , while , what is more , there is the recommendation to monitor the life of GMOs and products produced from GMOs closely , without , however , it being possible to require additional risk assessments .
There is one example , in particular , which I feel is absurd : so-called co-existence .
I know there is no point in going back over the arguments raised in the debate on this matter , but the fact is that the path chosen - the decision to require the Member States to produce rules governing the area before the Commission has had time to give its opinion - is surely highly unusual .
I hope I am wrong when I say that it will not be the benchmarking techniques which stop pollution , in addition to which there is no mention of the ' polluter pays ' principle , while , moreover , the acceptability criteria of 0.5 - 0.9 , which caused so much debate , are completely invalidated .
In conclusion , we certainly needed to move on from the current derogations , but that could have been achieved with more meaningful and , above all , more coherent provisions .
Madam President , in approving proposals on traceability limits for genetically modified organisms in raw materials , all we are doing is to open the floodgates to the gradual but constant release and movement of genetically modified food and feed .
Our fears are not unfounded , if account is taken of the increasingly suffocating pressure from the USA to import genetically modified products .
The arrangement setting upper permissible contamination limits creates a de facto situation with which we radically disagree , first because it shifts the responsibility to the consumer , who is not , however , in a position to evaluate the risks inherent in food produced from or containing GMOs and , secondly , because it paves the way for the suffocating dependence of farmers on the mainly American multinational biotechnology companies , which have sole rights to produce and sell genetically modified seed and the agrochemicals that accompany them .
Apart from anything else , the use of GMOs will result in the genetic erosion of non-genetically modified varieties , with unforeseeable consequences for biodiversity .
We must fight to ban imports of products made either from genetically modified raw materials or containing GMOs , not for limits on how these products are moved and traced .
Finally , we disapprove overall of the use of GMOs and the ' could be worse ' philosophy .
Any concession on this position cannot but be at the expense of farming , the equilibrium of the ecosystem and consumer health , which is why we shall abstain from the vote .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs , but in particular Mrs Scheele , whose report I followed , for her excellent work and the way she has brought about this compromise agreement on what is a very important report for all our constituents concerning human and animal health and the environment .
The labelling of all genetically modified food and animal feed will give consumers in Europe what 93 % of them are asking for : the choice of whether or not to buy GM products .
Meat producers , for example , will be able to avoid using GM feed for the first time through labelling .
It is not complete choice , because of the threshold levels for authorised - and temporarily for unauthorised - GMOs if their presence is adventitious or technically unavoidable .
These levels are too high , but they can be reviewed in the light of developments in technology .
Under the new regulations GM food and animal feed will have to go through a strict authorisation procedure - not just a notification process - and once on the market they can be monitored for effects on the environment .
However , as other colleagues have mentioned , of central importance are the measures which can now be taken by Member States to avoid the contamination of other products by GMOs .
Coexistence has become a major issue since we started discussions on these reports , and conventional and organic farmers , and food producers , as well as consumers , will welcome the proposals before us today .
I represent Wales , a country where the National Assembly tried to implement separation distances between GM and non-GM crops , only to be informed by the Commission that this action was not legally sustainable .
About a quarter of agricultural land in Wales is under agri-environmental schemes , or registered as organic , so this is of crucial importance to the economy as well as to the environment .
I am sure that my constituents will be very pleased that action can now be taken on coexistence .
I particularly welcome the fact that it is clear here that producers and users of GMOs must take all necessary measures to prevent contamination of other products so the burden is not on the conventional farmer .
These new regulations will defend the fundamental principle of consumer choice and we will see people exercising that choice by not growing GM crops and by not buying GM food .
Madam President , following the approval of the two GMO reports we are debating today , we unfortunately face the imminent cancellation of the moratorium , which is something I deeply regret .
The EU should not be turned into one large biological exploratorium , as is happening now .
That being said , ' there is nothing so bad that it is not good for something ' , as an old Danish proverb would have it .
Now , there is a further argument for promoting organic farming .
It is a clear signal to consumers that the only way in which they can be certain of steering clear of GMOs is by buying organic products , especially when you think of all the animal products whose labels will not state whether GMOs were used in the animals ' feed .
The political system has abandoned all responsibility .
From now on , it is crucial for the GMO-free areas of Europe to be extended through organic farming and for other farmers voluntarily to refrain from using GMOs .
Madam President , that was a very good example of a French expression of an inferiority complex vis-à-vis America !
I , along with the majority of the British Conservative MEPs and the majority of members of my group , see genetic modification as an interesting and potentially very useful development for mankind and for our environment .
Genetic modification of plants and seeds holds out the possibility of better food production in harsh climates and of assuring future food supplies to a fast-growing world population .
It also holds out the possibility of reducing artificial agricultural inputs , notably pesticides and herbicides , whose use can cause collateral environmental damage .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has heard no convincing evidence that GM foods are a threat to human health or to biological diversity .
If we had , we would have been very reluctant to see these proposals adopted at all .
As it is , this debate has been remarkable for the chorus of Greens , Liberal Democrats and Socialists hymning the prospects of GM foods subject to safeguards .
Some MEPs may still want to differ from the Council over the question of the thresholds but we should remember here that we are talking about very tiny amounts .
The text we adopt will specify that GM presence of more than 0.9 % of any ingredient will trigger the labelling requirement .
That is a tiny amount .
Let us be honest .
The 0.9 % tolerance level is , in itself , on the very margin of detectibility .
There is something bizarre about Europeans putting in place such requirements when consumers in other parts of the world do not insist on them , when there is no health evidence that supports them , and when we are probably legislating for the technically impossible .
I have one question for the Commission .
If this legislation is adopted , and if some countries are reluctant to lift their moratorium on genetically modified foods , what action will it take ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are not debating today whether gene technology has a right to exist in this world .
Neither are we discussing whether it is right for there to be genetically modified food in the USA , Mexico , Canada or Europe .
There already is .
Had we not wanted this , we would have had to take action around twenty years ago and conclude a worldwide agreement .
We did not do so .
This means that we now have to ensure that we put a legal framework in place .
What should the legal framework contain ?
It needs to state that there is research and that a product shall be completely safe and harmless according to current scientific knowledge .
What we expect of any food colouring and any emulsifier in yoghurt is also what we expect of genetically modified food and seed , no more and no less .
We have repeatedly said that it will take a package of measures to assemble a reasonable body of legislation in the European Union .
The first part was Mr Bowe 's report on the release directive several years ago .
It was always , however , clear to us that this was not enough , that something more was needed in addition to the release of food , seed or plants .
What is actually needed is for the processed plants to be labelled so that the people of the European Union have freedom of choice , which incidentally they also have in respect of any other foodstuff , for example with the fat content of milk or with other foods .
They should be able to exercise their right to choose .
No one has countered what has been said here by saying that genetically modified food is the work of the devil and no one is scaremongering .
We simply say always that products have to be safe according to current scientific knowledge .
We are trying to ensure that this is the case .
And we are trying to ensure that food is comprehensively labelled .
We have heard that a threshold is arbitrary and we know that this is the case .
Whether it is 0.5 % or 0.9 % I really do not care .
I would like us to have comprehensive legislation as quickly as possible and the reports by Mrs Scheele and Mr Trakatellis are valuable and necessary contributions to achieving this .
Then we will also have the security in the European Union of being able to say to the Americans and all of the others : yes , you can produce and export to the European Union , but on our conditions and in accordance with our legislation !
We owe this to the people of the European Union ; that is our job as their elected representatives .
Madam President , the labelling of food products containing genetically modified organisms is , of course , to be welcomed , because consumers can make up their own minds .
Whether or not these consumers are right in having doubts about GMOs , the customer is ultimately always right .
Legislation on labelling , however , to my mind , misses the mark on at least two fundamental counts .
First of all , the consumer does not get what he wants .
A consumer who wants GMO-free products does not want less than 0.9 % or 0.5 % GMOs in them .
No , he does not want any GMOs at all .
A non-GMO label would therefore have been much better .
It is unfortunate that this can no longer be on the agenda , as we rejected it at first reading .
Moreover , a label of that kind would have made superfluous the whole debate we are now having about co-existence .
The second problem is that this is about political labelling which goes much further than information of potential relevance to public health .
As far as I am concerned , paper traceability instead of factual traceability is a mistake .
It is asking for fraud , and so the next food scandal is already in the making .
Finally , it is to be hoped that this proposal will lead to a lifting of the GMO moratorium .
This is what matters most ; it means that Europe 's lack of knowledge compared to the United States is only growing .
I should therefore like to ask the same question which Mrs Jackson raised a moment ago , namely whether this proposal will lead to the moratorium actually being lifted , because this is still shrouded in uncertainty .
Madam President , I am pleased that all the parties and all the groups in this House - including the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - agree on the political compromise that has been reached .
After all , today 's legislation means that the moratorium will be lifted .
Member States can therefore no longer prescribe their own requirements and ban products off their own bat if GMOs have been tested and approved at European level and meet all safety standards .
I am also pleased that the Commission will be tabling a proposal shortly in which it will indicate how GMO farming , organic farming and traditional farming can continue to exist side by side .
I wonder what the proposal will be like , but I assume that sufficient guarantees will be given for traditional and organic farming .
Madam President , Consumers have the right to know what they eat and to be certain that their food is safe .
Consumers must be able to choose , and labelling is crucial to this .
I am not at all happy with the rules that have been laid down , not only in the Environment Council and in the Agriculture Council , but also in our own group .
After all , traceability has not been factored in as the guiding principle : as modified DNA can be present unintentionally , a margin is provided for .
We will therefore never be able to say again that something is completely free of modified DNA , which , to my mind , turns freedom of choice into a farce .
Let me give you two examples : foodstuffs made of GMOs , such as sugar , starch and vegetable oils , fall within the scope of the labelling obligation , while sugar , oil and starch do not contain any protein or DNA .
Other foodstuffs , however , that have been prepared with a GMO do not fall within the scope of the labelling obligation ; these are cheese , wine , beer , soft drinks and last but not least , our daily bread , while bread improvers used to prepare bread contain yeasts or fungi with a GMO .
These do contain residues of modified DNA in a verifiable manner .
The distinction drawn is therefore hypocritical and I can understand very easily that industry has difficulty with it .
I regret it and I hope that in two years ' time , thanks to the amendment clause , something better will turn up .
Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , according to a recent poll conducted by Eurobarometer , over 70 % of Europeans do not want to eat GMOs .
There was , therefore , a need to provide European consumers with a response , by adopting legislation on labelling , which should enable everyone to choose what they eat .
I do , however , have several reservations .
The first concerns the 0.9 % threshold .
Why , when a lower presence is technically detectable - with a threshold of 0.5 % being accepted for non-authorised GMOs - are we refusing to be less demanding ?
The situation would be different if a 0.9 % presence becomes a reality before the moratorium is even lifted .
My second reservation concerns consumer choice .
Will this choice be guaranteed in future , when we do not envisage any binding legislation on the subject of coexistence and instead leave it to Member States to adopt appropriate measures ?
Perhaps we already know that coexistence is impossible , that we can regulate neither the flight of the bumblebees nor the direction or strength of the wind and that planting GMOs is irreversible ?
If this is the case , we are taking a considerable risk for Europeans , because we cannot make the issue of GMOs solely one of consumer choice , turning a blind eye to public health and environmental problems .
Lastly , no one has to date been able to produce powerful , irrefutable and convincing arguments that prove the benefit and the harmless nature of GMOs .
GMO crops and biotechnologies are too frequently lumped together , but GMOs are only one of biotechnology 's many applications .
Refusing to extend the use of GMOs in Europe does not mean that we are against progress , or against gene therapies ; it simply means that we are choosing the precautionary principle over the trial and error of the sorcerer 's apprentice .
Everyone is well aware that what still counts the most in this field is economic and financial interests and that the EU 's agricultural and environmental future will be shaped by pressure from the United States and from WTO negotiations .
This is most regrettable , because it should not be forgotten that the United States has still not ratified the Cartagena protocol .
I have the feeling that all of these debates and our votes tomorrow are preparing us for agreeing to raise the moratorium without too much argument .
Our vote will , therefore , be much more political than it appears to be and we would be failing the citizens if we did not demand , before any decision is taken , to be better informed about the real risks that GMO crops will entail for the environment and for people 's health .
Madam President , the proposals in the Scheele report , together with the Trakatellis report , mean that consumers do not have to use GMOs .
If the amendments of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy are approved , EU legislation will be the strictest in the world .
Despite this , the situation is still far from ideal , because it is still possible for traditionally or organically grown plants , and animals , to be adventitiously contaminated by GMO materials .
We are still waiting for effective criteria for co-existence in the field and also for the environmental liability system that the Commission promised us during the negotiations about Directive 2001 / 18 / EC two years ago .
Until such time as these criteria have begun to take adequate effect , the ban should not be lifted .
We must make it clear that European consumers are entitled to decide for themselves whether they want to buy GMOs or not .
For the protection of this right , we should not have to rely on the World Trade Organisation or the United States administration .
This is exclusively the responsibility of Europe 's own parliamentarians , both here and in the national parliaments .
If we are to move ahead , we have to support all the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I regret that the Commission has assumed a rather negative position towards a number of these amendments .
Madam President , I very much agree with what Mrs Ferreira has just said .
Demand for GM food is not driven by consumers .
On the contrary , it is driven by - and is only for the benefit of - multinational GM companies .
The United States ' concern for the starving populations of the world is as genuine as George Bush 's concern for the Iraqi people 's rights .
By the way , Iraq currently has a GM ban .
The United States should not be allowed to force this to be changed .
If the United States and GM multinationals are so concerned about world hunger why do they not put the resources spent on research and PR for GM into helping them fend for themselves , not into forcing them to become even more reliant on multinational companies to grow their own food ?
They should also stop exploiting them .
In relation to the coexistence issue , this is a myth .
Unless crops are grown , harvested , processed , eaten , and even the waste disposed of in laboratories , it is inevitable that there will be contamination .
What are we going to do in Europe ?
Are we going to start introducing Schengen agreements for bees , birds and the wind and also ensure that we do not have any kind of cross-pollination ?
It is absolutely impossible !
When we talk about the polluter-pays principle , the multinationals must be held accountable for the fact that conventional farmers , and in particular organic farmers , are not going to be allowed to do what they have done in the past .
This is all about profit and greed .
The consumers do not want GM food , so why are we being forced into it just for the benefit of multinational companies ?
What we have agreed in Parliament , in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , does not go far enough .
The threshold is far too high , since a lower one could be achieved .
Personally , I believe a zero threshold is the only one acceptable .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what is at issue today is not the profits made by enterprises or conglomerates , but our gaining , at last , the length and breadth of Europe , a single legal framework which will enable genetically-modified foods and feedingstuffs to be authorised , labelled , and traced .
This will give all participants in the market - including consumers - a guarantee of legal certainty ; it may have come very late in the day , but I hope it is not too late .
In terms of the practical implementation of this technology , we Europeans are over ten years behind developments in other countries , while our researchers are without doubt equal to the best in the world .
To put it another way , what this amounts to is that research findings have been left unused for ten years , and research in Europe has been scrapped , especially into green genetic engineering , even though the usefulness of this is not a matter of dispute .
As Mr Davies has given a number of examples of this , I do not need to do likewise .
Over recent years , however , public discussion has not been about the pros and cons of genetic engineering , but has instead been a campaign mounted along ideological lines , aimed at obstructing a modern and forward-looking technology , so it is not to be wondered at that the results of surveys show the majority regarding genetic engineering as the work of the devil and abominating it .
A number of interventions in this House today gave me the feeling that the plague was on its way back to Europe .
We have to be very careful here .
This situation means that it is perfectly reasonable that the regulations should contain very stringent rules on authorisation , labelling , and traceability , even though these threaten to break the bounds of practical feasibility .
The reason why I say this is that I think that we , simply by applying very stringent measures , are guaranteeing the absolute maximum of safety that is practically feasible - and this is something that we also need to tell the public over and over again in the information campaign .
Although the information requirements provided for in the regulations are certainly an important means towards this end , I would like to appeal also to the Commission and say that I too regard Europe-wide information campaigns as necessary , as Mrs Breyer has announced a campaign for a moratorium on buying GM products .
If the labelling of these products results only in their being rejected , we will certainly not be able to catch up on the rest of the world .
Whilst this compromise motion is certainly an intelligent solution , I do have my doubts - and a number of interventions seem to justify them - as to whether it will succeed .
When it comes to drawing up guidelines - and I can tell the Commission that I am agog to see what will happen when they do - there will be a lot of hard work to be done ; it will not be easy , and I hope it does not turn out to be a bureaucratic monster .
Madam President , we have to recognise that this is another step in the process of making sure that , when we deal with this new technology , it works for the benefit of human beings and not against them .
We have seen already other pieces of legislation come before this House , for one of which I was the rapporteur , which were part of the jigsaw creating the total picture of control over genetically modified organisms .
With this particular piece of legislation we have to recognise a number of things .
The main objective of this legislation and the agreements around it is to give people the right to make a genuine choice about GM products .
We have listened to the concerns of people across Europe calling for the right to make an informed choice about GM food .
We are trying to put in place a labelling and information scheme that makes the choice a reality .
I have some sympathy with the remarks made by Mr Maaten about the imperfections of this scheme ; nevertheless we have to work within the boundaries of what is scientifically provable and practically possible to implement .
We live in an imperfect world , and the use of thresholds reflects the reality .
Organic regulations allow for the presence of up to 5 % non-organic ingredients .
In practical terms that means that an organic readymeal could contain minor ingredients like herbs and spices which are not readily available in organic form .
We do not label very low levels of residues of pesticides or chemical contaminates in foodstuffs although we know they are present .
In any labelling regime there are bound to be imperfections .
There has to be a cut-off point where the practical and the scientific reality cuts in .
That is the best we can do with the science we have .
One of the ingredients in the pizza that you might eat tonight might be a salami sausage but not every constituent ingredient of that sausage will appear on the pizza-box label .
Our job is to make the best deal that science allows .
Our priority has to be to give the consumer real choice .
Madam President , tomorrow , I will be voting in favour of both reports .
Nonetheless , labelling will be difficult for industry and will provide no honest information for the consumer .
In its Common Position , the Council gives it as its opinion that the reports are aimed at preventing the consumer from being misled .
How kind !
The only problem is that it will not work like that .
The fact is that labels do not have to show any adventitious or technically unavoidable contamination that might be present , at any rate not below a certain threshold value .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt deserves our thanks for making that so marvellously clear .
Whether the figure is 0.9 % , 0.5 % , or perhaps we will hit on the idea of 0.1 % or even 0.01 % - the whole thing is nothing but a load of eyewash .
If there is no danger to health - and there is none - then what is all the song and dance about ?
Pity the consumer who will eat GMOs without knowing it , whom we will quite deliberately be misleading .
Read item 12 of the Scheele report and you realise how worthy of a comedy turn the whole thing is , for it says that , in order for the requirement of labelling to be dispensed with , the operator must certify to the competent authorities that he has done everything possible to prevent genetically modified organisms from being present .
The good fellow has made such an effort , so we will not put the labels on and keep the consumer informed !
The consumer will never discover what he has eaten .
Never will it dawn on him that he has eaten GM food .
In the committee , I attempted to prevent this , and put the case for doing away with negative labelling and saying yes to positive labelling .
That would have been honest , and big firms like Nestlé , Unilever , and others would have gone along with it .
No doubt it was too late for that .
Let us treat the whole business as a didactic drama .
Let us be glad that we have made co-existence possible , let us hope that someone will assume liability for it , and let us take this as a lesson in what political dishonesty can be like !
I should like to start by extending warm congratulations to Mrs Scheele , who has handled this difficult dossier with great care .
I have to say that I have quite a few reservations about this report .
First of all , I think that labels should tell the whole truth , and not be 0.9 % removed from the truth .
It is regrettable , in my opinion , that we have not decided to introduce a GMO-free label , because that would have made matters much clearer for the consumer .
I also regret that we have remained caught up in the small-print mentality ; it would , in fact , be much better if a label could indicate in an open and clear manner right from the outset whether a product is GMO-free , contains GMO or may contain GMO .
This would at any rate have provided consumers with the clarity for which many are waiting .
Despite this , I can agree to this legislation , because I think it is about time the ban was lifted , and I should therefore like to hear from the Commission what steps it intends to take to bring this about .
For the Member States , it is time to closely examine not only co-existence in agriculture , in transport and in ports , but also how this is to be monitored .
It should not be made too easy to get round this directive , and the Member States should really ensure that it is observed in any event .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking both rapporteurs for the work they have done , but I have to say that I am very uneasy about the decision we have to take .
The fact is , I feel as if I am in a kind of hostage situation .
On the one hand , I want to reject GMO technology , which is far from being problem-free .
It is no panacea .
On the contrary , it exposes us to risks because it is impossible to predict the characteristics to which a modified gene may give rise in its new environment .
Co-existence sounds good , but we also know that GMOs are infectious .
We do not therefore know what situation we are facing .
There is also a concentration of power , and the big multinational companies exercise incredible pressure , especially upon the African countries .
On the other hand , if we cannot put a stop to GMOs , strict rules are naturally needed .
We must minimise the risk .
I am therefore going to vote tomorrow in favour of the amendments by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
I want , however , to say once and for all that there are so many issues left to solve , for example in connection with environmental liability , that there can be no question of lifting the moratorium .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Trakatellis and Mrs Scheele have produced a comprehensive piece of work , which should make for better information and greater transparency , as well as helping European consumers to enjoy freedom of choice .
Consumers have to know what they are buying and what they are eating .
Effective , reliable legal framework conditions for authorising , labelling and tracing GMOs need to be created as soon as possible .
Both regulations , along with the lifting of the de facto moratorium on authorisation , are crucial to the implementation of a forward-looking strategy for European biotechnology , demands for which Parliament endorsed at the beginning of this year .
The moratorium impedes the progress of green biotechnology in the European Union , and , in particular , both damages Europe 's innovative SMEs and stands in contradiction to the Lisbon objectives .
The room for action set out in compromise motion No 1 on the Scheele report is desirable .
We must , however , ensure that , if individual Member States decide to go their own way , this does not frustrate the aims of this regulation by interfering with the common internal market .
When it comes to the adventitious and technically unavoidable presence of GMOs in non-genetically-modified products , we need rules that work in practice .
In the final analysis , as we all know , every threshold value we set is arbitrary , but the 0.9 % threshold value provided for in the Common Position is reasonable and helps to guide manufacturers and consumers .
The threshold value is important in terms of different types of cultivation being able to coexist , as , in the natural world , there are no techniques for preventing such things as cross-pollination .
The most important yardstick by which the new legislation must be judged must be the practicability of its framework conditions , which must , in particular , be in line with WTO rules and must not allow excessive bureaucracy to hamper the development of biotechnology in Europe .
Above all , they must help to inform consumers and protect them .
Mr President , although a lot has been said in today 's debate about threshold values , and about their being politically arbitrary , I would like to emphasise how important it was for this House , at first reading , to specify a figure of 0.5 % , even though many were not happy about it .
The fact is that , if this figure of 0.5 % had not been hammered out and adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , we would not have such a rigorous Common Position and also the present basis for negotiating an acceptable compromise on co-existence .
The second point I would like to address is that I do not think it is very fair for us to be now acting as if we were about to vote ' yes ' or ' no ' to genetically modified organisms .
We know for a fact that we do not have the option of saying ' no ' , whether to GMOs or to many chemicals and other products .
That is one reason why I campaigned for the most stringent conditions in the authorisation process and for comprehensive labelling .
Mrs Flemming 's criticism was that the method of labelling was politically dishonest .
I would ask her - although she is no longer here - whether not labelling something that was 100 % composed of GMOs would mean that we were being more politically honest with consumers .
I believe that the European public are perfectly grown-up enough to come to their own opinions on this , and also that biotechnology cannot but become more credible and be taken more seriously if it does not hide behind badly-framed rules on labelling .
To those who draw attention to their energetic campaigning for labelling as ' GMO-free ' , I have always said that the fact that products are ' GMO-free ' can be indicated by additional labelling .
We cannot conceal from consumers the fact that genetically-modified organisms are everywhere .
I believe that we have to stress the fact , and bring it to people 's attention , that this stance was friendly only to industry and not to the consumer .
Mr President , we need new regulation on labelling and traceability and it must be as rigorous as possible .
But my key point is that even if tough new rules are adopted tomorrow , as we hope , this should not be seen as a green light to lift the de facto moratorium .
These directives do not address properly the very real risk of contamination of non-GM and organic agriculture with GM varieties .
Nor do they provide for liability rules to cover farmers who are victims of such contamination .
Research by the Commission , by the European Environment Agency and by the Department for Environment in my own country all conclude that licensing GM crops will almost inevitably lead to widespread contamination of non-GM crops .
If we are to ensure that the public has the right to choose to reject GM we must ensure not only that GM is labelled , but also that non-GM continues to exist .
Unless we can address the problem of contamination , that cannot be guaranteed .
I do not believe Mr Fischler 's guidelines will be adequate .
The moratorium therefore must stay in place .
Finally , there are a number of national consultation processes going on in the Member States on GM crops .
It is vital that those processes are taken seriously .
It is therefore a matter of much regret that the UK Government 's process has been under-funded and badly publicised .
Its deadline must be extended if we are not to conclude that government ministers have already decided in favour of GM cultivation .
. Mr President , we have now come to the end of this debate that has lasted for very nearly two years at this level of intensity .
The evidence of the cooperation that has taken place between our institutions is in the presentation of the legislation before you for voting on tomorrow .
Of course there have been expressions of different views by many sides during the course of the debate over the last two years and , indeed , in this Chamber this afternoon .
There are some inevitably who will not be satisfied with the legislation that is put forward .
Some for instance say that we go too far in achieving the balance that we have tried to achieve and that this will put off and set back the development of biotechnology in Europe in the future ; that we are losing our good scientists to the United States .
That may be true but , nonetheless , we have to ensure that we have in place good legislation that gives valuable information to the consumer so that the consumer can make the choice of whether or not to consume GM foods .
We have put in place in this legislation - the best legislation in the world on this issue - providing free market authorisation , monitoring , labelling and labelling supported by traceability to give it the appropriate level and full credibility .
Others reject GMOs and I suspect some of them would reject GMOs at any cost .
I have to tell them that they will never be satisfied and there is no legislation that will satisfy them .
In those circumstances , have they placed themselves in a situation where their views cannot be fully taken into account ?
Perhaps that is the case .
Those who have worked hard on this issue - Mrs Scheele , my own staff and I hope myself - have attempted to achieve a balance so that we get in the legislation the best solution for all points of view , having taken into account views expressed right across the spectrum to achieve the result which is before you this afternoon and for voting on tomorrow .
I have to say to those who are very sceptical about this technology that all the scientific evidence available to us indicates that GM food is as safe as conventional food .
There is no scientific evidence going in a contrary direction .
We have said time and time again that our decisions here in Parliament and in the Commission must be science-based .
If we move away from that we are in peril .
I have been asked to deal with the question of the moratorium .
A number of Member States and a number of others asked for the de facto moratorium to be put in place to enable legislation to be brought forward to achieve what we have in this draft legislation at the moment .
I cannot believe that it was the intention of those who wanted this work to be done to then say that , despite all this hard work , effort , expense and debate , they nonetheless believe that the moratorium should remain in place .
In those circumstances , reflecting the views of those who asked us to engage in this exercise and provide this legislation , we have now come to the stage when we must lift the de facto moratorium .
Legislation is in place which gives adequate protection and information for consumers .
It is a sophisticated piece of legislation - the best in the world , as I have said - to enable consumers to make the choice for themselves of whether or not to consume GM foods .
The choice is for them .
In those circumstances it is appropriate to move now to the beginnings of the lifting of the de facto moratorium on food and feed .
I do not believe we should be doing this in the face of any threat of WTO proceedings or anything of that nature .
The work I have been doing - and I am sure it is the same for you - has been done on the basis of trying to achieve what is right , trying to achieve a result that provides the kind of choice for consumers that we believe is necessary and provides the choice for them in a meaningful way and in an informed manner .
We do this work because we believe it is right .
We do not do this work because other people believe we ought to speed it up and do what they believe .
I do not do this work under threat of WTO proceedings .
To those of you who have expressed scepticism and still have some worries about this legislation , within a period of two years after the adoption of this legislation and it becomes law , there is specific provision in the legislation for a review .
Therefore , it is possible - and it is intended - for us to return to this issue in that timescale so that we can , with the experience of the operation of the legislation , determine whether there is any need for adjustment and for amendments .
In my opinion that is an important part of the legislation which will assuage the concerns of those who are expressing anxiety about it .
Will I take infringement proceedings or do I believe the Commission should take infringement proceedings if there is a failure to comply with the law ?
It is the Commission 's function and role to look to the legislation , ensure that the laws of the European Union are properly applied and implemented and if there is a failure to apply any legislation - including this legislation - then we must take our responsibility and move in the way that we are required to do under the Treaties .
Finally , I thank Mrs Scheele for her hard work and for the cooperation she has afforded to me in meetings personally and with my staff , and compliment her on the outcome of some difficult work over a long period of time .
I also enjoyed working with her during that period .
. Mr President , firstly I should like to thank you all for a very useful and comprehensive debate .
It confirms at the same time how difficult it is to reach some sort of consensus on this complex issue .
This adds to the merit of the two rapporteurs , Mrs Scheele and Mr Trakatellis , who have managed to approach very distinct positions and to work out some viable compromise solutions .
In this debate I can trace a wish to be in a different debate about saying ' yes ' or ' no ' to GMOs .
This is not the situation .
We are not discussing whether to say ' yes ' or ' no ' to GMOs .
Maybe this would have been easier , but we have passed that stage .
We already import into the European Union 35 million tonnes of soya every year .
This is a fact .
It is not fair to say that we have not tried to act according to the situation .
We have revised Directive 2001 / 18 / EC about placing live GMOs on the market .
We have proposed traceability labelling .
We have looked at food and feed proposals .
We have added this .
We have written a new text into the environmental liability proposal .
We are always discussing ways to complement the existing legislation in order to meet the concerns of citizens in the European Union .
What we have proposed reflects these concerns and , at the same time , the potential of this new technology .
This is exactly what it addresses .
We see that there is probably a lot of potential in using GM techniques , but we also see that there are risks .
That is why we now have much stricter legislation in place .
That is why we are tracing and labelling these products .
That is why we have added a text in the environmental liability proposal .
This is exactly what we have taken into consideration .
We are trying to do our part and to take our responsibility .
That is the only way to address such a complex and difficult issue .
Is it enough to restart authorisations ?
This debate also reminds me of a boy I know who , when he was five or six years old , was served small green peas as part of his dinner by his grandmother .
He assured his grandmother that ' yes , I love green peas , but I don 't eat them ' .
The same will apply if we now put in place completely revised legislation but are not willing to apply it .
What kind of signal are we sending to the rest of the world ?
A signal that our legislation , which ensures this balance of looking at both the potential benefits and the risks , does not work - we are not ready to apply it .
That is the main point for me .
We should be able to start to implement the legislation that we have now worked on for such a long time , trying to ensure an informed choice for the European consumers and farmers .
We must demonstrate to the rest of the world , including the US , that it works .
This is how we do it .
We make a risk assessment , we trace it , we label it and we make sure that we have this correct balance .
That is why , as my colleague , Mr Byrne , has said , the Commission will take its responsibility .
As you know , the process also leaves it very much up to Member States to demonstrate that they can work with this issue , but if they are not willing to do it the Commission will certainly take responsibility .
Once again my thanks go to the rapporteurs and to all in the House for a very exciting debate .
Mrs Breyer has asked leave to make a personal statement in accordance with Rule 122 .
Mrs Breyer , I would like to point out to you that you may refer only to statements made concerning yourself in the course of the debate . In other words , please can we not have a new debate ?
Mr President , Mr Schnellhardt has stated that I am organising a campaign for a moratorium on buying GM products .
That is utter nonsense .
Consumers are making it clear - and saying so in every survey - that they do not want GM products .
So far , industry has been able to slip GM foods past the consumers on the quiet ; now , the food manufacturers have to tell them the truth about their products , so if the de-facto moratorium is lifted , we will be in a completely new situation .
Labelling has now arrived , so that consumers can make known their feelings - whether for or against - about this type of food .
For the GM industry , the litmus test is not to do with whether or not they get authorisation from the EU , nor is it the procedural hurdles ; it is whether or not consumers will buy these products .
It is the market that is the litmus test ; it is the market that will decide .
I do not fear the end of this moratorium - far from it .
You have to ask yourselves why it is that not one single manufacturer has , so far , put these products on the market labelled as such .
Manufacturers will watch as these products do an economic nosedive .
If these products have to be labelled , the manufacturers will have to tell the truth about them .
It is the consumers themselves who will bring in a moratorium on buying them .
The Commission has also accepted responsibility when it comes to lifting the moratorium .
Commissioner Wallström , at the time of the directive on release into the environment , you told us that liability would be incorporated in the environmental liability directive , but it was not .
My final point is that , earlier in the debate , I asked the Commissioner to say something about the rules on seeds .
My fear is that this House is being tricked .
I urge the Commission to make a statement about this , because Parliament 's voice is not being heard on the subject .
Will there be a limit value of zero for seeds as is already the practice in a number of states ?
Is it not technically avoidable ?
I ask you to speak and account for this .
Mr President , both these regulations are meant to establish a single new , Europe-wide , legal framework for the authorisation , labelling and traceability of genetically modified food and feedingstuffs .
Consumers have minds of their own and want to be informed - about ingredients , composition , and additives ; some of them want information about methods of production .
We have to meet this need for information , especially in those areas where ignorance gives rise to fears .
Consumers want to use choice as a means of getting rid of uncertainty .
People are afraid of anything that is new .
As we have no long-term experience of GMOs , information is urgently needed if there is to be freedom of choice .
I support the compromise .
If we are to put this important regulation into effect , we now have to avoid a conciliation procedure .
Only if it is adopted soon will it be possible to end the moratorium , thus avoiding trade disputes with the USA , Canada and Argentina .
I hope that the EU will shortly abandon its reservations about GMOs .
If people had opposed the wheel when it was invented , we would still be going everywhere on foot .
The next item should be the joint debate on a number of reports on food safety , but we would have only three minutes available for it before the start of the debate on the Commission communication .
There is no point in starting the debate right now .
The next item is the Commission communication on proposals for action for strengthening the European pharmaceutical industry in the interest of patients .
. Mr President , I am delighted to be able to announce to you that , earlier today , the Commission adopted a communication on the G10 Medicines initiative .
For those of you who are not familiar with G10 , I would like to briefly explain the background to this initiative .
In recent years there has been growing evidence that the European-based pharmaceutical industry was losing competitiveness compared with its American-based counterparts .
This is not only serious for our economy but of vital importance to public health and , especially , European patients .
Millions of Europeans use medicines everyday .
Achieving real and long-lasting benefits to patients is a key objective of pharmaceutical policy .
We must support Member States to make authorised medicines , especially the newer and more innovative ones , available and affordable to all those who need them as quickly as possible .
However , some of the statistics concerning the industry make difficult reading ; those pertaining to research and development , for example : critical to our industry , to our science base and to our patients .
In 1990 Europe was the world leader in pharmaceutical research and development and innovation .
Now the US has overtaken Europe in the discovery of new chemical or biological entities .
This has not happened by chance .
Since 1990 , research and development expenditure in the US has grown at a dramatic rate .
Between 1990 and 2000 , research and development expenditure grew at twice the rate in the US compared with Europe .
By 1997 America had overtaken Europe in terms of total research and development expenditure .
G10 medicines were born out of this background .
In recognition of the critical role the industry plays in both the industrial and health sectors , Commissioner Byrne and I established the High Level Group on Innovation and the Provision of Medicines - G10 Medicines .
It is a small Group of high-level representatives from Member States , industry , mutual health funds and patients .
The group was given the challenging remit of reaching consensus on ways of improving the competitiveness of the pharmaceutical industry in the context of achieving social and public health objectives .
To many people 's surprise , the group was able to report back in May last year , with 14 wide-ranging recommendations .
In the communication adopted today we set out how we plan to take these recommendations forward .
There are five broad themes we pursue in the communication which we intend to take forward in parallel .
Benefits to patients are at the heart of G10 .
We will look at ways of improving patient information on medicines , strengthening the role of patients in public health decision-making and so forth .
I am sure that in that area my colleague Mr Byrne will say more .
Developing a competitive European-based industry takes us back to the origins of G10 .
We examine ways of improving access to innovative medicines and the need to speed up national negotiations on reimbursement and pricing , greater price competition for medicines that are not part of the state sector and measures to develop competitive generic and non-prescription markets .
With regard to strengthening the EU Science Base : if we fail to support innovation we will pay a heavy economic , social and public health price .
We look at ways we can develop incentives for research , including the use of virtual institutes for health to stimulate and organise health and biotechnology research and development .
We also link in to the many initiatives under the Commission 's existing Sixth Framework Programme .
As for medicines in an enlarged Union , with the forthcoming enlargement the Union is facing one of its greatest challenges and opportunities .
We look at ways of meeting the challenge through providing a level playing field for intellectual property protection and providing support for the new Member States to implement the new legislative framework .
As regards Member States learning from each other , benchmarking will provide a practical mechanism for monitoring the implementation of the recommendations , as well as providing a forum for Member States to share best practice .
So , what is the driving force for implementing the proposals in the communication ?
The main driving force will be the pharmaceutical review supported by the Life Sciences and Biotechnology Action Plan and the Public Health Programme .
You will be well aware of these , and the Pharmaceutical Review will obviously have its second reading in the autumn .
However , the unique aspect of G10 is the vehicle it provided to look at areas of national competence that have an impact on competitiveness and public health .
There is only so much we can achieve at European level .
In the communication we set out areas where we believe that a European reflection could benefit Member States as well as helping to achieve our G10 goals .
In particular , we propose an examination of national pricing and reimbursement systems .
Although this is clearly within the competence of Member States we believe that the injection of more market measures , while ensuring national safeguards to control expenditure on pharmaceuticals , could bring benefits to patients and the industry in terms of quicker access to the markets .
Overall , I believe the communication , together with the other initiatives I have mentioned , provides a framework for turning around the competitiveness of our pharmaceutical industry while reinforcing European public health .
. Mr President , in the G10 communication adopted today by the Commission we see patients and public health placed at the centre of the debate on the future direction of European pharmaceuticals policy .
This rebalancing of policy-making between legitimate industrial innovation and health needs is an important step in the right direction .
You have previously heard me say here that our health is our wealth .
The development of rising public health standards , the extension of disease-free life-years and the increase in life expectancy are shaping features of modern economic development , and pharmaceutical innovation has played a significant role in all of this .
Similarly , from a patient point of view , innovation has yielded dramatic improvements in the dignity and quality of life of patients in recent decades .
Now patients are taking a more active role in seeking out information and products .
But at a point where health expenditure is rising , the population is ageing and patients ' expectations are increasing , we need to have a strategic vision of how to move forward in this complex field .
There are a number of interlinked issues here .
For patients , there is a desire to have more effective , more humane products , brought to market more quickly .
There is a desire to have better information on the comparative advantages of products and early warning of adverse reactions .
For patients , the availability of clear and authoritative information from the leaflet inside the package , to online at the level of a European health portal , is essential .
For those who finance the health system , there is a need for sustainable budgeting , affordable medicines , manageable demand and responsible behaviour from patients , prescribers and producers alike .
From a public health point of view there is a need to ensure that medicines maintain high quality and safety standards and that adverse reactions are quickly identified and tackled .
There is a need to work towards more rational prescribing and consumption patterns , to ensure that we can tackle anti-microbial resistance .
In addition there is a need to ensure that research develops products which tackle health requirements as distinct from lifestyle issues .
For example , more must be done to develop products that tackle rare diseases and childhood illnesses .
And , in an ageing society , medicines will play an important role in ensuring active and healthy ageing - with all its attendant economic and human benefits .
For the industries involved , there are a range of specific issues which are being presented to you today .
But we need to be aware that an increasingly global industry is less likely to prioritise investment in research for the treatments which Europeans will need in 10-20 years ' time if they are dealing with a fragmented and unpredictable market .
In other words , whilst there will be no shortage of sure-fire lifestyle wonder drugs like Viagra , how can we be sure that the medicines needed to tackle arthritis , Alzheimer 's and obesity , to name but a few , will be developed ?
It is only by moving towards a more predictable market environment across Europe that we will be in a position to convince industry to take the needs of Europeans seriously in the years ahead .
The High Level Committee on Health has stated that the public health goal of pharmaceuticals policy is ' to make readily accessible , efficacious , high quality and safe medicines , including their most recent innovative ones , to all those who need them , regardless of income or social status ' .
Each of these issues has been addressed in this communication .
We have effectively highlighted patients ' needs for better information and their need for a stronger voice to influence policy .
Efforts in both these areas will support their growing role as important decision-makers for health care .
The establishment of an EU-funded European Patients ' Platform in February this year is an important step .
We have also targeted the medicines themselves , to build up systems that ensure their safety , quality and efficacy .
Here the G10 put the need for stronger systems of pharmacovigilance and relative effectiveness firmly on the agenda .
In this way we aim to improve the rational use of medicines .
This is a public health goal that underpins our vision for the pharmaceuticals sector .
Relative effectiveness is a very important issue for the European Union .
In June 2000 the Council underlined the importance of added therapeutic value both in terms of health protection and from an industrial policy perspective .
Effective medicines must get quickly to the people who need them .
This means identifying which medicines are genuinely effective , not just in the controlled environment of a clinical trial , but in general use amongst the wider population .
This is the critical issue at stake here .
Relative effectiveness is one key tool towards rational use .
But , clearly , we have to consider the role of other actors too .
How can we improve rational use of pharmaceuticals at the level of the health care prescriber and the consumer ?
A parallel question might be : how can we know if we have improved the rational use of pharmaceuticals ?
This brings me to the issue of benchmarking .
The recommendation to develop indicators for public health has set us a big challenge .
For example , to investigate indicators that could monitor what is happening at the health-care prescriber level .
Ultimately , the intention is to have a set of indicators that can shed light on what is happening in the pharmaceuticals sector of Member States in terms of the extent to which public health needs are being met and in this way to inform policy development at national and European level .
Finally , the discussion on enlargement is particularly timely .
The accession treaties have been signed .
Although enlargement is one specific recommendation of the G10 , clearly our responses to each recommendation need to adequately reflect the changing environment within the European Union .
The G10 is a first important step to developing a strategic vision of the future health needs of Europeans which is affordable , effective , transparent , inclusive and safe .
Properly pursued it will be good for the health of all concerned .
Thank you , Commissioner Liikanen .
This debate will be conducted according to what we call the catch-the-eye procedure .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt has succeeded in catching my eye , and she has the floor .
Mr President , it is a pleasure for me to be able to catch your eye .
I have just one question for the Commissioners .
Do you not think that there is a certain contradiction inherent in the recommendations ?
If you are in favour of more incentives for research in order to get better medicines to the patients more quickly , and if all the G10 countries have said so too , then why does it appear from the policy agreement on the pharmaceuticals package as if the provision being made for data protection , as regards the creation of a return on innovations , is insufficiently long-term , so that research is not being driven forward ?
Do you not also think that the safest and best way of providing patients quickly with better medicines would , in principle , be a fast and simple central procedure , and that it would be better if the Commission and the Member States were to hand out more money for research projects and at last get round to submitting the new legislation on children 's medicines to Parliament ?
That would enable us to do something more quickly about getting people better medicines .
. Mr President , I must emphasise that the two proposals are separate as far as the review is concerned .
The review is supported by G10 and now has the support of the Member States .
The G10 process goes further , and so far there has not been any broad discussion in the Member States about that .
There is , firstly , a proposal from the Group and today there are the recommendations from the Commission .
Next week the Italian Presidency is organising a conference on G10 on the basis of the Commission recommendations .
We hope that the dissemination of these messages goes forward .
As I said , it is now important to get the review through .
That is important for research-based industries because it strengthens their position ; it accelerates the access to markets for new products ; it acts as a counterbalance ; and it also means that generics will be more competitive when the patents expire .
Mr President , having worked for over thirty years for one of the major international pharmaceutical companies , I can tell you that the main concern of this industry , whether European or otherwise , is neither people 's health - and especially not the health of people who cannot afford to pay for their medicines - nor the well-being of its employees , whom it does not hesitate to make redundant by the thousand whenever a merger or concentration takes place in the sector or to drive hard , day and night , even the women , in manufacturing and packing medicines .
These practices are all the more scandalous because the pharmaceuticals industry is one of the most profitable of all .
The sole concern of this industry is the financial well-being of its shareholders .
Before bringing out a new medicine , the major companies first undertake marketing studies , which determine whether research in the field is continued or stopped .
This means that companies are only interested in illnesses that generate money .
Too bad if a growing number of men and women find it harder and harder to look after themselves ; too bad if in Africa and elsewhere , children are still dying in this day and age of easily curable diseases such as measles , and too bad for those people suffering from malaria or other diseases that affect the populations of poor countries .
The only decision that could satisfy both the employees of these companies and patients - in rich countries and in the developing world - would be for this industry no longer to be a private industry in which only the interests of a minority count , and for it to be placed under the control of the people , for the benefit of everyone .
Thank you , Mrs Bordes .
Let me just point out that , in a debate of the sort we are having at the moment , the idea is to put questions rather than just make speeches .
I would ask you to again read the Rules of Procedure in order to see just how this works .
That way , there will be no misunderstandings between us next time .
Mr President , I must admit that I am pleased to hear Mr Byrne side with consumers against the pharmaceutical industry .
We had the feeling , when addressing the pharmaceutical industry dossier and pharmaceutical legislation at the same time , that it was actually the European Parliament that was defending consumers , through far-reaching amendments , in particular on marketing authorisations , on centralised procedure and on consumer protection .
The Commission 's answers to these questions , let us remember , were not what the European Parliament had hoped to hear .
Fortunately , I have the impression today that the Council has reintroduced a number of items , such as the five-year renewal , marketing authorisations , the centralised procedure and stopping direct advertising to patients .
All of this leads me to ask you whether your communication will accept a good number of the amendments to pharmaceutical legislation that Parliament has adopted by a large majority , particularly in the fields of direct advertising , consumer participation in the EMEA , centralised procedure and modifying marketing authorisation dossiers , as real proof of your concern to protect consumers and patients ?
. Mr President , that discussion has already been held in a different context when I commented on Parliament 's amendments , but I would like to say briefly that the Commission welcomes Parliament 's support for the centralised procedure .
We now we propose that it be applied for all active substances and Parliament supported this .
Now the Council has reached a political agreement which goes in the same direction , but in a rather narrower fashion .
It will limit the application of the centralised procedure to four illnesses , but within the legislation , in the Council 's opinion , there should be a particular Article which would allow for the enlargement of the scope of the centralised procedure .
Regarding information for patients in that area , discussions continue but it seems to be that the majority in the Council and the majority in Parliament are not so far from each other .
This is not the same as the Commission 's position , but I respect the outcome of the legislative procedure .
The Commission has never proposed direct-to-consumer advertising .
It only supports the provision of controlled information for patients , patient groups and so on .
Anyone who today has access to the Internet sees a massive amount of direct spam advertising on medicines , which is growing every day .
It would be better for consumers if they knew which websites were trustworthy , where there is scrutiny by the authorities or whether they could trust the quality of the information .
On that issue , it seems that Parliament and Council are on the same wavelength in being very prudent on the issue of information for patients .
We will of course return to this in second reading .
Commissioners , among your numerous proposals , you referred to the added value of medicines .
I believe that this is a crucial point .
A large number of new medicines now coming onto the market are , unfortunately , rarely innovative .
What practical measures do you envisage for encouraging industry to produce not only new but also innovative medicines ?
You also raised the issue of the European computer portal .
New Zealand , for whom I have appointed myself spokesperson , is currently working on just such a system and wonders whether our contribution to this system will be medicine-centred or disease-centred and , in the latter case , whether the answers provided will revolve around medicinal therapy or whether other , replacement therapies will be proposed on these sites .
. Mr President , in reply to the first question , if there is real work on the new indications , which really means new innovations , then supplementary protection data exclusivity can be guaranteed .
As far as efficiency factors are concerned , our position is that authorisation should be science-based but of course , once the authorities of the Member States decide which medicines they reimburse by public funds , they can reinforce that by different studies of their efficiency and that is supported also by G10 .
In that area G10 is proposing , and the Commission is supporting that proposal , that more exchanges of information on best practice and these kinds of efficiency studies could be undertaken in future .
Regarding the second question , of course it is very much in the hands of Member States .
There is very different legislation in Member States , whereby patients are being directed to use different solutions , either only the product which traditionally has been under patent or at the same time generics , when generics are inside the market .
On the European level perhaps the emphasis is not there ; it should be more on the national level .
Mr President , Commissioner , the pharmaceutical industry is not doing all that well .
There is a lack of innovation .
That is why there is the temptation to provide better protection for existing products or produce minor variations on them , and prices remain unacceptably high .
Your communication is therefore very well-timed .
You were both right in saying that the patient must be placed at the centre of the debate , but the question is , of course , who that patient is .
As one of the previous speakers already remarked , patients in developing countries are still faced with a shortage of medicines .
In actual fact , no , or hardly any , research is being done into diseases of the developing countries .
I would therefore want to ask you what initiatives you intend to take in order to give research into the neglected diseases a shot in the arm , so much so that the pharmaceutical industry as a whole will also enjoy the benefits .
.
Mr President , as far as the developing countries are concerned , there are three main possibilities in terms of action : firstly , to create a legislative framework that encourages research on orphan drugs to treat what are on our territories rare diseases .
There , we have a directive that was adopted by Parliament some time ago , and that framework is in place .
Secondly , the question is that if that is not enough to provide an incentive for research work , the question of public research funding can be raised .
I am sorry that Mr Busquin , the Commissioner for Research , is not here .
I am sure he would be in a position to provide a more detailed reply to that .
Thirdly , there are the issues of the needs of developing countries , which are based on the low level of income and lower purchasing power of the citizens .
In that area , there has been some progress in recent years .
The issue is still being discussed in the WTO context on the one hand .
On the other , there have been schemes which have allowed developing countries to purchase certain medicines at a lower price than in Europe .
Things are moving , but I am sure that the situation today is far from satisfactory .
.
Mr President , I would like to add briefly to what Commissioner Liikanen has just said in answer to that question .
There is a group of Commissioners which includes myself , the Commissioner for Development , the Commissioner for Trade and the Commissioner for Research .
This group is concerned with the very issue you are talking about , that is , to focus on diseases in the developing world .
This group is focusing in particular on the diseases of malaria , HIV and tuberculosis .
I expect that more information will be made available on that issue as time passes .
I would also mention that one of the objectives that has been stated by the Italian Presidency , by the incoming minister for health , is to make progress on the disease of malaria .
That is one of the objectives of the Italian Presidency .
Mr President , Commissioners , I wish to take up the thrust of the speech by Mrs Corbey , with whom I worked on drawing up a programme under Article 169 of the EC Treaty relating to the Sixth Framework Programme , for Research and Development on diseases prevalent in the countries of the southern hemisphere .
She asked you about the difficulty of attracting researchers to this field .
You replied that Commissioner Busquin could have given us further answers on the matter .
Without wishing to put words into the Commissioner 's mouth , I simply wish to say that there appears to be very little enthusiasm in the private sector for contributing to the amount of appropriations earmarked for the programme I have just referred to , under Article 169 .
Since you work together , you might perhaps know about this : could you confirm or deny the information that I have in this field concerning the lack of private funds raised to implement this programme to combat Aids , malaria and tuberculosis ?
Do you also have information about whether States have agreed to this programme and consequently whether public funds are being harnessed ?
Since the European Parliament voted for this report at first reading , we have not had much news .
This question stretches the scope of today 's debate , but it involves the same issues and , this being the case , I would be extremely grateful for any answer you might be able to give me .
. Mr President , the work that is being undertaken on this issue , by the Commissioners involved , is ongoing , as I indicated earlier .
It is hoped that there will be greater involvement of the private sector in this issue , because we have ambitions to make some progress on that .
I also know from the work that has been undertaken by Commissioner Lamy in relation to the provision of drugs to developing countries that this is an issue that is being discussed in the context of the Doha Round .
He has expectations that there will be progress on this issue because it was one of the undertakings that was given in Doha at the commencement of the discussions .
The expectation is that developing countries will insist on some progress before there is any finality .
I expect and hope there will be some outcome on this before Cancun .
Mr President , Commissioners , I congratulate you on the speech you have just given .
I will confine myself merely to asking Commissioner Liikanen a few questions . At the start of his speech , he drew our attention to the state of the European pharmaceutical industry , pointing out that it is less competitive than it once was and that , although it is one of the most important industries in Europe , it has now lost its pre-eminence to the United States .
I would like , then , to make a short comment to the effect that the future of Europe - Europe 's destiny - is being determined today above all in its laboratories and research centres .
That is why Commissioner Liikanen 's observation left me troubled , more troubled than I already was . So I would ask him this : might the legislative framework under development in Europe and the inflexible system of research regulations in the field of biotechnology , for example , not constitute a major obstacle to European industry 's acquiring or recovering competitiveness ?
I know that this is not what many of my fellow Members wish to hear , who , for philosophical or ideological reasons , are imposing a virtual veto on biotech development , but I felt obliged to put this question to you , Commissioner .
. I should just like to say a word about the pending research .
Public research is very important but it is very clear that , even in the EU , objectives of devoting 3 % of GDP to research by 2010 is based on the concept that 1 % of GDP would come from public sources , 2 % of GDP would come from the private sector .
Whatever happens in public spending , we never will have enough resources to achieve 3 % .
For that reason , the regulatory framework has to be judged so that intellectual property rights are protected in such a way that private money will go to the sector .
Whether you like it or not , that is very simple , clear economic logic .
On biotechnology , I am sure you are at least partly right .
In the Commission we have accepted the biotechnology action plan , which we follow in a strict way .
In general in the field of so-called ' red biotechnology ' , which is connected to pharmaceutical industries , perhaps the situation is slightly better .
When you go to the other branches of biotechnological research we have a lot of work to do .
Today my colleagues Mr Byrne and Mrs Wallström talked about the GMO area .
There are also other issues in this field .
If we want to lead in the field of pharmaceutical research we cannot separate different chapters of biotechnological research .
We need intellectual property rights , we need sufficient financing .
We also need public opinion that supports novelties and innovation in the market .
At the end of the day that is always critical .
No research can have financing unless there is a market .
There is no market unless consumers have confidence in the products that come out of research and manufacturing .
Mr President , I wanted to ask a brief question about the European Patients ' Platform and to ask the two Commissioners whether they are happy about the degree of independence of those who represent patients .
I do so against the background of articles published in the British Medical Journal in the United Kingdom .
If the Commissioners have not had sight of these articles I would be happy to let them have them .
We all understand that without the support of the pharmaceuticals industry there would be very few patients ' voices , but that voice does not come without a price .
I would be interested in your views on that .
. Mr President , as Mrs Read said , it is of absolute critical importance that the platform is seen to be , and is , independent and does its work in a manner that is going to add value to this entire issue .
I have not heard any suggestions that there is any infirmity in this area .
I take note of what you say in relation to that issue and will enquire about it personally when I leave the Chamber .
However , I have to assure you that I have not heard this , I do not have those apprehensions and I have confidence in the platform .
Question No 31 by Carlos Lage ( H-0393 / 03 ) :
Subject : Reform of the common fisheries policy and the stability principle
During the European Parliament 's debate and vote on the reform of the common fisheries policy , much support was expressed for the principle of relative stability in the management of fisheries resources - a principle which is doubly advantageous since , on the one hand , it will help to ensure that resources are better managed and conserved ( which is one of the main objectives of the reform ) and , on the other , it will prevent undesirable conflicts which impede the development of harmonious relations between fishing peoples and communities .
This is what is happening today , for example , all along the Portuguese coast , where people are becoming increasingly concerned and are rebelling against the EU authorities .
What action is the Commission intending to take in order to secure acceptance of the above principle and thereby reassure fishermen and the general public ?
.
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Lage 's question addresses the issue of access to Portuguese continental waters , which features in the Council 's consideration of the new regime applicable to Western waters .
The Commission 's task in this is to ensure that two principles are maintained , the first being the principle of relative stability , which is laid down in Article 20 of the new framework regulation for the common fisheries policy .
This principle , according to which fishing opportunities are to be shared out among the Member States , applies , of course , to Portugal and to Portuguese waters .
Another principle in the common fisheries policy , in addition to this one , is that of free access to waters outside the twelve-mile-zone , which is laid down in Article 17 of the new framework regulation , and which is of fundamental importance .
When dealing with the issue of access to Portuguese continental waters , the Commission clearly has to adopt the same approach as it does to all other Community waters .
Although all Member States have to have access to waters outside the twelve-mile-zone , this access can be restricted on biological grounds , but restrictions of this sort must not be discriminatory in their effects .
For that reason , it is not possible in law to protect fish stocks by denying fishermen from a neighbouring country access to these waters .
There is a solution , however , and the right one is to have relative stability , together with total allowable catches , quotas for stocks of economic importance , and any further technical measures that may prove necessary .
Thank you for your response , Commissioner .
That was a formal response based on principles , the principle of relative stability and the principle of freedom of access . There is a certain contradiction implied between these principles , although commenting on this is irrelevant at present .
This formal and abstract framework does , however , conflict with a situation that cannot be ignored at either the political or ethical levels .
I am referring to the fact that Portuguese territorial waters have the misfortune to lie next to the territorial waters of Spain , which owns the largest fishing fleet in Europe , one which hungers to find new fishing grounds and shows a ravenous appetite , not always adhering strictly to the rules .
This is causing fury among Portuguese fishermen , as well as great anxiety and indignation in Portuguese public opinion , so much so that all the reactionaries and nationalists in the country , who have been keeping quiet because the European project is a success for both Europe and Portugal , are taking advantage of the situation . They are making irate speeches against a Europe which wants to deprive Portuguese fishermen of their fish and allow uncontrolled and alien fishing in Portuguese waters .
This is a political problem which the Commissioner and the Union have to face .
.
( DE ) Mr President , I am aware that various sections of Portuguese society have reacted in this way , but you will also understand that the only option open to us is that of acting within the legal framework available to us .
I have told you that there is a solution in practical terms , above all if the Spanish and the Portuguese are willing to meet each other halfway when quotas are laid down .
What is actually at issue , and of the essence , here is sardine fishery , for which , in this stretch of sea , no quota has been set up until now .
We are , however , prepared to set such a quota , and it stands to reason that , when this is done , it will be possible to specify how much of this quota is to be fished by Portuguese and Spanish fishermen respectively .
We would then have a solution that would , I believe , be acceptable to everyone .
Question No 32 by Proinsias De Rossa ( H-0405 / 03 ) :
Subject : EU support for the ILO 's International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour
On 13 June 2002 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution on child labour in the production of sports equipment which , inter alia , called for more funds to be made available to the ILO 's International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour ( Paragraph 9 ) .
In the light of this resolution and of the Commission 's answer to my Oral Question ( H-0515 / 02
. Mr President , the European Commission shares the concerns expressed about the use of child labour in general and , particularly , in the production of sports equipment .
The Commission is establishing a strategic partnership with the ILO as a follow-up to the communication on building an effective partnership with the United Nations in the fields of development and humanitarian affairs and the communication on promoting core labour standards and social governance .
In that context , careful attention will be given to possible support for the ILO 's International Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour .
Annual high-level meetings between the Commission and the ILO are held in the framework of the cooperation between the two organisations agreed in May 2001 .
The next high-level meeting will take place on 8 July 2003 - a week from now .
The Community is increasing its support for universal and compulsory primary education in all developing countries .
It sees this as one of the most efficient means currently at its disposal to draw children out of the vicious circle of exploitation .
We place great emphasis on working with the ILO on this issue , both because of the problem of child labour as such , and because this is an area in which most people understand the whole rationale of strengthening governance and the rights that the ILO is working for .
I wish to thank Commissioner Nielson for his reply .
I am pleased that steps are being taken by the Commissioner to follow up on the commitments already made , and look forward to the outcome of the meeting on 8 July .
The global statistics for the involvement of children in labour are really astonishing , particularly when you see the breakdown , where it is estimated that something like two million children globally are involved in prostitution and pornography and approximately six million children are in bonded or forced labour .
The global figure is something close to 200 million for child labour .
Could the Commissioner indicate in what way we can hope to measure the success of the ILO and the European Union 's efforts in this area ? In addition , could he indicate how we can discourage the major sports companies which sell sports shoes and clothing at inflated prices in European stores ?
How can we avoid the situation that , when they come under pressure in India , they move to China to carry on exactly the same trade ?
. This has to be focused on in all parts of the world .
The main side here is as criminal as the production side .
Very little is decided in these activities without being defined by the market in our rich part of the world .
There is the ' Red Card to Child Labour ' action being taken by FIFA and the ILO to jointly combat child labour , a very good campaign that directly addresses exactly the problem we are talking about here .
Matching this with the broader work of increasing respect for the basic principles that the ILO stands for will , I hope , make a difference .
The measurement of progress here can be made in many ways .
One is to see how many countries actually sign up to the legal instruments .
This debate is one that we are pushing quite vigorously with our development partners .
Question No 33 by Camilo Nogueira Román ( H-0356 / 03 ) :
Subject : The association between Mercosur and the European Union in the light of the new political situation in Brazil and Argentina .
Economic relations with both countries
What stage has been reached in the planned association between the European Union and Mercosur six months after the election of Luís Inácio Lula da Silva as President of Brazil and now that Argentina has elected Nestor Kirchner as its new President , bearing in mind that both leaders have clearly signalled their intention to develop relations between the two countries further and to give Mercosur a fresh impetus ?
In this context , can it say what the state of economic relations between the Union and these two countries is ?
Mr President , Mr Nogueira Román 's question raises three points .
First , the state of the negotiations between the Union and Mercosur ; secondly , the effect of Mr Kirchner 's election as President of Argentina and , lastly , issues of economic cooperation between the Union and Mercosur to facilitate integration in that region .
Let us look first at the state of the negotiations .
As you know , we relaunched the process last year and , since then , negotiators on both sides have been working relentlessly to make progress on its various aspects .
These are complex negotiations , which address services and regulations and the trade in goods .
Last year in Rio , we therefore adopted a schedule and we are sticking to it .
Proposals on tariffs , which were furthermore of a high quality , were exchanged .
Since March of this year , the pace has been relaxed .
Some progress has also been made on rules of origin , investments , tenders , dispute settlement , trade facilitation , standardisation and technical regulation .
This all bodes well .
The March negotiations also enabled us to prepare an exchange of ideas on services , investment and on procurement contracts , which took place at the end of May , although we were rather disappointed with the proposals put forward by our Mercosur partners .
As you see , we are still actively pursuing these negotiations and we have confidence in our partners ' desire to get there .
One negotiating round was concluded last week in Asunción .
We must continue to make progress because much remains to be done , not least because our friends in Mercosur are anxious for the Union to make a gesture .
We will only make such a gesture , should this prove necessary , in the context of an overall balance , which has not yet been fully achieved .
Optimism about the state of the negotiations must , therefore , be relative .
It is probably premature at this stage to take the decision on launching the final phase of negotiations - always an important time - because there are many issues involved and this takes time .
We are considering this step , particularly because these negotiations - especially in the field of agriculture - cannot be separated , in terms of a bargaining chip for the EU , from what is happening in the multilateral context of the World Trade Organisation .
We look favourably on Mr Kirchner 's election as President of Argentina and on the various statements by Presidents Lula and Kirchner on the future of Mercosur .
Both of these undoubtedly wanted to convey to Mercosur , in other words Paraguay and Uruguay , to Latin America and more generally , to the entire world , their desire and their will to strengthen the process of integrating Mercosur .
We can only welcome these statements .
Latin American integration is one of the European Union 's political priorities and this is why we initially felt that we should negotiate with Mercosur as a whole .
We therefore wish to hold ' one-on-one ' negotiations and not ' one-on-four ' as is done in other areas such as the North-South America free trade zone .
I have also said , moreover , and have said so publicly to our partners in Mercosur , that the EU 's trade ambitions towards Mercosur are in line with Mercosur 's own ambition in the field of political , economic and commercial integration .
What means , then , are we making available to Mercosur under economic cooperation ?
There is first of all our action at regional level : we have a regional Mercosur / European Union strategy on contributing to the completion of Mercosur 's internal market and , for the 2000-2006 period , this amounts to just over EUR one million .
We are committing more than EUR 10 million in the same period to Mercosur 's institutionalisation and there is a third chapter of assistance for civil society .
Our experience as Europeans enables us to contribute to the completion of the internal market , of commercial integration , of the statistical system , of the system of veterinary and phytosanitary standards and to harmonising technical regulations ; in short , to anything that requires cross-border instruments .
We are familiar with these issues because we have faced them ourselves in the recent past .
Furthermore , we have also developed cooperation strategies with a number of Mercosur countries involving sums of around EUR 200 million for the period that I have just mentioned .
These strategies can also contribute to supporting regional integration , economic reform and social development .
Brazil , Argentina , Uruguay and Paraguay have a real need to pursue thoroughgoing reform .
We shall continue to support this course of action at economic , social and political levels .
Commissioner , your speech took the words right out of my mouth , since I was actually going to say that Commissioner Lamy has always answered my questions fully . I am very grateful to you for that , as I am always grateful to you for your answers to my questions during Parliamentary Question Time .
In any event , I would like to say , before asking one last question , that the members of the Delegation for relations with the countries of South America and Mercosur have just returned from Brasilia .
We held meetings with members of the Brazilian Government , with parliamentary leaders , with the President of Congress , and with President Lula 's principal advisors , and we realised once again that we are dealing here with an extraordinary country , which is setting in motion an exemplary social inclusion programme , which will be crucial to its future .
As the Commissioner knows , this country also enjoys privileged economic relations with Europe , in addition to the traditional relations of cultural kinship .
In addition , I myself have just spent a month and a half in Argentina , on political business , and have seen the progress that the country has made .
Mercosur sees its connections with the European Union as a historical relationship between sister states , as a partnership which is essential in order to avoid subordination to the United States .
That is why I ask whether the Commission is prepared to give special priority in future to its relations with Mercosur , and perhaps with the whole of South America , which may possibly join Mercosur .
Mr President , my response to what the honourable Member has just suggested is broadly ' yes ' , in that we have clearly made Latin America 's southern cone region one of our priorities , because these countries themselves have decided to work on integrating with one another .
Our idea is that these efforts will be reproduced in other places , in the future , perhaps with the Andean community , perhaps with the communities of Central America .
This concept of regional integration that we wish to encourage is therefore positive , not because it systematically converts everyone to the European model , but because we believe that , since these countries themselves have decided that integration is in their interest , they deserve our full and unremitting support .
Question No 34 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0380 / 03 ) :
Subject : Foreign trade with southern Africa
What is the Commission 's view of foreign trade developments between the EU and the countries in sub-Saharan Africa ?
I shall try to answer Mr Posselt 's question about trade relations between Africa and the European Union as briefly as I can .
In trading matters , we are clearly Africa 's main partner , with bilateral trade worth around EUR 150 billion , according to the figures for 2000 , in other words , just under half of all Africa 's external trade .
This being the case , if we look at the matter in terms of trends , and more particularly of the trend to which the question refers , that is , trade between the Union and countries located south of the Sahara , the rate of change is clearly slow .
If we look at the ACP countries in the sub-Saharan zone , the trend is for slight average growth , with some slumps , and I shall return to this .
It is , in any event , lower than the growth in world trade .
In the long term , the trend is for a slight increase , with total exports to Europe to the tune of EUR 30 billion .
And , as I said , within this trend for a slow average increase there are occasional slumps .
This was the case , for example , between 2001 and 2002 , despite the ' Everything but arms ' initiative which , in that period , provided around EUR 90 million for the whole of 2002 , which was the first full year in which the system was implemented .
The ' Everything but arms ' initiative , therefore , to some extent offset the slump observed in 2001 and 2002 .
Beyond the figures , the main problem lies in the make-up of trade and exports from those countries , which still contains structural weaknesses because it is essentially dominated by some basic products , such as oil , diamonds and cocoa .
Furthermore , around one third of exports from African countries to Europe consist of farm produce , which also makes our market the major outlet for African exports .
How can we improve the situation ?
I think that the concept involves trying to improve these countries ' abilities to export to us and to diversify their economies .
In order to achieve this we have a policy that has now stabilised and is one with which the European Parliament is familiar , because we discuss it often : first of all , stepping up regional integration amongst African countries themselves ; second , strengthening economic and trade links between these countries and the EU ; and lastly , gradually integrating African countries into the world economy , because we cannot lay claim to an exclusive relationship with them and nor would this be in their interests .
To help us achieve this aim we also have a framework - the Cotonou framework - as well as negotiations on economic partnership agreements , which are making progress .
At multilateral level , we have the framework of the WTO .
This is why we are now in continuous discussion , if I may put it this way , with our African colleagues , not only in the context of regional relations - and I am here talking about the negotiations on economic partnership agreements - but also multilaterally , given the topicality of the Doha round of negotiations .
In this context , we Europeans clearly have a partial responsibility to ensure that all these negotiations meet Africa 's needs because , in my opinion , our African friends now have the means , which they did not have in the past , themselves to identify how this type of negotiation can best meet their needs .
Mr President , I am obliged to the Commissioner for his reply .
As we know , we tend to see Africa as very largely characterised by single industries ; on the other hand , though , Africans see Europe as very much made up of conglomerates .
What I want to ask you is what the Commission is doing in order - and I do know that this is in practice very difficult - to build up cooperation between sub-Saharan Africa and the European Union as regards small and medium-sized enterprises .
There is virtually nothing moving on that front .
I would like to know what is being done in the area of cooperation between small and medium-sized enterprises .
Although most small businesses still do not dare to venture into the region , I do believe that they would make very important partners for Africa , if it is not to be dominated by single industries and conglomerates to the exclusion of all else .
Your question is most pertinent .
From the African point of view , constructing the economic fabric must clearly entail creating small businesses .
It is also true that such businesses generally have less access than larger ones to international finance procedures .
Having said that , with what we are doing in the field of development aid and technical assistance for training , with what we are doing to encourage trade and with what the European Investment Bank is now doing - and God knows it is putting enough effort into it ! - in this region , the volume and the number of instruments available to the entrepreneurial initiative are , I believe , experiencing rapid growth .
Investment is necessary even if it only pays off in the medium and long term and even if we have to wait until a reasonably sophisticated level of development has been achieved to ensure that small businesses - which are by definition much more reticent about taking risks than large companies - participate actively in the type of trade that we want to promote .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether he agrees with the President of the United States of America that perhaps Europe 's position on trade in genetically modified crops is having an effect on our trade with the southern African countries in agricultural products , thereby affecting their ability to feed themselves ?
The answer to Mr Purvis 's question is no .
We do not agree with these statements and I have furthermore discussed the matter with the President , in a frank and direct way , as recently as last week at the EU-US Summit , which was held in Washington .
Mr Purvis , we do not agree with this position and we sought to ensure that the President of the United States was informed of the matter , as they say in English , ' straight from the horse 's mouth ' .
One of the reasons we do not agree is that we consider this to be an argument of dubious merit , used in an entirely justified cause and which is intended to promote the interests of GMO agri-food exports by the United States .
There are other ways of proceeding , however , such as reducing food aid in kind , as we have done , in order to provide food aid in cash .
In Africa in particular , we have funded food aid at regional level .
Consequently , every country has choices to make , for or against GMOs , and we must not impose these choices on them .
We simply hope that these countries retain their freedom to decide and their sovereignty .
In order to ensure this , we simply have to reduce food aid in kind and increase financial aid for food , in line , furthermore , with the regulations of the various United Nations food programmes .
You are quite right .
In many cases I , like you , have noted that our joint efforts in the fields of promoting development , trade and human rights on this continent come up against political problems .
I also believe that African leaders and the governments of these countries are more aware now than in the past of the need to address , both on their own and with one another , a number of political obstacles of this type .
Programmes such as NEPAD - which we support because our work on regional integration in Africa closely mirrors the strategy adopted by this new partnership - are , in my opinion , moving in the same direction .
I repeat ; you are quite right .
This being the case , what we have is a chicken and egg situation , in which the chicken is probably political and the egg is probably economic .
Nevertheless , given the state of the world , we cannot refrain from using the eggs available to us in order to take things forward .
This is a daily chore that requires patience .
If we manage to convince a number of economic operators to work towards an environment that is more stable , less conflict-ridden and less disjointed , we could perhaps , here and there , create pressure for peace .
If , on the other hand , communities and those who appoint their leaders are not interested , we will find it much more difficult to achieve our aim .
Politicians certainly have a responsibility to free up some of these economic resources , but let us not stop working from the bottom up .
This , I believe , would be a mistake .
Question No 35 by Glenys Kinnock ( H-0392 / 03 ) :
Subject : WTO - TRIPS
What is the Commission 's response to the concerns from the ACP about lack of agreement on the implementation of Paragraph 6 of the Declaration on TRIPS and public health ?
Whilst the Declaration as a whole is an important step forward in the campaign for access to medicines , would the Commission agree that any attempt to restrict the agreement to a set list of diseases would be damaging ?
Mrs Kinnock , the Commission shares your concern and your disquiet about the lack of an agreement that should have been concluded under the Doha declaration on the links between the TRIPs agreement on intellectual property and public health .
As you probably know , the current blockage is the result of the US refusal to accept a compromise proposal which has been on the table in Geneva since December 2002 and which has been accepted by all Members of the World Trade Organisation except the United States and this is precisely wherein the problem lies .
Our position on this matter is simple : Doha , and nothing but Doha .
The compromise text of last December and nothing but the compromise text .
Recently , furthermore - last month , to be precise - we submitted a written communication to the TRIPs Council and thus to the WTO , to remind them of our proposals and to insist that technical assistance is provided .
This will enable us , once the problem is resolved , to implement the acquis of the Doha declaration .
We also agree with the ACP countries ' view on the need to maintain the scope of the Doha declaration .
We believe that the Doha mandate is a broad one and this is acknowledged in the text that has been on the table since last December .
We have always maintained this position , and this is why we proposed , at the beginning of the year , to call on the World Health Organisation to re-establish confidence and to find a way out of the current impasse .
Our strategy remains the same .
We want the Americans to accept the compromise text that has been on the table since December , without diminishing the scope of the text , where diseases are concerned .
We will continue to make every effort to find a solution before the Cancun ministerial conference .
A number of our friends in developing countries have intimated that , to some extent , unless agreement is reached on this point , everything that will be on the table in Cancun and , consequently , the outcome of the multilateral negotiations launched in Doha could be at risk .
The issue is , therefore , one of our top priorities .
Mr President , the Commissioner 's commitment on this issue is not in doubt at all .
The Commissioner will be aware of the letter that the President-in-Office of the ACP sent in May 2003 to the chair of the TRIPs Council , raising a number of issues .
I believe it was a very good letter and one that covered the issues and concerns very well .
The letter , however , refers to the EU proposals , and says that the EU is making an unacceptable attempt to restrict the ACP 's use of compulsory licensing .
It also mentions the references to the WHO and so on , with which the ACP countries are not happy .
They are not happy with any suggestion that seems to deviate from the Doha Declaration , which sets no limitations of this kind .
The application of the agreement on national emergencies is something the ACP and other developing countries are not happy with .
Commissioner , I know that you are making every effort to bring the opposing sides together , but are you not putting yourself in danger of being seen as deviating from the content and understanding of the consensus which was so valiantly achieved in the Doha Declaration ?
In the letter , the ACP countries ask whether there is a straightforward and easy way to implement a solution .
Do you think , Commissioner , that it is at all possible for you to answer the ACP and say ' yes , it is possible for us to find a solution and implement it with reasonable ease ' ?
Question No 36 by Juan José Bayona de Perogordo ( H-0399 / 03 ) :
Subject : Unfair competition from goods imported from China
In the course of 2001 , China greatly increased its exports of ceramics .
The continuing existence of state-owned companies and the selling off of stocks from others which have already closed account for the fact that Chinese production prices are very low .
Although the country still has limited export capacity , the EU 's trade deficit is steadily increasing on account of unfair competitive practices , the most serious of which is the copying of EU ceramic products which are then labelled and sold as having been ' made in the EU ' .
Is the Commission planning to take action in order to prevent this type of fraud in the export of ceramics from China ?
Are any negotiations being held with the Chinese authorities with a view to improving the terms and conditions under which Community businesses may secure access to a market in which , despite China 's membership of the WTO , there are still major sources of discrimination and obstacles to investment ?
I will respond very briefly to Mr Bayona de Perogordo 's question .
This matter is not very complicated in technical terms , but the question raises two separate issues : the first is the increase in imports of ceramic products from the People 's Republic of China and the second , a problem of potential fraud with regard to the origin of these products .
Where our imports of ceramics from the People 's Republic of China are concerned , it is true that in 1994 quantity limits were applied to imports of this nature , and to tableware or kitchenware in particular .
In the meantime , China joined the World Trade Organisation and , in recognition of this fact , it was decided to phase out these quantity limits , which will , therefore , disappear completely at the end of 2004 .
In 2001 there was an increase of just over 10 % in imports of these products to the European market , whereas in 2002 there was a slight fall in numbers .
Consequently , our markets are not being permanently flooded with these products .
I now come to the second part of your question , which concerns problems relating to fraud .
We have adequate instruments in place for combating fraud and we are prepared to make use of them .
As I have already told European industrialists who have expressed concerns similar to yours , we would need more precise information on what these industrialists and you seem to consider to be fraudulent actions .
The details are missing .
Mr Bolkestein 's services will study your additional information so that together we can work out whether an inquiry should be opened .
Mr President , I am glad that the Commissioner sees the solution to a problem which concerns many European citizens and in particular the Spanish Ceramics Association in such simple and straightforward terms .
I am actually delighted with the assessment you have made .
With regard to the evolution of imports I agree completely , not so much in terms of fraud , because if you are saying that you have the appropriate mechanisms for combating it , I do not understand why you are waiting for the citizens of Europe to tell you what these fraudulent practices consist of , since I imagine that it is for you to take the initiative in this area .
I do not believe , however , you have answered another part of the question on the measures the Commission would be prepared to take to promote the penetration by Community industry , by Community companies , into China .
I believe that you agree with many European citizens and , amongst others , the ceramics industry , that the current situation is a fraud , causes harm and constitutes a threat for the future .
My question is whether you agree with these citizens on the need to take measures to defend trade , to stimulate research and development and to promote penetration into the Chinese market .
We must make clearly separate two issues .
First of all , either suspicions of fraud about the products ' origins are justified or they are not .
This can quite easily be checked and investigated .
We are doing so in a number of areas and once again , Mr Bolkestein and myself , as well as our services , work together on many such matters .
What we need , in order to commit resources which , as you know , are scarce despite the considerable efforts of the European Parliament to give the Commission additional means , is to have sufficiently precise information , rather like a unit that is given the task of investigating fraud in the police force .
Give us more precise details , then .
Secondly , with regard to export opportunities in the ceramics sector , which is still a significant sector in a number of Member States , these do not depend on specific Community policies .
Also on this subject , if our ceramics exporters , whose quality is recognised throughout the world found their access to the market of one third country or another obstructed because the countries concerned were not applying the open arrangements accepted bilaterally or within the World Trade Organisation , we would then set in motion the means available to us to help out our exporters .


Mr President , my question is supplementary to that of Mr Bayona .
I agree entirely with his arguments and I would like to ask the Commissioner whether he would be prepared to adopt the following five measures : firstly , to show the utmost commitment to anti-dumping cases , bearing in mind that Chinese companies are subjected to much less stringent parameters and levels than European ones in the fields of employment and the environment ; secondly , whether he is also prepared to show that utmost commitment to anti-fraud measures , bearing in mind that , at this moment , it is possible to import without a mark , in any European port , Chinese goods which have a label in that port ; thirdly , to strengthen research and development so that European companies can face up to Chinese competition ; fourthly , to promote the entry and establishment of European companies in China , in view of the fact that , as the Commissioner knows , despite the fact that there has been a tariff restriction , entry tariffs in China depend on the port and the importer ; and finally , whether he is prepared to set up an observatory to provide better knowledge of the practices which discriminate against and harm European industry .
Very briefly , with regard to the fight against dumping and fraud , as I have said , we do have procedures in place .
These procedures are transparent , regulated and precise and if we have the necessary details , with which the industry must provide us if we are to launch an inquiry or investigation - known as ' complaints ' - we can take action .
This must be done in the correct way , because we have to respect the rights both of the plaintiff and of the country against which a complaint is lodged .
These are possible approaches , provided , of course , that we have the necessary information .
With regard to problems in accessing the Chinese market , we are entirely willing to discuss these with our Chinese partners .
I hold such discussions in other areas and if there is a need to do so in this specific area , I will say ' yes ' , provided that I am given the necessary information .
As far as research and development is concerned , the issue does not really fall within my remit and with regard to the monitoring centre , I would advise industry professionals to look into this matter themselves .
They are better qualified than we are to gather the necessary information and to decide when to convey this to us .
I have a great interest in this question , both as the Member representing the region of Stoke-on-Trent in the United Kingdom and also as the deputy chairman of the European Parliament ceramics industry forum , which has had a dialogue with both Commissioner Lamy and Commissioner Bolkestein .
I should like to ask Mr Lamy if he would comment on the issue of marks of origin , and confirm that the proposals being considered by Commissioner Byrne to require ceramic articles coming into contact with food to bear traceability marks showing the factory that they are made in - to trace any problems with toxic materials that may be in the articles concerned - would not in any way contravene existing WTO obligations .
As he may be aware , Commissioner Byrne 's services are actively considering this proposal at the moment and are having discussions with the European industry about that type of marking .
There have been disturbing cases where articles from China have been found to contain levels of toxic materials that are significantly above the limits laid down in the European Union to safeguard human health .
The industry would be very grateful for his confirmation that the proposals would not contravene any existing trade legislation .
These issues of marks of origin are complex and we are discussing them in a very general way .
They involve on the one hand a trade component , which is not covered by the question on the subject of ceramics and the work of my colleague , Mr Byrne , and on the other , a health component .
The latter area involves more than just the problems of managing trade flows or the comparative advantages that some countries have .
In this area , the World Trade Organisation 's ' SPS ' agreement , ( Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures ) , gives us , as Europeans , the opportunity to adopt the necessary measures to protect the health of our consumers .
In order to be adopted , these measures must meet the requirements for advance notification , transparency and justification that the SPS agreement and the case-law in the field have established on several occasions .
Accordingly , if the conditions are transparent and clear , and if the scientific evidence justifies the need for a particular protection measure on the grounds of health , the SPS agreement allows trade barriers to be put in place , and quite rightly so !
Mr Lamy , I am sorry to give you more work , but , as we had announced , we are going to reinstate the question by Mr Zacharakis , which had been reserved for this Question Time .
Question No 30 by Christos Zacharakis ( H-0389 / 03 ) :
Subject : Contravention of international legal rules by Turkey , and danger of causing a serious accident to a passenger aeroplane in Greek airspace
On 9 June 2003 , two Turkish F-16 fighter planes harassed an Olympic Airways aircraft on the Athens-Istanbul route , placing the lives of the passengers in direct danger .
The aircraft 's automatic crash avoidance safety system was triggered and Greek fighter planes were forced to intercept the Turkish planes .
This action constitutes a clear contravention of the rules of international law and , more specifically , a violation of European Union airspace and thus of its territorial integrity , placing the safety of EU citizens in danger , and represents a violation of fundamental standards of international conduct , such as those enshrined in the Treaty on European Union and in the United Nations Charter and included within the Copenhagen criteria .
It is a reflection of a systematic Turkish policy which leads to tension in relations between Greece and Turkey and directly threatens the peace and security of the region .
In view of these facts , what urgent steps does the Commission intend to take to put a stop to such aggressive acts by Turkey and to prevent their repetition in the future , and what consequences will the Turkish strategy adopted to date have on the assessment of the country 's progress towards EU membership ?
On a point of order , this may well delay other questions : Mr Zacharakis was not here when his question was called and , according to the rules of the House , it should lapse .



Mr Bolkestein and Mr Byrne will each speak for 20 minutes and we have to finish before 7 o 'clock , so I would ask you to continue , as the rules require , with Mr Bolkestein 's section .
Mr Purvis , we are going to allow each of the Commissioners their 20 minutes , which will mean a delay of 12 or 13 minutes in the timetable of this Question Time , which has already begun late .
But I had committed myself , having changed the order of Mr Zacharakis 's question , to that question being replied to today at the end of questions to Mr Lamy .
We must respect that commitment .
I would ask the other Commissioners ' forgiveness . This in no way jeopardises their respective turns of 20 minutes .
If I have understood correctly , this issue concerns an incident that occurred in airspace between Greece and Turkey .
The Commission does not have specific information on this incident , beyond what has been reported in the press .
With the cautiousness that this type of statement requires , we believe that this incident must be seen in the context of the dispute between Greece and Turkey over the Aegean Sea .
We hope that this issue of national airspace , as well as that of territorial waters and the continental shelf - over which these two countries , to my knowledge , have been arguing for some time now - will be resolved in the course of the meetings taking place between the Greek and Turkish authorities .
With regard to Turkey , as a country that is applying to join the European Union , it has given a commitment to meet a number of criteria and the Commission recalls , in response to your question , Mr Zacharakis , the principle of what is called the peaceful settlement of border disputes .
This has always been our approach , in line with the criteria set out in the conclusions of the Helsinki European Council of 1999 .
We also made this issue a specific priority for the review of the partnership for Turkish accession , which was adopted in May 2003 .
Accordingly , as on other matters requiring progress on the part of Turkey , we will closely follow developments in this matter and will present a detailed assessment in the periodic report that we are due to publish at the beginning of November .
Mr President , Commissioner , please excuse me for not being present when you called my question .
I had to attend another Parliamentary meeting .
I would like to answer Mr Zacharakis very briefly by saying that , to my knowledge , despite the most strenuous efforts of Mrs de Palacio in this area over several years , we have still not quite established a non-segregated Community airspace .
To my knowledge , therefore , we are dealing at this stage with Greek airspace .
Secondly , the Helsinki conclusions do indeed contain a reference to the need for Turkey to find peaceful solutions to possible border disputes with its neighbours , and we know that borders exist on land , at sea and in the skies .
Thirdly , preliminary negotiations are taking place between Turkey and Greece on this type of issue . Their content is not made public , which I feel demonstrates a basic sense of caution , especially in the run-up to the electoral period .
Fourthly and lastly , we will take into account , as I said a moment ago , the overall progress made by Turkey in the areas specified at Helsinki when we pronounce on this matter both this year and , of course , next year .
Question No 37 , by Mr Karas , has been withdrawn .
Question No 38 by Lennart Sacrédeus ( H-0376 / 03 ) :
Subject : Member State 's tax subsidy of abortion for other EU citizens
In early April 2003 , the Swedish Government announced in the Riksdag , through the Equal Opportunities Minister Margareta Winberg , that it was prepared to review the law on abortion to consider whether women who are not resident in Sweden , and therefore not Swedish citizens , should still be able to have an abortion in the country .
The underlying logic of the proposal is that taxpayers in one Member State of the EU - Sweden - would bear the costs and therefore , in practice , offer services to citizens from other Member States for an activity which is illegal in Member States such as Ireland and Portugal as well as in the new Member States of Poland and Malta .
Does the Commission consider that the Swedish Government 's proposal is consistent with the Treaties or the spirit of the Treaties concerning mutual solidarity given that it is prepared to subsidise an activity in Sweden for other EU citizens , which is illegal in other Member States , through taxation ?
Would such conduct support or undermine other Member States ' legislation ?
. The Swedish Minister for Equal Opportunities has indicated to the Swedish Parliament the readiness of her government to consider modification of the Swedish law on abortion so that the Swedish authorities would cover the costs of an abortion , not only for Swedish nationals and people residing in Sweden , but also for nationals from other Member States who have an abortion in Sweden .
The Commission would point out that Member States are free to determine to whom they wish to extend financial coverage for the cost of medical treatment .
Accordingly , there is nothing in Community law that would prevent the Swedish Government from amending its legislation in the manner proposed .
I wish to thank the Commissioner for his answer , but I still think he is leaving the basic question unanswered , namely that of mutual solidarity and of conduct towards each other in the European Union .
Is that mutual solidarity not in this way undermined ?
It is , of course , inevitable that the Member States ' different laws and values will make themselves felt in different forms of legislation .
What is , however , unique and serious in this case is that it entails subsidising , for foreign citizens of other Member States , an activity that I specified by name in my question , that is illegal in a number of Member States and that involves inviting citizens of other EU countries to engage in an activity that is illegal in these EU countries .
My follow-up question is as to whether that would not undermine solidarity with , and mutual respect for , each other in the European Union .
. May I stress that the Commission is of the opinion that such an amendment to Swedish legislation - which has not yet taken place : it is an amendment proposed by the Swedish Government - would have no direct impact on the legislation of existing or future Member States .
Indeed , the Commission is of the view that the changes in attitude within some Member States regarding issues such as abortion are driven by public opinion rather than by external factors .
The reflection of this is the fact that the legal regimes on abortion in Member States are still very divergent , as indeed the Member who has just spoken will recognise .
Whilst it is illegal in one Member State , it is legal in others - subject , of course to varying restrictions .
In short , the fact that in some Member States , such as Ireland , abortion is against the law , does not mean that , if the Swedish Government were to pass the amendment I described , it would not be allowed to extend benefits to whoever it liked .
It is within the competence of the Swedish Government to take a decision on that , and the extent of benefits allowed under Swedish legislation would , as I said earlier , have no impact on the legislation of a country where abortion is forbidden , such as Ireland .
Question No 39 by Antonios Trakatellis ( H-0398 / 03 ) :
Subject : Use of a mathematical formula in awarding public contracts : distortion of the rules of competition
Recent newspaper articles discuss the intervention of the Commission which has called on the Greek authorities to postpone awards of public contracts until the curious system for awarding public contracts on the basis of a mathematical formula has been modified . The same publications claim that this formula has cost the Greek economy EUR 800 million .
According to the Commission 's answer to my previous question on the use of a mathematical formula in awarding public contracts in Greece ( H-0097 / 03 )
. The Commission has examined with due attention the issue of the application in Greece of a mathematical formula to be detect abnormally low offers in the context of public tenders .
Following a request from the Commission the Hellenic authorities notified the relevant national legislation in January 2003 .
While proceeding with its assessment the Commission received a new complaint on the same matter , which gave a better picture of how the whole system of the mathematical formula is applied in practice , since the latter complaint did not concern the legislation in abstract , but made reference to concrete examples of its application .
On the basis of this new information , the Commission services addressed a letter to the competent Hellenic authorities in late April 2003 , asking them to take a position on specific issues raised in relation to the compatibility of the Hellenic legislation and practice with Community public procurement legislation and the relevant jurisprudence of the Court of Justice .
The Commission services have very recently received a request on behalf of the Hellenic authorities to extend the time given to them to reply to this new letter until 30 June 2003 , in order for them to give a comprehensive answer on the whole issue and in view of certain changes that they envisage concerning the relevant legislation .
The Commission services have granted this extension and now await the answer of the Hellenic authorities .
Once they receive this reply and the changes that the Hellenic authorities propose to their national legislation regulating the mathematical formula for identification of abnormally low offers , they will come to a final assessment of the compatibility of the system applied in relation to Community public procurement legislation .
The formula in question is so complicated that even Greek experts have great difficulty in understanding how it works .
Commissioner , thank you very much for your answer .
I would like to ask you whether it is your preliminary assessment that this mathematical formula really is compatible with Community law .
I cannot see why the Greek authorities proceeded , as you said , to change the law , as the Greek Parliament already has the capacity to deal with this .
I would like , therefore , to have your preliminary assessment .
Also , although this was a formula for avoiding very low offers , it had a damaging effect on the overall assessment of public works , owing to the very small percentage of the original amount intended for the public works concerned .
.
In response to these last two questions by Mr Trakatellis , I should like once again to reaffirm that the Commission has not yet finalised its assessment , but it has raised some issues of the compatibility of the Hellenic system with regard to the possibility given to the tenderers to justify their low offer .
If that were not the case , the Commission would not undertake this work .
I cannot say more than this .
May I say to Mr Trakatellis that fortunately I , personally , have not had to investigate this formula since apparently , as I said earlier , it is so complex that even the Greek experts have difficulty in understanding it .
Question No 40 by Elly Plooij-van Gorsel ( H-0402 / 03 ) :
Subject : Principle of ' fair compensation '
Directive 2001 / 29 / EC
. ( NL ) Mr President , I can confirm that the principle of ' fair compensation ' , as described in the directive , is a new concept , to be distinguished from the right to receive fair remuneration , indicated with the term ' copyright ' in the context of reproduction for private use .
As is indicated in the directive , the concept of fair compensation offers Member States a considerable degree of flexibility or freedom of judgment when they decide on the form , the modalities or the level of fair compensation regulations .
However , pursuant to recitals 35 and 38 , Member States that apply copyright meet the condition that fair compensation must be in place .
Relevant legislation implementing the directive need not necessarily contain a specific reference to the principle of fair compensation .
In accordance with the directive , Member States are obliged to ensure that fair compensation is in place for three of the exceptions to the reproduction right listed in the directive .
First of all , there is the exception of reproduction for private use .
This is the exception with most relevance for copyright , because usually , rights are levied with regard to reproduction for private use of sound and audio-visual material .
The second one pertains to the exception for reprographics or photocopying and the third one relates to transmissions in some social institutions such as hospitals or prisons .
It seems probable that the Member States that had levy systems in place in the past , will continue to allow reproduction for private use in combination with levy systems and that they will also apply these to certain digital products .
It is true that the different systems continue to result in differences in application with regard to carriers or equipment to which they apply and / or the amounts claimed , including the differences in application to digital carriers .
This is due to the fact that the EC legislator ruled against a higher degree of harmonisation during negotiations about the directive .
As far as analogue copying for private use is concerned , the directive acknowledges that it is unlikely that the existing differences will have a major impact on the development of the information society .
With regard to digital copying for private use , the directive underlines that due account must be given to differences between digital and analogue copying for private use , and that in certain cases , a distinction must be drawn between them .
At the same time , it must be stressed that the directive does not require Member States to abolish copyright , or to take a stand for or against copyright in comparison to digital rights management systems .
Mr President , Commissioner , although I am grateful to you for your extensive and clear response , I am nevertheless left with a problem .
At the end of your intervention , you draw a clear distinction between analogue and digital copying , whereby the former would not be harmful to the information society , while the latter would .
As far as I know - and I have been involved in information society legislation for years - we in Europe specifically do not draw a distinction between digital and analogue , in the sense that legislation must be technology-neutral .
So I am a little taken aback by your statement .
Moreover , I am surprised that the directive does not tend more towards harmonisation , particularly because your offices initially indicated that it would do so .
Where fair compensation is concerned , it is important to establish whether the rightholder is actually being adversely affected , whether any technological protection measures are available and whether any other payment is made to the rightholder .
This is why I think that it is regrettable after all that Member States are not required to adapt their legislation in the sense that only fair compensation is granted .
. ( NL ) Mr President , I can well imagine the disappointment felt by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , but , as I have indicated before , the legislator - which thus includes the European Parliament - was of the opinion that far-reaching harmonisation was not desirable .
This is how the legislation process went and there is nothing we can do about it now .
However , I do understand why Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel is disappointed .
It might have been preferable to apply a higher level of harmonisation but this is not how it was decided .
Allow me perhaps to correct the Commissioner on one point : Parliament would probably have wanted to see a greater degree of harmonisation where the current directive is concerned .
I have , however , a question for those of you responsible for the internal market .
You said that existing differences in levy systems were of no significance .
I believe that we need to investigate this area specifically with the internal market in mind .
Are the differences in the levy systems between the countries of Europe of any significance ?
Do they impede the internal market and lead to distortion ?
I believe that our examination of the trend we have in Europe should start specifically from the perspective of a functioning internal market .
I believe it would be important to obtain an account of the ways in which fair compensation or fair remuneration have developed .
What are the facts of the case ?
Above all , I wish , however , to say to you , as Commissioner with responsibility for the internal market , that I believe that the differences in levies affect consumer behaviour and create unequal conditions of competition .
. Let us see how all this works in practice .
As Mrs Thors and Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel know , the directive has not been transposed in the legislation of all Member States .
The Commission hopes that this will soon be the case .
It may be that a more significant degree of harmonisation would have been better for the internal market . But as I said earlier in reply to Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , unfortunately that is not the case and we have the directive that was approved by Council and Parliament .
So let us see how this works in practice and how quickly the whole system of digital right management is put in practice in Europe .
If Mrs Thors would then like to ask the Commission for further investigations and analysis , the Commission would be more than willing to oblige .
The issue is important and essential aspects of the internal market are at stake .
Question No 41 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0362 / 03 ) :
Subject : Rapid Alert Notifications
Will the Commission publish an annual breakdown of the ' Alert Notifications ' , ' Informations ' , ' Addition to Alerts ' and ' Addition to Informations ' issued between 1992 and 2003 by food product and country of origin , deviating the brand name , supermarket or company involved ?
Will the Commission indicate how it will publish such information and the timeframe involved ?
If the Commission is unwilling to publish such information , will it please explain how such unwillingness could be deemed to be in the public interest ?
. The regulation on general food law , which entered into force in February 2002 , contains new provisions as regards the rapid alert system .
With a view to increasing transparency according to Article 10 , the Commission published for the first time a report on the rapid alert system for food and feed for the year 2002 .
We will do so for each subsequent year .
However , we cannot apply the food law retroactively and go back as far as 1992 .
The publication of this annual report was , however , only the first step .
In addition , since the end of May 2003 , the Commission has published , on the Internet , summary reports containing information on all notifications received on a weekly basis .
These reports contain information on the type of product and the problem identified , the origin of the product and the notifying Member State .
The rapid alert system defined in Article 50 of the regulation is designed primarily as a tool for the rapid transmission of information amongst competent authorities in cases where a risk has been identified and measures have already been taken by the notifying Member State , such as withholding , recalling , seizure or rejection of the products concerned .
The quick transmission of information allows all other Member States to verify immediately whether they are also affected by the problem in question , or to ensure that a product rejected at one point of entry does not enter through another place .
It also ensures coherent and simultaneous actions by all Member States .
In cases where a product is still on the market and should not be consumed , the authorities of the Member States are in a position to take all the necessary urgent measures , including providing direct information to the public .
In addition , the information collected by the rapid alert system is used by the Commission .
For example , my services use the information to set priorities for the Food and Veterinary Office and to propose measures such as suspension of the placing on the market , suspension of imports or any other emergency measure under Article 53 of the regulation .
The Commission also uses this information to assist third countries .
When products subject to a notification originate from a third country , its competent authorities are systematically informed in order to enable them to correct the problem at source and prevent further cases .
It is true that , according to Article 52 of the Food Law Regulation , the Commission does not publish trade names and the identity of individual companies in the regular rapid alert summaries .
However , where emergency measures are taken by Member States or the Commission , in the light of the analysis of the risk posed by the alert , such relevant information on the products concerned by the action is made public .
The RASFF is used both to take actions to prevent further occurrence of food-related risks and to react immediately to such related risks in order to provide consumers with safe food .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for that information .
In relation to trade names and individual companies it is very important that a vague system of alerts is in place which allows the consumer to make a choice .
Does the Commission not agree that if a product or food producer causes an alert then it is both in the consumer 's interest and indeed in the interest of the open market that this information should be made public ?
I would like to ask the Commissioner a question concerning the 2002 rapid alerts .
Apparently , 26 % of rapid alerts in 2002 were caused by fish .
What is the breakdown of these alerts between farmed fish and wild fish ?
The consumer has a right to know if farmed fish cause a disproportionate number of rapid alerts .
Is DG SANCO taking any specific action to address this problem ?
Does the Commissioner have this information on him now ?
It would be very useful to have this information on the breakdown as regards fish .
. In further response to Mrs McKenna 's question , firstly , I would not characterise our system of alert as being in any way vague .
It is very targeted and the purpose of the exercise is , as I am sure she will appreciate , to transmit as fast as possible the relevant information to the competent authorities of all Member States , so that they can make a rapid response and take rapid action in relation to the risk that has been identified in respect of any particular food or feed in question .
What is important here is public health , rather than some kind of naming and shaming .
I would like to emphasise that once the rapid alert has been made and responses have been taken , and if it is shown that it is a genuine problem from which consumers need to be protected , the Member States in question , where there is a risk - and it is for them to determine this - will immediately inform their own consumers in their Member State .
That is their responsibility under the rapid alert system .
In those circumstances it would be appropriate for them to then identify , for instance , trade names or companies which would assist consumers to make the appropriate response .
However , bear in mind that the rapid alert system is designed to allow Member States to react quickly and to remove , for instance , foods from the market .
In addition to that , if it is necessary on further reflection and further analysis of the information that has come from the rapid alert - which is activated under Article 50 - that an emergency procedure under Article 53 is necessary , this would be something which could again be done at Member State level or , indeed , could also be done by the Commission .
In those circumstances , the relevant information that would be made available would include the information that you referred to relating to trade names and companies , etc .
I want to emphasise that the rapid alert is designed for a specific purpose , which is to transmit information as fast as possible , even in circumstances where all information may not be available .
The important issue here is to identify the risk to the public to which the Member States must respond .
I believe , in those circumstances , we have struck the correct balance .
In relation to the second part of your question concerning the figures for 2002 , I do not have the specific figures to hand relating to the breakdown between farmed fish and wild fish , but I am sure this kind of information is available to my services .
I will seek to ensure that it is made available by them and transmitted to you in the normal course .
Question No 42 will not be replied to since its subject appears on the agenda of the present part-session .
Question No 43 by John Purvis ( H-0369 / 03 ) :
Subject : Cost-benefit analysis of the identification and registration of sheep and goats
The Commission 's proposal for a regulation on the identification and registration of sheep and goats is a cause of deep concern in Scotland .
The manual scheme is both impractical and expensive for the Scottish sheep farming and processing industry , which is already struggling financially .
Since my enquiry in April ( H-0149 / 03
. The Commission proposal addresses the acknowledged need for urgent reinforcement of the current rules for identification and registration of sheep and goats , in particular in view of the experience acquired from the 2001 foot-and-mouth disease crisis .
In its resolution on foot and mouth disease of December 2002 , the European Parliament stated that the Commission should as quickly as possible submit a proposal to amend Directive 92 / 102 / EEC so as to improve the identification of pigs , sheep and goats .
According to current legislation sheep and goats must be identified with an eartag or a tattoo linked to the holding .
The keepers must keep an up-to-date register on the holding , and the competent authority must keep an up-to-date central register of holdings .
The main new elements of the proposed system are individual identification , double eartagging to ensure that identity is retained where one eartag is lost , and the introduction of a movement document .
Individual identification is essential for the effective tracing of animals for veterinary purposes , which is of crucial importance for the control of contagious diseases .
The introduction of a reinforced system will have a positive impact in case of outbreaks of major animal diseases such as foot-and-mouth disease , allowing the rapid identification of the source of infection and limiting the further spread of the disease .
Furthermore it will allow accurate tracing of animals in the framework of the animal disease eradication programmes financed by the Community .
Finally , such a system would assist in reducing fraud .
The technology of electronic identification for sheep and goats has progressed to such a stage that it can now be applied .
The Commission launched a large-scale pilot project - the IDEA Project - in 1998 .
The final report of this project , which included sheep and goats , as well as bovine animals , was completed in 2002 .
However , the implementing measures required for the proper introduction of the system of electronic identification on a Community scale have yet to be fully developed .
The proposal therefore provides for further guidelines and procedures to be adopted through the Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health , with entry into force of obligatory electronic tagging foreseen for 1 July 2006 .
I am well aware of the diversity of the sheep population and the sheep production systems in the Member States .
The proposal therefore includes options , which would allow : Member States to defer the identification of lambs up to the age of 6 months , where sheep are kept under extensive farming conditions , for instance in Scotland - to which the questioner referred ; Member States to apply simplified identification arrangements to young lambs , up to six months of age , intended for direct slaughter .
The options decided upon will influence the likely costs to the farmers of introducing the new system .
The estimation of the costs of introduction of the reinforced system on a Community-wide basis has to take into account the diversity of the sheep population and the sheep production systems in the Member States .
In the absence of precise information on movements and other parameters , the estimate has to be based on the general structure of the various production systems .
On this basis , the overall costs of the reinforced system are estimated to vary between EUR 1 for traditional eartags to EUR 3.7 for electronic identification per sheep per year .
I recognise that this proposal will require significant efforts by both operators and authorities .
But these efforts in my opinion and in the opinion of the Commission are both worthwhile and necessary .
I would like to ask the Commissioner whether he is aware of the extreme impracticality of the manual tagging of individual sheep , and its maintenance for a further two years .
Has he ever seen an auction market ?
I am sure that in his home country of Ireland the situation is the same as in Scotland , where you have thousands of sheep going through in one day and each individual sheep has to be inspected and tagged as it goes through .
That will add days to sales for only for two years ' worth of savings .
Could he not and has he not considered doing this on a flock basis , as opposed to an individual sheep basis , for this two-year period of time ?
.
In answer to the supplementary question from Mr Purvis , let me say that I , the Commission and my advisers have considered the possibility of herd tagging .
I raised that question specifically with them .
The answer they gave me - and it seemed credible - is that the system of herd tagging you suggest does not have the same degree of security in circumstances where you may have an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease or similar .
Also , for the reason that you identify in your supplementary question , in these markets that we see in Scotland and in my home country of Ireland as well , herds arrive , they are sub-divided into other herds , they are separated so that the chance of following a particular herd number and getting the information that you need in the case of an outbreak of disease is diluted to a considerable extent .
In fact , it eliminates the opportunity of following a particular animal that may be carrying that particular disease .
In those circumstances , the only alternative available to us was to come forward with an individual identification tag system .
I acknowledge this will last for an interim transition period until electronic tagging comes into play : it is scheduled for 1 July 2006 .
I have to say to Mr Purvis that there are many people calling for this system of tagging for the reason that I have identified .
Member States want it , even the Member States that have large sheep populations and trade a lot in sheep , both within the Member State and across borders .
For those reasons , the degree of support that exists in the Community for this proposal is strong .
Therefore , in the light of the need to protect animal health and for other reasons it seems necessary to come forward with that particular proposal .
Finally , I should again draw attention to what I said a moment ago : the Commission has taken into account the diversity of the sheep population and the sheep production systems in Member States and the proposal includes options which Member States may decide to apply under certain circumstances .
For instance , for animals kept in extensive farming conditions and in free range , the age of tagging may be extended from one month to six months of age , but , in any event , before leaving the holding of birth .
Also , for animals intended for slaughter before six months of age , the identification code may be the code of the holding of birth and the month of birth .
Under this system , instead of each individual animal , groups of animals with the same identification code are recorded in the holding register and the movement document .
That is a measure that was introduced in the legislation in ease of the kind of farming that I know exists in some remote areas in Scotland and , to a very large extent , meets the case that you have put forward in trying to respond to the concerns that you address .
Where the animals are obviously over six months of age , then , of course , individual tagging must take place for the reason I have already identified .
Question No 44 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0378 / 03 ) :
Subject : Irresponsible rise in cases of Bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE ) or ' Mad cow disease ' in Spain
The EU Scientific Committee indicated as long ago as June 2000 that Spain was a high risk country for BSE , while the Spanish Ministry of Agriculture described the report published by that body as ' irresponsible ' ( all of which was the subject of various Parliamentary questions I submitted in 2000 ) .
In recent months there has been a sharp increase in the number of BSE cases in Spain and that number is still continuing to rise . Does this not indicate that the 1996 Community ban on bone meal for ruminants has not been correctly transposed in Spain ?
. The Scientific Steering Committee has classified Spain as a GBR III country , having confirmed cases at a lower level .
The upper limit of this level is an incidence of 100 cases per million adult cattle over the past 12 months .
The BSE incidence in Spain has been increasing since the beginning of 2002 .
The incidence is , however , still well below this upper limit of around 45 cases per million adult cattle over the past 12 months , and it is not increasing rapidly .
Therefore , the classification of Spain by the Scientific Steering Committee still remains valid .
In the first quarter of this year , Spain reported about 50 % more BSE cases than during the corresponding period last year .
At the same time the number of cases decreased or was stable in all other Member States , except Portugal .
Compared with other Member States , Spain has a rather high rate of young animals born in 1997 and 1998 .
The feeding of ruminant proteins to ruminants is considered to be the main source of BSE transmission to cattle .
Therefore , the Commission imposed a Community-wide prohibition of the use of mammalian proteins in ruminant feed in 1994 .
It is , however , evident that this ban was not fully enforced at that time , since most of the BSE cases reported today were born after 1994 .
Meat-and-bone meal continued to be allowed in feed for non-ruminants , and thereby ruminant feed was contaminated in feed mills and during storage and transport .
Another source of transmission was cross-feeding of feed intended for non-ruminants to cattle on mixed farms .
Shortcomings in the implementation of the feed ban were observed throughout the Community .
To put an end to the transmission of BSE the feed ban was extended to the use of all animal proteins in feed for all farmed animals at the beginning of 2001 .
Other measures to reduce the transmission of BSE are improved rendering standards - which came into effect in early 1997 - and a ban on the use of so-called BSE risk materials in food and feed , which became effective in October 2000 .
The current Community legislation should , if rigorously implemented , be sufficient to prevent new animals from becoming infected .
BSE cases will , nevertheless , continue to appear in Spain , as in other Member States , for a number of years because of an incubation time of four to six years or even longer .
That is why it is important to maintain current safeguards , in particular the removal of specified risk material .
Commissioner , in the course of that very technical and diplomatic reply , in which you were so careful not to cause alarm , I believe I heard you confirm between the lines that Spain has in fact been failing to comply with that prohibition laid down in Community legislation since 1996 .
The increase in mad cow disease which has taken place in Spain as well in recent years - and your words also confirm this - is the result of the fact that the then Spanish Minister , Mr Arias Cañete , who denied that Spain was at risk - and the Scientific Committee did state this - was not complying with the Community legislation , and this is the reason for this proliferation and increase in mad cow disease .
Commissioner , is this confirmed non-compliance by Spain of the Community legislation on the prohibition of meat-and-bone meal not reprehensible ?
Is this non-compliance not reprehensible ?
Your reply can only be yes .
There is no social alarm , but it is non-compliance with the legislation which has made Spain the leading country in terms of mad cow disease in recent years .
. In response to the supplementary question , let me say that the Commission does not know the exact reason why the number of BSE cases is still increasing in Spain and not in other Member States , with the exception of Portugal , as I mentioned earlier .
Possible explanations , in addition to shortcomings in the implementation of the feed ban , are introduction of the removal of specified risk materials in Spain only at the end of 2000 and a higher than average exposure to infected meat and bone meal in the 1996-1998 period .
It should be stressed , however , that the Commission 's Food and Veterinary Office has carried out missions in Spain in order to verify the correct implementation of the Community provisions with regard to the control and eradication of BSE in 2001 and 2002 .
Shortcomings are still being detected .
Spain has also informed the Commission of a number of breaches of the feed ban detected in 2002 .
The number of breaches is very small and below the average in Member States .
As the time allocated to Question Time is at an end , Questions Nos 45 to 78 will be answered in writing
. ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , ladies and gentlemen , consumers have to have adequate information about the content and composition of the food that they buy .
This is true not only as regards what we were talking about this afternoon ; it also applies to ingredients .
What it says on the outside must be on the inside , no more and no less .
Changes in society over the past twenty years have also left their mark on our eating habits .
Who , nowadays , peels their carrots and potatoes themselves ?
Many do not have the time to do it , while all too many have forgotten how to cook or never learned in the first place .
This also resulted in profound changes to the food industry , with complicated processing methods and new ingredients giving rise to finished and half-finished products capable of being prepared quickly and simply , but with ignorance about them breeding uncertainty .
Numerous recent health warnings have made the need for information even more urgent , to which one must add the substantial increase in the number of food allergies .
People suffering from food allergies rely on the proper listing of what a product contains .
We have now reached second reading stage , and the greater part of the Commission proposal is made up of the Common Position , which limits the number of derogations and takes on board most of the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading stage , notably the regular revision of the list of allergenic substances and of the way in which it is to be interpreted , the inclusion of celery and mustard in the list and the mandatory indication on the labels of preparations of sauces or mustards of ingredients amounting to less than 5 % of the end-product .
I still see the table of allergenic ingredients as the most important element in this directive .
The list is to be drawn up on the basis of the latest scientific findings , revised on a regular basis and updated where necessary .
At second reading stage , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy adopted three amendments , all of which have the same objective in mind , that of removing the requirement to include on the label processing aids manufactured from substances on the list of allergenic substances , but no longer present in the end product and thus not liable to trigger an allergic reaction .
Checks must be carried out to establish if a product is still allergenic if , in the course of its production , a processing aid was used that was allergenic in its original form - protein is one example - but which has lost its allergenic character as a result of the food production process , or which is either no longer present , or present in a modified form .
Those who legislate are to establish that this is the case before requiring labelling .
Processing aids have been in use for decades , including in the production of wine and beer .
They undergo change in the course of the fermentation process and are naturally precipitated or filtered out .
It is therefore a matter of certainty that they are no longer present in the wine or beer that is eventually produced .
Allergies have hitherto been unheard-of in this area .
As a wine-grower myself , how am I to explain to my fellow wine-growers or to my customers that labels must in future bear the legend ' made with eggs ' ?
Wine is a pure and clear product of nature , clear and golden in the glass .
No research has been done into allergic reactions to it , as nobody has ever heard of there being any - so why this new requirement for labels ?
Politics , however , is about doing what is possible , and so I have , with the Commission and the Council , arrived at a compromise making it possible for evidence to be brought within a fixed period of four years .
The first point to be made here is that substances in connection with which a study has been notified to the Commission are provisionally exempted from being indicated on labels .
The second is that , if the study demonstrates that these substances have no allergenic effect , they will continue to be exempted from the labelling requirement .
I ask the Commission - and you , Mr Byrne - to confirm to me that further new studies can be commissioned and notified up to nine months after the directive 's entry into force , and that exemption from mandatory labelling will apply for a full four years .
This is important if we are to have studies of all types .
This new directive gives consumers certainty .
Only 2 % of ingredients are not required to be included on the label , as against the former 25 % .
For the first time , there is a list of allergenic substances that must always appear on the label , and we will produce scientific evidence in order to ensure that labels state only what is contained .
We are thus avoiding the possibility of excessive labelling making the list of foods allowed to allergy-sufferers ever smaller .
I think we should take this sensible approach of compromise .
Thank you very much , Mrs Klaß .
I would remind all my fellow Members of the rules of the game .
Each one of us really must keep to the speaking time allotted to us for our speeches this evening , since our work will take us until almost midnight .
I shall endeavour to bang my gavel as required in order to let you know that your speaking time has elapsed . I will then ask you to conclude very speedily .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am going to begin by referring briefly to the report by Mrs Klaß in order to support the compromise amendment relating to the official list of ingredients which must appear in Annex IIIa within two years .
I am doing so because there are products such as casein , egg albumin or fish glue which have been used for centuries in the production of wine and beer and which figure amongst the oenological practices laid down and permitted by Regulations ( EC ) Nos 1493 / 1999 and 1622 / 2000 and , above all , because there is no scientific evidence that they act as allergens in the final product .
Why do we have to place them under suspicion by subjecting them to labelling ?
The Council and the Commission must accept Parliament 's view of this problem .
Having said this , I will move on to my own report .
I would firstly like to sincerely thank the Commission , the Council and the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Lund and Mrs Paulsen , for their excellent cooperation in reaching compromises which may allow us to approve this proposal for a directive at first reading .
My main concern during the production of this report has been that the food additives included in it should not only represent technological progress but they should not pose any risk to health nor cause misunderstanding amongst consumers .
The compromise amendments we are presenting to plenary , together with the Socialist Group and the Liberal Group ( Amendments Nos 19 to 32 ) are the result of this concern that we all share .
Framework Directive 89 / 107 / EEC on additives , in its Annex II , specifies that ' all food additives must be kept under continuous observation and must be re-evaluated whenever necessary ' .
However , in view of the existing concern about the use of polysorbates , of the ruling of the Court of Justice of 20 March 2003 , on the maximum doses of nitrites and nitrates , and the declaration of the Scientific Committee on Food of 4 April 2003 , on derivatives of parahydroxybenzoic acid , two new paragraphs for Article 2 are being presented by means of Amendment No 21 .
The intention is that the Commission should review the use of additives E 432 to E 436 ( that is , polysorbates ) , E 251 , E 252 , and E 249 to E 250 ( which are nitrates and nitrites ) and that , before 1 July 2004 , the conditions of use for parabens , from E 214 to E 219 , should be revised .
With regard to biphenyl , orthophenyl phenol and sodium orthophenyl phenol , which will now be classed as plant protection products , the Commission 's intention is to include them in the future in the legislation of pesticides , removing them from Directive 95 / 2 / EC .
We agree with this and our only desire is that a legal vacuum should not be created , as indicated in Amendment No 21 and Amendment No 4 of the report which was approved in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
We are also concerned that additives may be introduced into foods by means of additives in flavourings which are not required to be labelled .
We are therefore presenting Amendment No 22 to restrict its use to the minimum necessary in order to guarantee the quality and safety of the flavouring when it has no technological function in the food .
Otherwise , these flavouring additives will have to be labelled .
In conclusion , I would like to stress that it is very important that we make consumers aware that thanks to the legislation on additives and the work of the Scientific Committee on Food they can enjoy adequate food safety and food products which are suited to their needs .
These days our cities are increasingly large and industry needs more and more new additives and this makes our lives easier when it comes to consuming cooked or prepared products .
I would like once again to thank the Council , the Commission and the shadow rapporteurs who have contributed to reaching these important agreements .
Mr President , Commissioner , it looks as if , this evening and tomorrow , we shall be able to solve the issue of the views to be taken of hormones and their use in connection with animal rearing in which there is a dispute between the EU and the United States .
I shall address this issue in three ways .
Firstly , I wish to express my gratitude ; secondly , I wish to explain why I do not like the compromise ; and thirdly , I wish to explain why , in spite of everything , I support the compromise .
I want to address a very big thank-you to everyone who has contributed : to the Commission , the Council , the committee secretariat and all my colleagues and fellow MEPs in the committee - the shadow rapporteurs - who have been of very great help to us in reaching this solution .
It really is , of course , the case that we do not want these hormones , especially oestradiol 17 ? which is used , for example in the United States , as a growth stimulant .
We do not want them in our food and nor , for that reason , must we of course use them in such a manner that they may end up in our food .
In that way , we should be more credible in our negotiations , for example within the WTO , with the United States .
If they are used as growth stimulants , then they are clearly present in our food .
They involve a health risk for human beings and are carcinogenic .
If we use them therapeutically in the rearing of agricultural animals , there is also a risk of their being present .
That is what we do in the EU , and it undermines our credibility and our opposition to these hormones .
That is why , in principle , they should really be comprehensively banned in these contexts .
If we had banned them completely , as proposed by our committee , it would have been almost possible to exclude them from the market .
There would then have been no danger of their being used in the wrong way .
The committee was in agreement - as was Parliament , mainly , at first reading - about proceeding in this way .
This is , however , an issue that needs to be solved .
Even if I had full support for my desire for a total ban , I personally realised that it might be sensible to try to reach a compromise .
I therefore contacted my fellow MEPs in the other political groups and said that we should perhaps try , for the fact of the matter was that the Council said that it wanted to retain the substances for three reasons : firstly , to induce rutting in cattle , which is the most important area of usage ; secondly , for foetus maceration and mummification , also mainly in the case of cattle ; and , thirdly , for pyometra in cattle .
Of these areas of use , the first is the main one and the other two of relatively little importance .
The latter two are , moreover , relatively important from the point of view of animal protection .
Animals suffer if they cannot be given this medicine in the present situation .
Even though there are alternatives , they were not believed to be accessible throughout the EU .
My proposal , which became our proposal following contact with the other political groups , was that we should propose to the Council that the substances be kept for the purposes of the two less important areas relating to dead foetuses and pyometra .
The Council accepted this , and we shall now be able to do away with use of the substances for inducing rutting , something I consider to be major progress .
There will certainly be a transitional period , but then they will have been dispensed with .
In the final proposal , we now say , moreover , that the second use too should be reviewed , and perhaps that too could be removed after a certain period .
I see this as major progress , and we can thus perhaps solve the problem .
I am extremely pleased that we in the committee have been able to unite in supporting the proposal , and I hope that this will also be the case in the vote in the Chamber tomorrow .
We shall therefore be able to phase out the main use and thus strengthen our hand in the dispute with the United States .
I therefore want to reinforce this compromise , which is certainly weaker than what Parliament previously put forward but is still sufficiently sound for us now to be able to find a solution to the problem .
.
Mr President , I welcome this joint debate , which covers three important legislative dossiers on which we are close to agreement following constructive interinstitutional dialogue .
I will address each dossier in turn .
I would like to thank the three rapporteurs , Mrs Klaß , Mrs Ayuso González and Mr Olsson , and the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , for their hard work on these legislative dossiers .
I will start with Mrs Klaß 's recommendation for second reading .
The adoption of this proposal on foodstuffs labelling legislation , to which we are very close , will be of great benefit to consumers .
The common position represents a balanced compromise , including the majority of the measures proposed by the Commission , whilst restricting the scope of exemptions .
It also reflects the European Parliament 's wish to increase the accuracy of the information on foodstuffs labelling .
The common position includes - either word for word or in substance - Parliament 's four amendments as set out by the Commission in its amended proposal .
It also takes into account most of the other Parliament amendments on three important points .
First , the flexibility in the ingredient listing and the exemptions from the obligation to indicate the components of certain compound ingredients will apply from 2 % , rather than the 5 % initially proposed .
Second , the review and update of the list of allergenic ingredients to reflect scientific advances .
Moreover , when the list is updated , ingredients may be removed if there is scientific evidence to show that they are no longer allergenic .
Third , the addition of celery and mustard and their derived products to the list of allergenic substances .
However , one question is not completely settled .
There is no available scientific basis that demonstrates either that the derivatives of certain allergens are still allergenic , or that they are no longer likely to cause adverse reactions .
Thus the question arises : should we require mandatory labelling of those derivatives ?
The common position includes mandatory labelling , but states also that these substances could be exempted in the future , should scientific evidence provide justification for such action .
I share the view of the rapporteur and the committee that this might not be the best solution , but I do not agree with that suggested by Amendment Nos 1 and 2 .
Indeed , Amendment No 1 states that , for alcoholic drinks , derivatives should be labelled only if they are present in an amount which scientific research has shown may cause allergic reactions .
This is not acceptable because science only provides evidence that allergens and their derivatives cause allergic reactions . No scientific data are available on what residual amount of a given allergen may trigger an allergic reaction .
Furthermore , the amendment would be impossible to implement and the burden of proof is reversed .
It is for the manufacturers to provide evidence that the specific allergen derivative they use is not likely to cause an adverse reaction in order to be exempted from indicating it on the label .
Amendment No 2 , in its first part , is identical to Amendment No 1 , but concerns foodstuffs other than alcoholic beverages .
It also expressly exempts the processing aids used in alcoholic beverages from labelling , while these are not covered in this paragraph of the common position .
It is , therefore , not acceptable .
Amendment No 3 requests the Commission to adopt , before 1 January 2004 , following an opinion from the European Food Safety Authority , a list of derivatives that should be considered as non-allergenic .
This goes in the right direction but , in addition to the unrealistic deadline , it is not acceptable as such because only studies conducted under the responsibility of the industry , on specific allergens ' derivatives used in specific circumstances , could be considered and submitted for an opinion from the EFSA - for example , fish gelatine used as clarifying agent in beer .
That is why only Amendment No 4 , which constitutes a workable and reasonable compromise , can be accepted .
I will now turn to Mrs Ayuso González 's first reading report .
In December 2002 the Commission adopted a proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 95 / 2 / EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners .
The main objective of this proposal is to adapt Directive 95 / 2 / EC in the light of recent technical and scientific developments and to ensure the functioning of the internal market , a high level of protection of human health and the protection of consumers ' interests .
To this end , the Commission proposes to authorise a new food additive , to withdraw the authorisations for the use of some food additives , to revise current authorisations and to harmonise the use of food additives in flavourings at Community level .
In particular , on the ' use of food additives in flavourings ' , the proposal is in the interests of consumers and industry as it would achieve harmonisation of this sector at Community level .
A package of compromise amendments has been tabled , following close contact between the various institutions .
COREPER has marked its agreement to this compromise package , to which I gladly add the Commission 's support .
I will now turn to the last of the legislative dossiers , Mr Olsson 's second reading recommendation on hormones .
I very much welcome the progress made .
The debate on hormones has proved to be as delicate as the hormonal balance controlling the physiological functions in living creatures .
As you know , the Commission initially proposed to prohibit the use of oestradiol in the light of advice that this endogenously produced substance is a carcinogen .
Parliament supported this .
However , intricate discussions in the Council - which took more than two years , spanned four presidencies and included two extra background reports - have demonstrated that prohibiting oestradiol is not as straightforward as was first imagined .
Member States have drawn attention to the significant difficulties likely to arise from a prohibition , in particular the distress that this may cause with respect to animal welfare and the reorganisation of stockbreeding .
We therefore had to reconsider , by asking ourselves : what are our objectives ?
They are , firstly , to protect consumer health and , secondly , to achieve compliance with WTO requirements .
According to the Commission 's analysis both objectives can be achieved with the compromise proposed today by the rapporteur , Mr Olssen , and his colleagues , to whom I offer my sincere thanks .
The adoption of this text with Amendment Nos 17 , 18 and 19 would result in a significant reduction in the use of oestradiol .
Moreover , it clearly distinguishes the three remaining uses from the use of oestradiol for growth promotion .
It will , therefore , allow the Community to implement its international obligations in the context of the World Trade Organisation .
Therefore , I look forward to the debate on these interesting and important issues .
Mr President , Commissioner , it will be no surprise to you when I say that I would of course have preferred it if the three fine amendments adopted - admittedly by a small majority , but adopted nonetheless - in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy had been made use of .
Things being as they are , and politics being the art of the possible , I would , however , like to make it plain to you that this House cannot be expected to co-decide on a European directive that demands that winemakers and brewers should indicate on the bottle label that these beverages were produced using fish and eggs .
That , though , would have happened had we approved the Common Position without the amendments tabled by our rapporteur , Mrs Klaß .
To her I would like to extend the warmest thanks for her tireless efforts at bringing to the light of day a well thought-out directive , one that will of course ensure that , where potentially-allergenic ingredients - and I say ingredients rather than processing aids - are present , that presence is required to be indicated on a label .
Wine and beer , however , do not contain such allergy-triggering ingredients .
There is no doubt that their manufacture and processing involves the use of traces of processing aids described in Annex IIIa as having allergenic potential , these being isinglass and egg derivatives as clarifiers and fining agents .
They help in technical processes such as filtering .
The crucial difference from conventional additives is that processing aids are removed after use , and things that are not present in wine or beer do not have to be declared on the list of ingredients .
That is the solution that this House adopted at first reading .
I am convinced that the ministers responsible would , if they had known what is at stake , have followed this House 's wise and far-sighted lead and would have put a proper Common Position before us .
We know for certain that the presence in the end product of traces of the aids used cannot be scientifically demonstrated , even though , in such small quantities , they are unlikely to trigger allergies .
Until such time as that is sorted out , there must be no labelling of such a nature as to mislead consumers , arouse unwarranted fears and do indefensible harm to major sectors of industry .
That is why our approval of our rapporteur 's compromise motion represents the outermost limit of what we can tolerate , and beyond that we cannot go .
Commissioner , as you did not give Mrs Klaß an answer , I will ask you once more : is it indeed the case that studies may be submitted nine months after the directive enters into force ?
This is something that must be clarified now , or else the rapporteur will have to speak for another few minutes .
Mrs Lulling , you were allocated two minutes by the sittings directorate , and you have talked for three minutes and 26 seconds .
In the absence of your fellow Member , Mr Goodwill , your speaking time was extended to three minutes , but not to three minutes 26 .
You will understand that I am obliged to be very firm , unless I want everyone to go to bed at 2 a.m.
I thank you .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , successive food scandals have undermined consumer confidence .
Furthermore , food safety will be a burning political issue from now on , becoming an integral element in the overall safety of citizens .
As a result , it is considered essential to provide extensive information on the ingredients of foodstuffs .
Precise and relevant labelling , then , is indispensable , especially for ingredients which may cause allergies .
The problem is relatively simple for those allergens actually present in the final product .
Is it reasonable , on the other hand , to demand the inclusion on labels of ingredients such as technological aids , used especially in the production of alcoholic drinks , which constitute part of the production process but are not present in the finished product ?
Since the best is always the enemy of the good , are we not in danger , in our commendable desire to protect allergy sufferers , of weakening traditional production methods through such measures , even causing markets to go bust , with no scientific proof of the harmful character of these aids ?
One can well imagine the horror of consumers when they discover that sulphites and other unappetising ingredients are used in the production of wines as prestigious as champagne , or those of this beautiful region , Alsace , to name but a few .
I am therefore glad that a balanced compromise has been found on this controversial question .
The compromise states that it will be possible to withdraw certain ingredients from the list of allergens on the evidence of a scientifically-researched dossier , pending a full scientific study .
Coming from a wine-producing region , of course , I would have preferred it if the burden of proof - in other words , the production of the technical dossier - did not fall on the shoulders of producers who are sometimes small operators .
I am aware , however , that if we did not accept this compromise , we would have to ratify the Council 's common position , which makes no provision for a procedure for exempting ingredients from the list of allergens .
For these reasons , although my feelings are mixed , I believe that it is advisable to adopt this compromise .
At the same time , I express the hope that the Commission will allow small - and medium-sized producers the flexibility they need in order to make their arguments heard .
Mr President , the Group of the Greens can by and large support the Kla ? report .
We believe in particular that industry must prove that a substance is non-allergenic .
That has fortunately been retained in the compromise .
As regards the Olsson report the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance supports the compromise .
Just like Mr Olsson we would of course have preferred to ban all growth promoters , but there are in particular animal welfare reasons for making a few limited exceptions nonetheless .
We are glad that there will be more research into safety and into efficient alternatives , so that eventually we can move away from them altogether .
We have a whole lot more difficulty with the Ayuso González report .
The Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance would go much further .
Many of these additives and all those substances are unnecessary as far as we are concerned .
With the precautionary principle in mind , parabens , polysorbates and aluminium phosphates should be banned immediately .
We will however assent to the compromise because it is a step forward compared with the Commission proposal .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would particularly like to congratulate Mrs Klaß , who has worked very competently on this report and shown herself capable of weighing up both the advantages and the negative consequences of systematic labelling regulations .
She has fought her corner and defended her case against some of her collaborators , notably the Commission , which was not predisposed to listen to the demands of the elected Members of this House .
Mrs Klaß 's report , as adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , was the best solution in my view , speaking as an eagle-eyed native of Champagne .
Certain higher and sometimes contradictory interests , however , could not be ignored , and we thus decided on a fallback solution .
In a sense , I had already proposed that solution anyway , in the amendments I tabled in committee , but I had then rallied round , without enthusiasm , to the solution advocated by the rapporteur .
Today , part of me is happy that a partial solution has been taken up and reworked to satisfy the majority of us .
Ensuring clear and relevant information as well as a certain level of protection for consumers suffering from allergies makes good sense to me .
On the other hand , alarmist labelling would terrify consumers who suffer from allergies and reduce their own consumption .
Iconic European drinks such as champagne or Irish beer would suffer terribly from this , Commissioner , dragging the whole European wine industry down with them .
Tomorrow , before representatives of the wine industry of my region , Champagne-Ardennes , I am going to have to defend the established principle that it is the responsibility of producers great and small to prove that derivatives of supposedly allergenic products used by them as technological aids in wine are not themselves allergens , because they are the result of an important process of transformation of raw materials and operate in a totally different context , that of wine or beer .
All of this alters their characteristics fundamentally .
Brewers will thus have to prove that isinglass , used for centuries in beer-making , is not a proscribed product .
In short , the burden of proof falls on their shoulders , but we have bought some time to do the relevant research .
I would like to conclude by thanking the rapporteur and supporting the solution proposed in Amendment No 4 .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group has moreover co-signed the compromise amendment and assumes the consequences of that choice .
Mr President , the three reports which are now the subjects of a joint debate are important items of focus in our endeavours to ensure food safety and consumer welfare .
I would like to thank my colleagues for their excellent work .
In the single market consumers encounter new and strange products and manufacturers on the shelves of their own familiar local shop every day , and they must be able to have complete confidence in quality control and food safety in that single market .
It is regrettable that whenever the EU is proactive in setting such important standards , this is so often felt to be needless concern over details .
One cause of that , of course , is the way the European press often deliberately sets out to portray things in a negative light , and disregarding the real problem at issue .
The reasons for this are not political ; they are to do with journalism .
Stories need colour , and , unfortunately , that colour is often acquired by spreading scare stories instead of factual information .
The latest example of this is the news story about limiting the maximum amounts for PAH compounds in foods to protect consumers ' health .
A totally legitimate research project carried out by the Commission has , at least in the Finnish newspapers , already developed into a scare about whether the EU is now going to ban private barbecues and our favourite summer treat , the grilled sausage .
There has been continual whining about the EU meddling in everything and being overly protective , and they have been asking when the Europolice are going to start lighting bonfires piled with dangerous cookery books and whether soon we will have to eat wearing a helmet on our head , just to be on the safe side .
Unfortunately , the nation swallows whole the scare stories spread in this way without any justification , giving rise to negative feelings and resentment .
For that reason it would be important if the good work done in Parliament to protect people 's health also had more vigorous support from the EU Information Centres .
It is obviously necessary to provide background information early on at the preparatory stage so that the unsubstantiated urban legends about the EU do not get a chance to take root .
Mr President , I must firstly convey my special thanks to Mrs Ayuso , the Commission and the Council for cooperating so well on the current proposal and compromise concerning additives , so that we might conclude this matter no later than at first reading .
I suppose our package permits the further use of additives , but it has been quite crucial for me that we are now also putting the emphasis on the Commission 's supervision and re-evaluation of the use of previously approved substances .
I hope that we do not continue with the policy of just going on accepting new additives and an extended use of already approved substances so that such additives and substances are only omitted from the list when the industry itself informs us that they are no longer used .
I think that the policy so far has been unduly defensive .
In my opinion , the Commission should constantly inspect and re-evaluate the use of additives so that the three well-known conditions for using them are fully complied with at all times .
I am therefore very pleased about the provisions in the package whereby the Commission must , within two years , present an overall report on the re-evaluation of additives and whereby this report must promptly focus especially upon the use of certain types , including nitrates , nitrites and polysorbates .
I hope that tomorrow 's adoption of the reports and the process leading to approval of the package may herald a better policy on the use of additives in food .
I should also like to take the opportunity of thanking Mr Olsson for his really constructive cooperation in connection with banning the use of hormones in animal husbandry .
In this area too , we are now obtaining a result in which the use of the carcinogenic hormone , oestradiol 17 ? will cease in the course of two years .
In other words , hormones in general will cease to be used in animal husbandry .
This is a sound and very positive result that Mr Olsson has piloted through .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I warmly congratulate the three rapporteurs , among whom I would like to single out Mrs Klaß , whose report demonstrates some very good ways of approaching this issue .
I know from my own personal experience the different preconceptions that have to be taken into account when considering issues of labelling .
I would particularly like to highlight the rules on labelling for products that trigger allergic reactions .
In the European Union , 8 % of children and 3 % of adults suffer an allergic reaction to food ingredients to such an extent that it markedly affects their general state of health , and that is an alarming statistic .
When it comes to keeping consumers informed , labelling is the only option in view of the large number of compound foodstuffs , the composition of which changes frequently .
Unlike the previous speakers , I am in favour of the continued addition of ingredients that , it simply has to be said , improve the quality of the meal .
That products should be listed only if there is scientific evidence that they trigger allergies goes without saying ; we should also ensure that the list can be amended quickly when new findings come to light .
It should always be borne in mind that the plethora of information on a label has to communicate the essentials .
In this perspective , I look forward with keen anticipation to learning what the Commission thinks about the inclusion on labels of , for example , unproven assertions .
This is where there could well be a reduction in the amount of information provided .
May I just make one additional observation ?
In 1998 , as a rapporteur , I tried to bring in rules on the labelling of alcoholic drinks ; the sole issue then was the labelling of sulphur .
What was , at that time , seen as revolutionary is now no longer an issue ; proof that Parliament has , in recent years , come round much more to the consumers ' way of thinking .
Furthermore , I welcome the proposal for labelling where the proportion of an ingredient is in excess of 2 % .
Although this was , years ago , regarded as impossible , and may well not be necessary , we are now taking account of the tendency to use many ingredients in small quantities in the production process , and we are discharging our obligation to inform the consumer .
Businesses with whom I have had discussions have told me that most labels now include ingredients the proportion of which is under 2 % .
I would just like to make a brief comment on the Olsson report ; I welcome Mr Olsson 's accommodating approach and see it as a good thing , but I am also aware that oestradiol 17 ? is already being replaced by other substances in many countries in the European Union .
That is something that we should be encouraging and promoting .
I really must insist that Members observe the limits on their speaking time .
I cannot extend every Member 's speaking time by half , or we will not sleep tonight .
Would the Commission like to say anything more ?
Very briefly , I was asked a question in relation to Amendment No 4 , and perhaps I might just give some clarification to that on the Klaß report .
I believe the Amendment No 4 compromise is quite clear .
The industry can notify the studies for existing derivative products for a period of nine months after the entry into force of the directive .
The Commission will finally need to decide , at the latest four years after the entry into force , whether a derivative will need to be labelled or not .
The Commission will decide on the basis of the studies , after the consultation that is envisaged with the European Food Safety Authority .
Mr President , Commissioner , the point at issue is that the wording in the compromise is ' studies currently in progress ' , and I stressed in my speech the fact that these things have not been researched before .
If our new directive leads industry to consider requesting a study , is it possible that it is only now that I would commission one ?
That was the question - not whether current studies would be taken into account , but whether it is possible that future studies will be .
One final response , perhaps , Commissioner ?
.
The compromise that was reached related to studies for existing derivative products ; that was for a period of nine months after the entry into force of the directive .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
- ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of the second reading I should like to revisit a number of important points from my report .
I do not wish to do so however without first thanking my fellow Members .
The shadow rapporteurs have been especially helpful .
At this point I would also like to direct a word of thanks to the industry .
We had the opportunity of holding intensive discussions , not only with the packaging industry , but also with the packers and the environmental groups .
This gave rise to heated discussions and it increased my understanding of actual practice .
These discussions have convinced me that we must start looking at packaging differently .
For a long time it has been self-evident to see packaging as an environmental problem , a small and necessary problem certainly , but a problem nonetheless .
We can also see packaging in a positive light by looking at it in conjunction with the product .
Packaging then becomes the protector of the product and prevents waste .
Packaging is also the vehicle of globalisation , of world trade and of socio-economic development .
Seen in this light sustainable development is no longer possible without packaging .
A positive way of thinking about packaging however is only credible if we go all out to prevent environmental pollution .
Which is why recycling and prevention are necessary .
I shall turn to them briefly now .
First of all recycling . This is an important part of the directive .
Some even maintain that really the packaging directive is first and foremost a recycling directive .
In the debates during the first reading I pointed out that recycling is not a goal in itself and that there are also limits to the environmental benefit of recycling .
During the second reading we were mainly concerned with the costs of recycling .
The British Government in particular is concerned about the extra costs of more recycling and published figures on this .
What remains unclear however is the way in which the costs have been calculated .
Recycling costs money , but it does produce something as well .
The greater the scale , the more cost-effective , but there are limits of course .
If you want to collect the last tin in the north of Finland , that does of course cost a disproportionate amount of money .
Our discussion about the environmental benefit in the first reading and the economic costs in the second almost inevitably lead to the conclusion that the optimum percentage could vary substantially from one country to another .
The discussion was indeed more of a discussion between countries than between political groups .
Ultimately we are going to have to work towards each country finding and fulfilling its own optimum .
But that is only possible if sufficient recycling capacity has already been created in each country .
That is why we need clear objectives now .
We must certainly not set the bar too low , nor too high , nor too close , nor too far away .
We need a good middle position .
I therefore call on you to support the compromise that the groups have reached .
This compromise is 55 % in 2007 .
In passing I note that we are therefore later than the original Commission proposal , because that was 55 % in 2006 .
It is very important to set ambitious but achievable targets for the new Member States as well .
They must themselves be involved with this .
Waste and recycling have become global markets .
There is no objection to the export of sorted waste , but we must be sure that it has indeed been sorted and that it is indeed being properly processed in developing world countries .
The exporter must prove this .
Prevention .
Prevention still receives too little attention i n the packaging directive .
We have to do something about producer responsibility .
We have done so previously in the electronic waste directive and the end-of-life vehicles directive .
The responsibility of producers here is not just financial .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy demands better implementation of the essential requirements and asks producers to choose the most environmentally friendly alternative .
It is a good idea to set up an indicator for this .
Different materials such as paper , metal , glass and plastic must compete on an environmental quality basis .
This will provide an incentive for constant innovation in the environmental field . And there is an incentive to invest in recycling capacity .
It will lead to every country having optimum recycling capacity because every material producer will have an interest in recycling .
The introduction of an indicator is also a way of giving consumers greater involvement with packaging and of giving supermarkets or businesses the opportunity only to choose five-star packaging for example .
In this way sustainable development is something that concerns all of us .
This approach fits in perfectly with the sixth environmental action programme .
I would like to draw your attention to two further points . Firstly , re-use .
Discussion of this topic has gained fresh momentum since Germany made deposit systems compulsory on 1 January .
Complaints are pouring in about this because of the distortion of the internal market .
Deposit systems can indeed conflict with the internal market .
It is a pity that the Commission has not seized upon the revision as an opportunity to do something about the long list of complaints .
It is also a pity that no majority was to be found in the first reading for the amendment to create clarity .
We must prevent improper utilisation of re-use and therefore we must put the environmental result first here too .
The second point that I would like to make concerns ceramics . I have a question for the Commission about this .
The ceramics industry is concerned about the effects of the packaging directive and is seeking total exemption .
There are two points on which I would like a clear statement from the Commission .
Firstly , in my view it is not advantageous for the ceramics industry to fall completely outside the packaging directive - this directive does after all provide the basis for trade in the internal market .
Commissioner , what is your opinion on this ?
Secondly , I would like clarity as to whether the ceramics industry will have a recycling obligation by 2007 .
In my view it will not , but on this too I would like confirmation from the Commission .
Before giving the floor to the Commissioner , I would remind those of my fellow Members who have just rejoined us for this new debate that we have an extraordinarily full agenda this evening .
So that the last few Members , speaking on the last few reports , do not have to watch the sun rise from this room , I would ask speakers to keep to the time allotted to them .
. I thank Ms Corbey for her work as rapporteur on this subject .
I know she has done a very serious job and looked at this in depth .
In 1999 a total amount of 63.5 million tonnes of packaging waste was generated in the European Union .
This corresponds to around 17 % of municipal solid waste and 3 % of the total waste generation by weight .
The packaging and packaging waste directive has made the collection and recycling of packaging waste a normal activity in all EU Member States , increasingly so also in the accession countries .
In this way the directive has helped to reduce environmental impacts and to strengthen the internal market for packaging and packaging waste .
This revision builds on this success .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament has , since the first reading , given clear support for our proposal to more than double the minimum recycling targets and to further increase the recovery target .
It seems that there is now widespread agreement on the levels of the targets .
The key remaining question is whether the implementation deadline will be 2008 , as in the common position , or whether an earlier date should be set .
In my view deadlines should be both realistic and ambitious .
It will also be important to give Greece , Ireland and Portugal - Member States already granted later target dates under current legislation - a reasonable time to adapt to the new targets .
This also applies to the accession states .
I intend to propose deadlines for these countries before the end of this year .
I am also pleased that Parliament largely agrees that other aspects - in particular , prevention and re-use - should be further studied before new decisions are taken .
However , the need for further analysis also applies to the new obligation referred to in the first part of Amendment No 7 .
This new obligation to minimise the environmental impact of packaging risks duplicating the existing essential requirements and facing the same problems in regard to enforcement .
I fully understand the concerns of Parliament regarding exports for recycling .
I agree that we should make sure that recycling in non-EU countries should only count for our targets if it is done properly .
However , controls and paperwork should be focused on where they are really needed .
I do not see any reason why this should apply to materials such as metals , paper and glass .
These materials are part of a functioning , internal , international market .
I doubt that we need written proof of the recycling of each exported batch .
It would also seem strange to me to apply stricter controls on exports of packaging waste than the provisions on waste electrical and electronic equipment , which we decided just a few months ago .
There seems to be a great deal of concern in Parliament - as we just heard from the rapporteur - about the effect of the packaging directive on ceramics packaging .
Let me be clear that nothing in the directive obliges Member States to set up recycling systems for this type of packaging .
Excluding ceramics from the scope of the packaging directive raises the question of why we should exclude ceramics and not other , similar packaging types .
It also gives Member States the freedom to take any measure on ceramics packaging , as long as it is within the framework of the Treaty .
Therefore I believe it is better to ask the Technical Committee to solve any possible implementation problems , rather than excluding ceramics from the scope of the directive .
I know that flower pots , self-adhesive labels and related issues are important for the industries concerned .
Therefore they merit a proper discussion .
Conciliation is , in my view , not the right framework for such a discussion .
This is a job for detailed work by the experts in the Technical Committee .
Of the 32 amendments the Commission can accept 20 amendments in full , in part , or in principle .
A list of the amendments concerned has been handed over separately
Mr President , Commissioner , the modification of the directive on packaging is going to have enormous repercussions for the various agents , local councils , collection systems , companies producing materials , the food industry and consumers .
It is clear that we must set quantitative objectives and that these must be ambitious but , at the same time , they must be achievable .
We must not forget the fact that in certain Member States the objectives will be more difficult to achieve for historical reasons relating to lack of infrastructure , low population density or consumer habits .
I regret not having been able to reach a full agreement with the rapporteur , but I believe that her work has not been at all easy .
In the report which she presented in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy there were many points on which we were in agreement , but Mrs Corbey wanted to go further and , after having reached a compromise , at the last minute she has introduced modifications in Amendments Nos 26 and 27 which have obliged me not to sign them and to vote against them tomorrow .
I understand that in countries such as Germany , Belgium or the Netherlands the collection of waste is cheap and efficient .
In these countries there is a uniform distribution of population and no geographical barriers .
But it is not logical to impose the same objectives on other Member States which do not have a similar distribution of population .
And I am not just talking about my country , Spain , but also Finland , Sweden , France , the United Kingdom and other Member States which are going to have great difficulties fulfilling the objectives agreed in the common position .
And this is not a problem of a lack of investment on the part of public administrations .
There are 41 million of us living in Spain , half the population of Germany , in an area of 504 000 km2 .
The population is distributed around the most mountainous rural environment in the whole of the European Community .
Can anyone believe that the collection of waste can be carried out on equal terms ?
We need a realistic , flexible and , above all , applicable directive .
It appears that some people want to gear this directive towards their own laws and impose it on the other Member States . This is neither fair , logical nor equitable .
I believe that the Council 's common position is pretty balanced .
I fully support the dates and the quantitative objectives set in it .
My only regret is that there are not equal objectives for all materials and that , as a result of economic interests , we have forgotten that there are problems with the functioning of the internal market , which is the real reason for this Directive .
I believe it is very important that we support the various different options for dealing with waste : re-use , recycling and energy recovery .
These three options are better than merely depositing waste in dumps .
Finally , we must bear in mind that packaging waste represents a relatively small proportion of all waste generated in the Member States , 3 % according to you , Commissioner .
So let us be flexible .
Industry is making great efforts as are the agents involved .
Mr President , it is important to improve on the present Directive on packaging waste , as has been said here in several speeches .
The targets for recycling and re-use for the next five years in the form now proposed are fairly high but are by no means unreasonable .
Many Member States have already achieved considerably higher levels than those now being proposed .
These suggested targets are easily achievable , and if we had less ambitious targets , then any branch of industry , for example , which would exploit the use of recycled material , could not develop .
In order to reach the targets , however , we should bear in mind the excellent measures that have already been implemented in different Member States to achieve the greatest possible targets for recycling and re-use .
For example , countries that have good experience of re-use projects should also be encouraged even further in this area .
Just as the rapporteur stated , economic and ecological factors must be taken into consideration in this connection .
I would therefore like to draw attention to the fact that , as recycling targets are being proposed for wood , it is these very ecological and economic factors that have not necessarily been taken into consideration .
The 15 % target for wood is a low one , but in a country like Finland , for example , the ecological disadvantages of transportation greatly outweigh the benefits gained from recycling wood in this way .
It is a lot wiser ecologically if this wood is burnt as an energy source in people 's houses .
I therefore hope that common sense will prevail and that Amendment No 26 , which is a proposal put forward by the rapporteur and others , will be supported .
Mr President , in brief , since I can do little more within one minute , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur for seeking a compromise which has led to 11 amendments being signed , the majority of them , by several groups , for the revision of this Directive .
I would also like to point out that this proposal represents the fulfilment of one of the objectives of the Sixth Environmental Action Programme and say , like the rapporteur , that the objectives of the proposal are ambitious but achievable , as certain Member States are demonstrating by already complying with certain aspects of this Directive on packaging and packaging waste .
We must place particular emphasis on compliance with the Directive ( one of the most serious problems we are facing is very frequent non-compliance with Community environmental legislation ) .
We must stress the need to ensure that exporters carry out the process of recovery or recycling under conditions which are not merely similar to those laid down in Community legislation , but exactly equivalent to them .
Finally , Mr President , we must also act quickly to guarantee the selection at origin of materials that create less waste , are less harmful and reduce waste as much as possible , since that waste has increased over recent years in the majority of Member States .
Mr President , my compliments to the rapporteur , Mrs Corbey , on her approach .
The principle underlying this legislation is limitation of the harmful environmental consequences of packaging .
The way in which the targets formulated are achieved may differ from one Member State to another .
Unfortunately , we have to say that the European Commission thinks differently about this , witness the fact that on 17 December last year it decided to summon the Netherlands to appear before the Court . And this while the targets are being amply achieved in the Netherlands through the operation of a voluntary agreement between the Ministry for Housing , Spatial Planning and the Environment and industry .
This approach will also have to be recognised in this directive .
In compromise Amendment No 31 this has been done , although I still find the requirements very tight .
I recognise that the targets of this directive may be ambitious , but nonetheless this matter must not end in conciliation , certainly not if there is agreement with the Council on the other points .
I can for example give my unqualified support to the idea that the export of packaging waste may only count towards the achievement of the targets if the exporter can supply the proof that the recovery and / or the recycling has taken place in circumstances that are equivalent to the community regulation .
I am less happy with the fact that the discussion of mechanical recycling is again being deferred , so that we continue to be faced with a lack of clarity .
Finally , Mr President , I really do think that gift wrap should be covered by the definition of packaging .
Mr President , I believe that the approach of this directive is out of date .
That is confirmed by the Commission 's recently published Thematic Strategy on Recycling .
This now says : ' Current directives foresee that all Member States should achieve the same recycling targets as this one does .
However , the question is legitimate whether this uniformity in targets is most effective , both from an environmental and economic point of view .
It might be better to have an overall EU recycling target at EU level and let market forces determine which recycling facilities can achieve the objective in the most cost-effective manner . '
How right that is !
We know that there are some Member States that want to go beyond the proposed targets . Others will find them impossible to meet .
So why are we ploughing on with a strategy that is already being undermined by the practicalities ?
The United Kingdom has a problem with this .
For many years we have relied on landfill .
Our geology favoured that .
We consequently had no particular incentive to press ahead with recycling , as some countries did .
We are now moving as fast as we can , but there is no way that we can move as fast as the rapporteur 's amendments prescribe .
To do that would mean spending EUR 1.8 billion on recycling packaging waste alone , and packaging waste is only 6 % of the waste going to landfill in Britain .
This would mean that we would have to tell British local councils to initiate policies to remove packaging from the household waste stream .
That takes time and money , Mrs Corbey .
Maybe such policies are not the most pressing priorities of my country 's local authorities .
Maybe their priority is financing home helps , Meals on Wheels for the elderly or services of another kind .
If subsidiarity is to mean anything at all , such priorities should be for local decision .
How can I defend a situation where a combination of continental MEPs press for changes that will supply an imperative to British local authorities that a majority of British MEPs have not voted for ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by thanking our rapporteur , Mrs Corbey , for the work she has done on this report and on the proposals that are on the table .
We have just heard how the way we deal with packaging has a decisive part to play in shaping the future of our environment , and how there is - of course - a market in this field , one in which the big packaging groups are competing with one another , so that we have to give some thought as to how we achieve an optimum level of effectiveness .
Within this market there are specialities , which represent the opportunities offered by diversity in Europe .
Where these are concerned we have stressed the need for this great pot to safeguard the interests , futures and chances of survival of the small firms , scattered throughout Europe , working in the ceramics sector and producing highly-prized packaging such as that for Meaux mustard and similar goods . To describe them as an industry would be an exaggeration , in that they have between 30 and 50 workers each .
It is for this reason that the keynote of our amendments is that the directive should not cover packaging materials which cannot be utilised for energy recovery owing to their material quality , which are inert , and the quantities of which do not exceed 0.1 % of the proven quantity of packaging in the Community , and for which material or raw material recycling is ruled out for ecological and cost-benefit reasons .
We have just heard from the Commissioner - and for this we are grateful - that the packaging directive 's recycling order will not apply to ceramics .
There must , of course , be a place for ceramics in the packaging directive , but recycling it would mean that it would have to be transported back across Europe , in minimal quantities , in order for this to be done .
Systems for its return , collection and recovery would have to be introduced .
That would kill off small businesses .
We cannot believe that Europe is about enacting directives that cut away the economic basis from under small firms that offer speciality goods that are highly prized in Europe .
I thank you for your unambiguous statement , which is something we can build on , and which will also give the firms a certain amount of breathing space and a reliable prospect of future development .
Mr President , Commissioner , although I often agree with you , this is one occasion when I do not , as I take the view that you ought to have intervened at a much earlier stage .
I have just heard impressive speeches to the effect that equal quotas in Europe are unfair .
At that , I cannot but laugh ; why , then do we have them ?
In Europe , we have to have comparable rules , and the ground rules have to be interpreted in such a way that the Member States can make a start .
I was here in 1994 - as was Mrs Jackson - when we adopted the directive .
If my schoolboy maths serves me well , that was twelve years ago .
There are Member States that , since that day , have simply sat with their arms folded and done nothing whatever .
This morning , I was at a big event in Frankfurt , along with several hundred others .
They gave me a good telling-off and said to me , ' Florenz , why are we , in Germany , in the Netherlands , in Belgium , in a number of Nordic countries , keeping in step and implementing these rules , while , elsewhere , they are doing nothing at all ?
You are a poor representative of your country if you allow this sort of thing to go on ' .
I have to tell you , Commissioner , you are the guardian of the laws , and you have to intervene at a much earlier stage .
Mrs Corbey , I see it as almost shameful that we should be starting a dispute in this House as to whether the starting date should be 2008 or 2007 .
That is not what all this is about !
What matters is that we should heighten awareness among the public and in the Member States of the fact that a recycling strategy means that resources are conserved , and that when we talk about the conservation of resources , we are talking about our children 's capital .
In Europe , that has to be organised on a Community basis .
I very much sympathise with those who say ' yes ' to this , but are worried about the export issue .
With my liberal approach , I do not go as far as that , but when it comes to exports , we cannot have the situation in which enterprises here develop recycling strategies , and then export the materials .
Such a thing would surely be false .
While I , of course , have sympathy with Member States that sort out care for the elderly before dealing with the packaging directive , I do accept that this is the rule .
Mr President , there is no doubt that we need this legislation : we are absolutely drowning in a sea of milk cartons , hair sprays , coke cans , pizza boxes , bottles of wine and shampoo .
They are evident in every town , city and street we go into across the Union , in particular the UK .
Landfills are reaching capacity , incinerators are overflowing and the wads of excessive packaging we use should go .
This legislation , if it signals the end of just one elaborate box , fancy bottle or something wrapped in plastic and sold in a heavyweight bag , will have done its job .
However , I would call on everyone here to recognise the importance of allowing time for change .
Ministers are calling for a 2008 date for the UK and some of the other states .
I would ask you to support that .
Culture change takes time .
The UK is meeting its existing recycling targets , but it is simply not possible to meet and implement this legislation by 2007 without an expensive , crash-spending programme .
The figures do not look very significant , but they represent millions of tonnes of material which must be collected , recycled and new markets found .
A realistic timetable for implementation is five years .
Any attempt to compress this time will result in spiralling costs - if not quite as much as Mrs Jackson says .
Nevertheless , we need time and we will do the job .
Mr President , I should like to begin by expressing my heartfelt support for the proposal put by the rapporteur , who has worked with great dedication .
I can understand the compromises that have been made .
Not everyone can be equally tough .
We must however in any event leave those who can be tougher , but who perhaps go about things differently , as in the Netherlands for example , with its voluntary agreement , in peace because they are achieving more than the others .
That is why I , just like Mr Hans Blokland , am happy with the amendment to Paragraph 31 .
Everyone wants to achieve the targets in their own way .
That does however mean that you must not distort the market in achieving those targets .
Commissioner , I have a question for you about this .
It has become apparent to us - and they are finding this very difficult in the area that I come from - that because of the way in which deposit money is levied on single-use packaging in Germany - and shortly in Belgium too - it has actually become impossible at the moment to continue importing single-use packaging from other European countries into Germany .
What we have therefore is a trade embargo .
Do you not think , Commissioner , that this way of achieving the target , namely the reduction of waste , which I am otherwise in favour of , is distorting the market through the imposition of an ecotax or deposit money ?
And should that not be reason for you , perhaps in consultation with your colleague Mr Bolkestein , to take this up and in any event to give me an answer now ?
What is your opinion on this and what steps must be taken to bring an end to this trade distortion , which has for that matter already led to job losses ?
Mr President , key to the 1994 directive were targets for Member States for packaging recovery and recycling , to be set initially for a five-year phase and thereafter to be reviewed for subsequent five-year phases - and hence we are here today .
I support the objective of this directive to minimise the impact of packaging and packaging waste , as long as the costs are proportionate to the environmental benefits .
It is often forgotten that packaging waste is only a small proportion of total landfill .
The key concern in relation to the amendments to this directive is the deadline for achieving compliance with the proposed higher recovery and recycling targets .
The deadline , or ' time-line ' , should be realistic , proportionate and achievable in line with best practice .
This will allow infrastructure and recycling capacity to be built up at a pace that ensures progress with the objectives of the directive whilst not imposing excessive or disproportionate costs .
I wish to draw attention to the derogation that sets the same recovery and recycling targets as for the other twelve Member States , but allows Ireland , Greece and Portugal longer to achieve them .
I urge support for the common position , which sets an accepted deadline of 2012 .
There is an assumption that all Member States should ultimately reach the same recovery and recycling rates , irrespective of size , geography or infrastructure .
It is not a question of having done nothing alone .
Yes , far more could be done , but in Ireland 's case we have a population of less than four million and too small a market to sustain a packaging manufacturing infrastructure .
We import 75 % of our packaged goods .
There is one paper recycler , little plastics recycling , no metal recyclers and the only glass recycler in the country has recently closed down .
Therefore we are at a permanent geographical and structural disadvantage .
To comply with this directive we must ship packaging waste overseas or build more reprocessing facilities and export the empty packaging , which is uneconomic .
The cost will not be proportional to the environmental benefit .
I underline what Ms Jackson said to us , on the Commission 's recent communication on the Thematic Strategy on the prevention and recycling of waste , published in May 2003 .
From an environmental point of view it is more important to optimise collection and recycling in the Community as a whole , rather than to consider whether this takes place in a particular Member State .
This should be reflected in the overall recycling target at Community level .
In the Commissioner 's own words , could she please explain how this squares with what we have here today ?
Mr President , to her credit , the main thread of the rapporteur 's argument has been the speedy revision of targets , thereby avoiding the temptation to embark on too large-scale and thorough a review now .
There will be another time for that .
I would like here to mention some of my own amendments , which were approved by the committee in the recommendation and also in the proposed inter-party compromises .
If the targets are to be implemented we should avoid discrimination between materials on the basis of weight .
That will not happen , however , if , for example , charges are based solely on weight and do not take account of each material 's environmental impact .
Clarification is needed to give proper shape to the whole programme .
The very fact that there is an aim to recycle 55 % by weight of packaging waste and an obligation that goes with it to take the environmental costs and benefits of the recovery and recycling of packaging materials into account means that there should be no one-sided increase in material-specific commitments , even if that would mean the 55 % target would be achieved more quickly .
The Commission has promised to present a report in 2005 , one section of which is to be on the subject of re-use .
My amendment proposes that that report should examine re-use and , in particular , a comparison of the ecological benefits of re-use and those of recycling .
The report should focus precisely on real environmental impact and assessing market viability .
Important details include examples in the Annex of products which constitute packaging that is not subject to the scope of this directive .
These include tubes and cylinders around which flexible material is wound , release paper of self-adhesive labels , and wrapping and gift wrapping paper sold as a separate product .
I want to thank the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Corbey has presented for its second reading a report the essentials of which I can endorse .
We need the best possible systems to deal with what amounts to some 58 million tonnes of packaging material produced every year in the European Union , an amount that is increasing from year to year .
In so doing , we would be ensuring that the environment is better cared for and giving important sectors of industry the security to plan ahead .
Among those we will be voting on tomorrow , there is one amendment that I regard as particularly important .
Amendment No 4 has to do with packaging materials in small quantities , which are therefore subject to a very low market penetration in the Member States .
One material that occurs in small quantities of this sort is ceramic packaging ; for example , ceramic bottles , pots , and bowls made in the Netherlands , in France and in Spain , are mainly used for the packaging of brandies , chocolates , and patés .
Ceramic packaging accounts for only 0.1 % of the packaging waste produced in the EU - in other words , just 58 000 tonnes out of 58 million tonnes .
Ceramics consist of baked clay , and their artistic and creative appearance means that , in many households , they are kept or re-used , so that they do not end up in the household rubbish .
Ceramics can be neither re-used in the production of energy nor recycled .
They pose no problems for the environment .
To treat ceramics separately , collecting them and transporting them thousands of kilometres across the Member States , would make no sense either in environmental or in economic terms .
I therefore urge you to support Amendment No 4 .
Waste management , which was already introduced on the basis of this directive , or which has yet to be introduced in certain Member States , should deal with those materials that are suited to recovery ; it must concentrate on materials the collection and recycling of which is profitable in economic and environmental terms .
Thank you very much , Commissioner
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is no exaggeration , I feel , to state that tomorrow , when we approve the final version of the directive on emissions trading , we will have before us a new economic and environmental paradigm for the European Union : the carbon economy .
Carbon will have a price per tonne on the market , and whoever can produce it with the lowest carbon dioxide emissions will reap the benefits .
Approving this directive , then , has enormous political value : it lends credibility to our leadership on the world stage , which is crucial if we are to be able to convince Russia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol ; from 2005 on , it will allow us to remedy the inadequate progress made by the majority of Member States towards compliance with Kyoto ; and , most of all , it will reduce the financial cost of implementing Kyoto in the European Union by 35 % .
Although Parliament has welcomed the Commission 's proposal from the start and believes it to be valuable , we also felt that its scope could have been more ambitious .
I believe that this has been achieved with the recommendation for a second reading , agreed with the Greek Presidency , with the full cooperation of the Commission .
We will vote on this recommendation tomorrow .
This agreement brings two great advantages : firstly , it avoids conciliation , and hence the possible postponement of the launch of the scheme from 2005 until 2006 ; secondly , although it does not incorporate all the amendments tabled by Parliament , the compromise that was reached includes our most important proposals .
Allow me to highlight the principal innovations introduced by this recommendation .
Firstly , it defines a national ceiling for emissions allowances , in line with the Kyoto objectives . A quantified objective to be obtained by the system is thus guaranteed , and the risk of over-allocation avoided .
Secondly , the temporary exclusion clause - the ' opt-out ' - clause , will apply to installations but not to activities , thus assuring that the liquidity of the scheme and the equilibrium of the internal market will not be threatened .
Thirdly , the scheme can be extended to amend the directive in other sectors , notably the transport , chemical and aluminium sectors .
Fourthly , auctioning may now constitute part of the process by which emission allowances are allocated after the end of the first period , though unfortunately in a non-harmonised way .
Fifthly , credits deriving from clean development projects and joint implementation of the Kyoto Protocol will be linked into this directive , but they will not replace the priority that should be given to domestic measures .
Sixthly , an opt-in clause is included , permitting Member States to extend the system to other installations and activities .
Seventhly , the system may be extended to greenhouse gases other than carbon dioxide from the second period of the directive onwards , though on a voluntary basis .
Eighthly , limits are then defined , with fixed and non-negotiable penalties for non-compliance .
Lastly , I would like to draw your attention to the inclusion of benchmarking criteria for allocating emissions allowances among the Member States .
I feel , therefore , that the European emissions market has become more ambitious in environmental terms with this report . It is more effective economically , with lower risks of distortion of competition , and it is more compatible with other national policies currently in force .
I would like to conclude , then , by thanking the Council , and the Greek Presidency in particular , for its cooperation . I would like to thank the Commission , whose arbitration between Council and Commission was exemplary .
Most of all , I would like to thank my shadow rapporteurs , because I believe that without their cooperation and support , Parliament could not have remained united . And without Parliament 's unity , this agreement would not have been such a good one .
Mr President , Commissioner , I have always been passionately in favour of voluntary agreements , and I accept that we lost them at first reading stage .
That is why I am every bit as happy as you are about this marvellous package that Mr Moreira da Silva has put on the table after the most enormously hard work - something that I can confirm to my own group .
I think we are on the right track .
The reason why the compromise is so important is that , if we do not adopt it tomorrow , we will not know for some considerable time what will emerge from the conciliation procedure .
Apart from that , I am quite certain that we will then waste another year , and that is precisely what we do not want .
This really is about how future generations will live , and , although I am very keen on conciliation procedures , we should dispense with one and give the Council a great opportunity to follow where we lead .
On this issue , the Olympic spirit is not enough ; simply joining in is not on .
All the Member States must make the utmost effort ; even today , we can already see that some of them are having problems with this ' trend-line ' .
On that , Commissioner , I am again in agreement with you .
You must see to it that they all play their part .
Some will be able to do more than others ; there is no doubt about that , but they must all join in , and then we will get the right result .
I am , however , again astonished at how , silently and overnight , other sectors have been dropped from this directive .
That was a first-class demonstration of the Member States ' weakness and lack of courage when it came to developing an approach according to which both transport and personal house fires - such as we have in our own homes - would in future be covered by the Kyoto Protocol .
I would very much have liked that , but it presupposes very tough politicians - of which there do not seem to be that many in the Council .
I believe that we have made a good start by taking 1990 as the initial reference year , and I hope that , with joint implementation , and also with CDMs , we are on the right track .
Even though we have not yet precisely defined the package , I do believe that we will , tomorrow , adopt it by a large majority .
Many thanks , Mr Moreira da Silva .
Mr President , first of all , a word of thanks to Mr Moreira da Silva .
He has gone about his business with energy and tenacity .
An energetic step to achieve the Kyoto targets is now of major importance .
Uncertainty about Russian participation in Kyoto must not lead to paralysis .
Climate change has major economic and social consequences .
We must therefore take the steps to turn the tide now .
Pollution must now acquire a price and that is an important tool for the preservation of industry .
The PSE Group is in complete agreement with Mr Moreira da Silva 's desire to reach an agreement in the second reading and appreciates all the efforts that have been made to this end .
Unfortunately , we have to say that it has also been at the expense of our democratic procedures .
Not all of the amendments have received an equal amount of attention in the negotiations with the Council .
It is particularly disappointing for the PSE Group that the amendment on closures for instance failed to reach the finish line .
There was very broad support for this amendment in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
We saw in this amendment an important safeguard against improper closures .
Kyoto must not be allowed to be a reason for closing businesses or moving them to a different part of the world and then selling the emission rights .
This amendment was important for the employees in energy-intensive sectors .
We cannot skate over it too lightly .
Public support for a dynamic climate policy is sorely needed , because quite an effort is still going to be needed to achieve the Kyoto targets .
I call on the Council and the Commission in any event to take account of closures in the allocation plans .
In the event of closures the emission rights must be returned .
The PSE Group is entirely satisfied on other points .
We have always stressed that the system must also be fair and be experienced as fair .
This is why we do not want any ceiling that prejudices Member States that have expanded their industry in recent years .
We do however want a ceiling that slowly but surely brings Member States to reduce the emission of CO2 .
Nor do we want Member States that made an early start on innovation to be disadvantaged .
That too is an important point for us .
And finally , we do not want any superfluous bureaucracy .
The allocation of emission rights is already complicated enough .
We must not make it even more complicated by adding an auction for 5 % on top .
No one is served by an auction for 5 % and in this way we would also tend to stimulate overallocation .
In short , we are very satisfied with the outcome across the board and on this we congratulate Mr Moreira da Silva once more .
We call for attention for the social implications of this directive and the PSE Group calls on the Member States to take this into account in the allocation plans .
Mr President , Parliament can point to some real gains from the deal negotiated with the Council to fast-track this legislation and avoid the conciliation procedure .
We can claim to enclose a number of possible loopholes .
Member States will not be allowed to issue allowances that exceed their previously agreed targets , and they must not use the Kyoto mechanisms to avoid taking action to reduce emissions domestically .
We look forward to the Commission coming back with plans to bring other greenhouse gases into the scheme and to extend its scope to include other industries .
We await with keen anticipation the Commission 's proposals to reduce emissions from the transport sector .
Of course , we might have secured more , but speed is of the essence .
We want this scheme to succeed , and if Member States are to start meeting their targets they must publish national allocation plans by March 2004 .
Several Member States have expressed serious concern about this legislation and this has been reflected within all our political groups .
All those leading on the issue have faced a degree of resistance from some colleagues , but it is a tribute to the skill of our rapporteur that we have secured all-party support for this package .
It is also a reflection of our shared concerns .
When the Commissioner reflects on her term in office , she can take particular pride in the role she personally , and her team , played in securing support for the Kyoto Protocol .
But with emissions of greenhouse gases continuing to increase in most developed countries , we hope that this scheme can make a very significant difference .
I hope that it will enable the European Union to retain its credibility as the world 's leading force in pressing for action to curb global warming .
I hope also that it will send out a very clear signal about our determination , both to the United States and to Russia - particularly to Russia - whose ratification of the Protocol is so important .
Mr President , Commissioner , emission allowances are not naturally occurring phenomena and they have not been the result of human labour .
They represent an administratively allocated abstract right to pollute the atmosphere .
Emissions trading is not a market mechanism .
It serves to reallocate emissions among the polluters , but not reduce them .
The most despicable way of allocating emissions is by auctioning them .
Things could easily turn out the way they did when the radio spectra were auctioned off : the air space was bought and sold and all the operators ran into trouble .
We must not let that happen to European industry .
As the system covers just carbon dioxide emissions it will be free to release other pollutants into the atmosphere .
There are many questions the directive does not answer .
I will mention some of them .
The emission allowances are to be sold on the stock market .
Should an emission allowance , as a financial instrument , be regarded as being the equivalent of a share or an option ?
How will its sale or non-sale be taxed ?
How will emissions be recorded in company balance sheets ?
How will they be treated with regard to private individuals ' income and wealth taxation ?
Indeed , will private individuals also be able to buy them ?
We need to ask whether the EU will generally have the power to decide all these matters in a way that treats everyone in the same harmonised way .
Emissions trading will be done on the stock market and stock exchange activity always involves speculation .
There is a danger that the price of an emission allowance will be determined by speculators having no links with industry or any other source of emissions production .
Then industry in the Member States might fall victim to the mechanism proposed by the United States of America , in which US industry is not involved and profits and losses depend crucially on the first administrative allocation of emission allowances .
The Directive on emissions trading is a raw fruit , which should have been allowed to ripen longer .
There are many Members in our group who do not believe in the trading of emission allowances on the stock market .
Many Members , however , will vote in favour of the compromise amendments , because they are better than Parliament 's report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all my congratulations to Mr Moreira da Silva .
This is a very important directive , perhaps the most important one of these five years , and tomorrow it will be brought to a successful conclusion .
The opt out that Germany was so keen to see for entire sectors is explicitly no longer possible .
A heavy defeat for the Ministry for Economic Affairs and even for Chancellor Schröder .
Still more important is that next year the Commission will study seriously how transport sectors , with stress on the plural , can be brought under this directive .
And that is most sorely needed .
Both road traffic and air traffic are going too far .
All the internal air traffic within Europe will count for the achievement of the 8 % reduction .
Can the Commission confirm that it is working on a concrete proposal to bring air traffic within Europe under this directive ?
It is very important that we conclude tomorrow because that , as Mr Davies has already said , will give the right signal to both the Duma in Russia and the government and the opposition in the United States that this is a serious system .
This is the most efficient way of reducing CO2 and I do not therefore understand the GUE Group .
May I start by warmly congratulating not only Mr Moreira da Silva , but also the Commissioner and her officials , who really have pulled out all the stops to produce a good proposal .
This was an extremely controversial proposal .
There has been much weighing up of the pros and cons in many a European boardroom , in many Member States and therefore within the political groups as well .
How will this impact on our business ?
What will the options be for new investments in production capacity ?
What will an expansion cost if we have to purchase rights ?
And finally , what will the consequences be for the competitiveness of industries that are already finding it difficult , such as the refining industry , the chemical industry and the iron and steel industry ?
Mr President , what we seemed almost to have forgotten in the discussions was that we were all there when agreements were made in Kyoto and that this directive on emission trading was simply a good way of ensuring that the reduction tasks could be implemented in a very efficient manner .
That was the underlying intention of this proposal .
In other words , how to use an economic tool to serve the environment .
Trading in what one business has too much of and another too little .
The path to the compromise , which I otherwise support , was not an easy one .
The economic interests for European industry as a whole were great and a European approach to the problem therefore went without saying .
At the same time we had to put on record that a European approach was also very difficult because there were such great differences in starting positions , not only because the environment has been rather better implemented in one Member State than another , but also because the objectives of the Member States were so different .
Yet something good came out of it .
The political compromise takes the existing differences into account .
Agreements have been made for benchmarking and I am very happy with them , likewise with the Commission 's control of them .
It has also been agreed that the auctioning , in any event for the first but also for the second period , is allowed but is not compulsory .
Mr President , I appreciate what has been achieved , especially the benchmarking , and for that I thank my fellow Members , in particular Mr Blokland , and once again the rapporteur .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this directive is taking us down a new road .
Until now , we had used direct taxation as an instrument of environmental policy , and we could have done that here by specifying CO2 threshold values for certain types of plant .
Rather than do that , we have opted for indirect taxation via pricing , and , as one finds with indirect taxation , here too , our problem is that it sets off many side-effects that we had not initially wanted .
That being so , Commissioner , it is the Commission 's particular responsibility to take matters in hand as regards any such side-effects .
I will mention just three of them .
The first is that emissions trading may of course have an effect on enterprises ' balance sheets and end up being a factor in their shutting down production or moving it elsewhere .
That has nothing more to do with the protection of the environment ; it would be a purely commercial calculation .
This is where , as a principle , climate protection must , without doubt , be given priority over factory closures and the transfer of production .
The second question , Commissioner , is whether there are safeguards ensuring that emissions rights are indeed issued for the sake of climate protection and not as part of individual Member States ' policies on industry .
One of your core responsibilities is to check to see that they are issued in accordance with fair criteria and with the aim of reducing greenhouse gases that affect climate .
Thirdly , might it not also be the case that advantages in terms of comparative costs will lead to the indirect promotion of atomic energy ?
Here too , it is for the Commission to take responsibility for ensuring that no indirect impact is envisaged here .
I hope that you will have plenty of staff and plenty of courage to enable you , in the interests of workers , to discharge that responsibility .
Mr President , as our colleague , Mr Seppänen , said , our group is no supporter of the trade in emissions allowances , because we believe it may contribute to the imbalance between rich and poor countries , but we Members on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy do support Mr Moreira da Silva 's proposal , because it tries to establish stricter controls on this trade , restoring some of the amendments from first reading , which we believe to be important .
Despite this lack of enthusiasm , I hope that the rapporteur is right when he says that this trade will correct the situation of non-compliance on the part of the majority of Member States - my own country is perhaps one of the worst offenders - and contribute to teaching European companies in preparation for 2008 when the international trade comes into effect , and , most importantly of all , may convince the United States to comply with the Kyoto Protocol .
We agree with the rapporteur on the need to include the six greenhouse gases , although the common position only establishes that , as of 2008 , the Member States will be able to request their unilateral inclusion in the allowance trading system .
We believe it to be important that projects which relate to the mechanism for clean development and joint application should not be a replacement for prioritising emissions reductions , which must be achieved within the European Union .
In any event , the common position includes certain proposals from the European Parliament which we believe to be very important , such as , for example , the demand for greater transparency in the registers , in relation to the ownership of transfer and the cancellation of allowances , the obligation to publish the names of non-compliant operators and penalties imposed for non-compliance , which are now fixed .
Mr President , Commissioner , the vital importance of this directive in environmental and economic terms is clear .
The European market in emissions allowances will provide the Member States with an effective instrument within their climate change policies to close the gap between the true situation in the field of polluting emissions and compliance with the Kyoto commitments , while creating the best possible cost-benefit relationship .
The political importance of this directive is perhaps less obvious , but no less significant .
European environmental policy is moving on from words to actions , from rules and principles to practice , linking the economy to the environment .
This always creates uncertainty , resistance to change , apparent winners and losers and there is no doubt that this can be argued over , but I believe there are many more arguments to convince us , and to convince us that we are moving in the right direction , and to confirm that Europe , by means of directives such as this , is consolidating its determination to lead the process of achieving sustainable development .
In this case we must thank the rapporteur , Mr Moreira da Silva , for the excellent work he has done .
He has achieved agreements between positions which were initially very far apart and in the end we are going to avoid the need for conciliation by reaching an agreement with the Council which is satisfactory to both sides .
Personally , as he knows , I have been very critical and I have been a great nuisance to him over some of the amendments approved at first and second readings , above all those which seemed to me to impose excessively rigid conditions on the Member States for the application of the directive and which made it difficult for each State to find and define the best way to fulfil its objectives .
However , this agreement , which has been reached following long and difficult negotiations inside and outside Parliament and the Council , has lead to a much more open text , which is no less effective and is acceptable to everyone .
We needed a directive which was sufficiently flexible to allow the Member States to be able to adapt their requirements and operation to the characteristics of their national policies .
I believe it was a complicated task which has been successful .
Mr Moreira , I hope that tomorrow we will be able to congratulate you and take pleasure in having been able to successfully take such an important step towards practice in the environmental field .
Mr President , I would sincerely like to acknowledge all those who have been involved in creating this compromise , which we will vote on tomorrow .
It has been said several times here that after the first reading it was difficult to believe that we would get this far , that we would have a directive on emissions trading available to us whose content is sensible and rational in a way that makes it possible to be accepted from very different points of view .
We obviously have to remember that this is just one of the many ways we have to aim for a reduction in greenhouse gases .
If this way were not available to us , we would have to find another , but it has been seen and shown that this is a cost-effective scheme and in this sense it is good that it is to be introduced .
I wish to stress , however , that these last minute discussions and negotiations resulted in the unreasonable proposals that seemed to be included , such as a ceiling on national emission allowances , being taken out .
Moreover , the fact that auctioning is to be voluntary is excellent .
This way companies that have opted in will not be under strain .
In conclusion , my congratulations go to the rapporteur and all the others involved .
We still have a long road ahead of us in our endeavours to reach the Kyoto targets , but the compromises this report and this directive have achieved mean that we are a step further along the way .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my warm thanks to Mr Jorge Moreira as rapporteur .
He has fought with much energy , determination and expertise for a good and practical system of greenhouse gas emissions trading .
I would also like to thank the Commission for its strong support for such a system , but I have to be perfectly honest and say that I am disappointed with the Council .
I think we would have achieved more and could have got a better system if the Council and my own government in particular had been more constructive .
Unfortunately , some Member States , Germany among them , tried for a long time to torpedo the whole system and weaken it .
The upshot is that the compromise we now have is not as good as it might have been if everyone had sought a constructive solution from the outset .
I think some problems are inevitable unless great care is now taken with national implementation and monitoring by the Commission .
The aim of the system is to cut the costs of compliance with the Kyoto Protocol and - much more important - to create an incentive for undertakings to develop new ways of saving energy and greenhouse gases .
Market economics is a powerful system ; it is capable of opening up potential , if only we set the right conditions .
Market economics should also therefore be brought to bear on environmental protection , which is what this system seeks to do .
As I said , the Commission and the Member States now carry a heavy responsibility for implementation because the compromise is not as precise as Jorge Moreira and Parliament as a whole would have liked , but was watered down somewhat by the Council .
Now , some risk of over-allocation still remains and the Commission will have to watch things very carefully ; there is also still a risk of allocations being made that have no regard for the technical possibilities .
We all know that coal can very easily be replaced by gas or other energy sources , but it is not so easy to cut CO2 emissions for lime , cement and steel .
That must be taken into account when allowances are allocated , otherwise it will not be fair .
Mr President , it was quite remarkable how the Commission and Parliament were able to reach a tidy compromise under the providential leadership of the rapporteur , Mr Moreira da Silva .
I think it is also an expression of European identity , because climate policy has a good name in Europe .
May it continue to do so .
When it comes to emissions trading , we must be careful not to confuse two things .
Trading in emissions does not save one tonne of CO2 ; that is only saved by investment .
But emissions trading encourages investment , that is to say it triggers a search for the cheapest way of cutting CO2 .
It is also sensible from an economic point of view and industry and many government leaders , many of whom still find emissions trading strange , need to see that .

Secondly , Mr Seppänen - and , to some extent , Mr Lange as well - have rightly pointed out that a few questions are still unanswered .
For example , are emissions rights securities ?
How are they treated ?
These are questions for which an answer will probably have to be found in the future , at either national or European level .
As regards cost factors for undertakings , Mr Lange is quite right to say that undertakings ' balance sheets will probably look different in future than they do today , especially if CO2 costs more than it does today .
Today it costs EUR 5 to EUR 6 a tonne .
Once it costs EUR 20 to 30 a tonne , the picture will be quite different and will naturally have effects on energy policy .
Let us hope that these will be the ones we are looking for , namely cuts in CO2 .
Mr President , the unanimous sign-off of this emissions trading directive in December 2002 at the Council of Ministers was a major wake-up call to corporate Europe and a signal that this was actually going to happen .
Quite frankly , I do not think they believed it up to that point .
I extend my sincere thanks to the rapporteur , my colleague , Mr Moreira Da Silva , for the enormous body of work that he did in bringing all of us to where we are today .
Ireland has one of the worst records , second only to Spain , for greenhouse gas emissions .
National emissions allowance capping will ensure that quantifiable Kyoto objectives are met and that we decouple economic growth from increased greenhouse gas emissions .
National allocations will have to be linearly convergent with the Kyoto Protocol .
The national cap on allowances can start from the 2003 emissions level and not from that of 1990 , provided that the allowances are decreased to the Kyoto figure by 2012 .
Amendment No 43 is very important as it allows Member States to benchmark the best available technology for allowance allocation .
This should ensure that one-off , economically-vital industries can be looked after in a Member State .
The force majeure provision is also necessary until a liquid trading market emerges .
It is critical to secure the viability of the emissions trading market in the short term if it is to survive in the longer term .
In particular , a situation where , as a result of market design , allowance prices significantly exceeded the long-run marginal cost of abatement within the EU and approached the penalty price would be unsustainable .
It is appropriate that provisions be made to deal with unforeseen circumstances during the pilot period of 2005 to 2007 .
In the absence of market management mechanisms and taking into account the risks involved , the current force majeure clause could provide flexibility for Member States to cope with unforeseen events such as market failure , and avoid serious economic shocks .
Definition by the Commission of the circumstances under which it may be applied is appropriate and desirable for Member States in advance of them preparing their national allocation plans .
In conclusion , the provision for banking 2005 to 2007 surplus allowances into the 2008 to 2012 period effectively reduces the number of allowances available for allocation in that period and will act as a constraint on Member States in applying force majeure .
Nonetheless , given the large uncertainties and the major risks involved , the provision for force majeure must be retained .
Mr President , it is hard to imagine any other report that would have so great an impact on the state of things in Europe and about which the decision-makers know so little .
Europe is now moving into unfamiliar territory .
Even theoretical research on the effects of emissions trading exists in name only .
When two or three years ago we had the Commission proposal before us , it started to become clear how enormous the gaps were in the proposal upon which we had been building a European strategy for the economy , competition and the environment .
There was no appraisal made of the impact of enlargement , no guidance given about how emission allowances could be accounted for in companies ' books , no information regarding value added tax , not even a strategy in case of serious market problems or speculative attacks , no precise data on emissions in Member States , let alone emissions in companies , and no proposal regarding rights of appeal .
It is regrettable that we had such an incomplete proposal on such a major issue .
Much has been done to put things right , but whether or not we succeeded remains to be seen .
The ' trendline cap ' problem in Trilog was solved with a formulation proposed by the Commission that allows Member States to approach the Kyoto targets along their own paths .
In being allowed room to move , Member States are also being encouraged to embrace a transport policy that is more responsible in terms of the Kyoto Agreement .
That of course is our real problem .
Trilog 's solution for project-based mechanisms should also be supported .
There is no sense in setting more stringent criteria than was agreed at Marrakech .
We need , rather , to establish EU rules concerning how converting the emission allowance credits earned from project-based mechanisms into marketable emission allowances can take place without the climate change imperative being compromised .
The emission allowance credits earned from the project-based mechanisms will also have an interesting impact on development cooperation .
I believe Member States will become much more interested in development cooperation , because they will see the chance to earn emission allowance credits with projects .
Combined heat and power production and process emissions posed a special problem in connection with emissions trading .
If the causal chain associated with the nature of CHP is not taken into account , there will not be any reductions in emissions either .
Now Trilog is discovering and acknowledging the special nature of CHP .
Member States can take the potential for a reduction in process emissions into account , which in practice means that the best European steel factories can earn their full emission allowance quotas and they will not have to bear additional costs in a world steel market that has been fiercely competitive .
That means the risk of carbon leaks will diminish and there really will be an increased chance of preventing climate change .
. Mr President , firstly , I am totally convinced that the issue of climate change will follow not only us but generations to come , and it will become more and more difficult and we will have to be more and more ambitious in order to meet this enormous challenge to human life on this planet .
This issue will not go away and we will have to deal with it and find solutions .
I am also convinced that we will need all the different tools we can find : legislation , as well as voluntary agreements and market-based instruments , like this one .
That is also why it is important that we take the initiative and try this out .
We have studied carefully the experience already gained with sulphur trading in the US and we have conducted studies .
We have also prepared in a prudent way the start of an emissions trading system in Europe .
I shall just comment on two things that were mentioned .
Firstly , the treatment of allowances .
Allowances will be a tradable commodity , just like many other tradable commodities , and it is not different just because it stems from an environmental policy .
It will be subject to existing taxation legislation in the Union - not different from any other area .
On transport , we wanted to start with large , fixed-point installations , whose emissions can be feasibly monitored .
The transport sector consists of many small diffuse sources that we thought would be difficult to monitor , administer and control .
This has been important in designing this proposal , but we accept that transport also has to be subject of action when it comes to reducing the greenhouse gas emissions .
We are happy to look at how this area can also be covered .
This is now part of this compromise package .
Under the text of the directive , the Commission is committed to researching how the transport sector could be brought into the scheme .
We will also come back on other issues , as you know , which are in the pipeline to link them to joint implementation and the other flexible mechanisms as well .
We will also come back on these issues .
Mr President , I have asked the Commission in Dutch and in English whether it will include aeroplanes in this .
It can be easily measured using data from only a few take-offs .
Commissioner , can you answer ' yes ' or ' no ' as to whether you intend to do this ?
Could you please answer this question ?
. Mr President , in answer to that question , of course we will see what we can do on air transport also , but we do not have any ready-made plans .
As you know we are trying to work in international fora to address this problem .
It is already a part of the discussion under the Kyoto Protocol and we will now have to follow up and see what we can do in order to address the whole transport sector .
Of course we will also have to look at what it is possible to do regarding air transport .
We do not have any ready-made proposals or a set date which we can present to you .
However , we will do our best to also address air transport .
Thank you very much for that additional information .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
. ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , despite the lateness of the hour there is a problem we would like to broach .
This is what we tend to think of in Dutch as ' bloated chickens ' .
It is currently legal to fill chickens with water .
It is possible to add 30 % , 40 % , 55 % water to these chickens .
The problem is that to keep them looking a little like chickens proteins are then added to these chickens , proteins from offal , from chicken meat that is supplemented with pig proteins and with cow proteins .
This happens in particular in Dutch companies and this chicken meat , if you can still call it chicken meat , is then sold in the UK as Halal to the Muslims and Kosher to the Jews .
This is unacceptable and this was emphasised in a BBC documentary .
I know that the Commission will propose labelling : ' chicken with pork ' or ' chicken with beef ' . But the problem is that with modern DNA techniques it is very easy to rub out the DNA of these chickens , the DNA of this beef and pork so that the British are unable to prove that it contains anything other than chicken .
We therefore propose simply banning it : no water may be added to this chicken .
The UK Food Standards Agency has proposed the addition of no more than 15 % water .
What is your response to this ?
.
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Lucas , Mr Lannoye and Mr de Roo for tabling a question on adding water and protein to chicken meat .
In May 2002 the Irish and British authorities published the first worrying results of their investigations concerning chicken breasts imported from the Netherlands and intended for the catering industry .
The results published by the same authorities on 12 May 2003 , show that the problem remains .
The practice of artificially increasing the weight of meat by the addition of protein and water - in some cases up to 40 % or 50 % water in the final product - in order to mislead the purchaser is despicable .
It appears that purchasers and , by association , consumers are being misled on three counts .
First , the labelling of the product may lead to the assumption that it is fresh poultry meat , when it is clearly not .
Second , some products have been labelled as Halal despite containing pig as well as other animal proteins .
Third , the meat contents expressed have been overstated .
Enforcement and possible sanctions arising from the infringements of legislation relating to the labelling of foodstuffs and unfair practices are the responsibility of Member States .
According to the information transmitted by the Irish and British authorities , the chicken products concerned are in the main manufactured in the Netherlands .
That does not mean that there is no other country concerned with this issue .
I have asked Member States to strengthen their controls and reinforce their cooperation .
Fraud appears when you are looking for fraud .
As regards the letter from the Dutch authorities of July 2002 , I have , along with my colleague Commissioner Fischler requested more information from the Dutch authorities about the measures taken and the origin of the protein .
In March of this year the Dutch authorities undertook to ensure that these products were correctly labelled .
However , inspection results from the UK and Irish authorities indicate that the problem of fraudulent labelling continues to exist .
I have therefore asked the Member States to improve collaboration between national authorities and to strengthen the controls .
Furthermore , I have decided that there is a need to improve the labelling requirements for chicken and other meat preparations .
The Commission will propose to Member States in the food chain committee to include an explicit mention , for instance , of chicken preparation with added water , on the food label .
The standing committee on the food chain and animal health composed of representatives of Member States welcomed this suggestion at its meeting on 8 April 2003 .
The technical discussion will continue during the next committee meetings .
I have also asked my services to consider the development of standards for meat preparations that would limit the amount of water that can be added to such products and the use of animal proteins for the purpose of bulking .
Your suggestion to indicate chicken meat containing beef or chicken meat containing pig is one that will be examined along with the possibility of banning the use of such proteins in poultry meat preparations .
As regards the detection of the addition of pork or beef protein following enzymatic treatment to destroy the DNA , this will be examined by the Commission Services with the experts from the Member States .
In addition , it is important to emphasise that other control methods , including documentary checks , should be used to check the origin and traceability of products .
Mr President , I associate myself with everything Mr de Roo has said , and his outrage at these events is shared by many in the United Kingdom , which is the principal destination for these adulterated products .
I would like to press the Commissioner further .
Since chicken at the moment can be legally sold when it is 55 % water and is adulterated by other proteins which the perpetrators of this scam boast is PCR negative and , therefore , cannot be detected by most tests , is it not the case that there should be a more direct form of action from the Commission ?
The FSA in Britain has now proposed , through Sir John Krebs , its chairman , that we should set a limit of 15 % for the water content of what is labelled and sold as chicken .
He has further said that at that level the addition of these proteins - which intended to sustain the holding capacity of a much larger proportion of water - would therefore become unnecessary .
It is still the case , however , that many of those who are at the moment exporting these tainted products will continue to attempt to evade legal provisions and checks .
I would like to hear from the Commission that it will intervene not merely by recommending better labelling and better testing - though , of course , we need that - but by taking action to outlaw these activities , which are a total fraud on the public and are likely in one respect to cause serious concern , because the injection of beef protein - which the perpetrators admit has come from countries where there is BSE , and they have not tested the products for that - may cause serious public concern as well .
This is a matter that has outraged the United Kingdom and many others .
We need improved testing , but we need direct intervention here from the Commission , and I am confident that we will get it .
.
In response to the questions that have been put to me by Mr Whitehead and Mrs Wallis , let me repeat what I said earlier : I have asked my services to consider the development of standards for meat preparations that would limit the amount of water that could be added to such products and indeed the use of animal proteins for the purpose of bulking .
My intention is to analyse the work that has been undertaken by my services , to determine what further work can be done .
I agree , to some extent , that labelling may not be sufficient .
I , like you , have also watched that television programme .
I found that some of the labelling that was identified in the programme indicated that the particular product was 65 % chicken .
It raises a question for the consumer : what is the other 35 % ?
We have spent a great deal of time in this Chamber debating - as we did this afternoon - questions relating to GMOs and the labelling of GMOs .
But it requires some degree of vigilance from consumers : they must read these labels and draw appropriate conclusions .
Having said that , this does not relieve us from examining the appropriate responses to situations such as this and seeking a more satisfactory response .
As I said earlier , in my original answer , I am looking at this .
However , I also appeal for some consumer vigilance as a response to the work that we do here in relation to labelling .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The next item is the report ( A5-0240 / 2003 ) by Mr Mulder , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the 2004 budget in view of the conciliation procedure before the Council 's first reading [ 2003 / 2027 ( BUD ) ] .
Before giving the floor to our rapporteur and to those Members who have been placed on the agenda , I remind you that it is 11.40 p.m.
We have a very large number of speakers and this is not the last debate on the agenda .
I therefore ask you all to respect your speaking times .
. ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to repeat what I said on a previous occasion .
One of the main objectives of the 2004 budget will be the smoothest possible integration of the new Member States .
We shall therefore be spending the whole year working on a budget for probably 25 Member States and on this basis we shall be taking a political decision in December .
In this report we speak of the position that Parliament must take in the conciliation procedure and a number of main subjects traditionally have a part to play in first reading conciliation .
First of all we have agriculture .
The margin of 1.4 billion currently calculated is positive , but all the items in the agriculture budget are based on a dollar-euro rate of 1.07 .
This is probably on the low side and so we are also looking to the letter of amendment at the end of October , which will also contain the conclusions of the agricultural negotiations in Luxembourg .
What are the financial consequences of this rate ?
Apart from this point , Parliament has set a number of priorities for the agriculture budget in the form of pilot projects or preparatory actions .
In the first place we think that , given the number of outbreaks of infectious animal diseases in the last ten years , there is a great burden on the agriculture budget .
In future the agriculture budget will not have the margins that it has had in the past .
We therefore think that very serious thought must be given to some form or other of insurance system against infectious animal diseases and some or other European animal disease fund will have to be created .
We want to make a start on this .
Secondly , future payments to farmers will be based not only on historical actions , but also on the environment , method , on cross-compliance : one good turn deserves another .
All well and good , but these environmental indicators are not all that precise .
Mrs Wallström has unfortunately disappeared , but there is much to say about the nitrate directive . Something has to be done about that .
Other points that we consider important are the development of better vaccines against infectious animal diseases and a quality policy for agricultural products .
As for fisheries , the most important point is that the Council , which regrettably is very sparingly present this evening , must as soon as possible take a position with regard to the financing of the reforms that were agreed in December of last year , in particular with regard to the scrapping fund that is mentioned therein .
We think that in principle credits must be made available for this .
Otherwise better control of the quota and more research into fish stocks are the main points for us .
Common foreign and security policy . The Council promised to give Parliament information about this policy as of 15 June .
This information had not arrived by the time of the printing of this resolution .
I understand that it was handed over here just an hour ago .
We shall be examining it closely .
We think that we should be informed about everything , not only about the actions , but also about the budget of the European Parliament , as well as about the budgets of the Member States themselves .
Both are communicating vessels and cannot be seen separately from one another .
As regards the structural funds , we think that the N + 2 rule must be applied .
We also think it interesting to hear precisely what the estimates have been that are given to the Commission by the Member States each year so that the Commission can draft a good budget .
It is always interesting to make this comparison .
We should like to have this information from the Commission .
Another important point for this budget : we want to promote economic development in the new Member States .
We think that this can for example be done through the promotion of small and medium-sized enterprises and through investments in these new Member States .
We are therefore expecting good cooperation with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development in London and with the European Investment Fund in Luxembourg .
We shall be raising this as well .
I do have a number of other points , Mr President , but since you , given the lateness of the hour , were so insistent that I keep to my time , this I shall do .
Perhaps the position of the Parliament will emerge later in the resolution itself .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission adopted the preliminary draft budget for 2004 - a historic budget that will , for the first time , cover an EU of 25 Member States - on 30 April and I presented the preliminary draft here in plenary session on 13 May .
Tomorrow we will begin the trilogue , that is to say , the actual negotiations .
This trilogue traditionally concentrates on expenditure for the agricultural , fisheries and common foreign and security policies , the compulsory expenditure .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Mulder , for his comments .
I will not discuss all the points in the report right now - for reasons of time and because talks are continuing today and tomorrow .
I would like to begin by noting an important point of agreement ; this is that we want to reach agreement on the budget for 25 Member States by December 2003 .
Although the budget resolution can for the time being only be adopted formally for the budget for the EU of the 15 , there should be complete agreement on the amending and supplementary budget for the 10 new states in December .
Adjustment of the multi-annual programmes is also important in the light of enlargement .
The Commission has made a proposal for the adjustment of the amounts , and this is now the subject of intensive discussions in the various parliamentary committees .
It is , however , important that we settle the procedural questions now so that agreement can then be reached on the amounts and the legislative changes can be made as quickly as possible .
With regard to the pending legislative procedures , I would like to return briefly to the legal basis for granting support to various institutions - the A-30 lines .
This is also extremely urgent and I am hoping that the Council will deal with it quickly .
Now a brief word on the various areas of expenditure that will be the subject of the trilogue and which Mr Mulder raised .
In October , the Commission will as usual be presenting the adjusted expenditure estimates for agriculture , which will of course take into account the outcome of the Luxembourg agricultural compromise , which contains higher expenditure for 2004 than that suggested by the Commission .
So far as the proposal for insurance for farmers against various risks is concerned , the Commission has commissioned a study of the matter and I am informed that the findings will probably be available this summer .
The Commission will then make the conclusions known and I hope I will be able to tell you more at Parliament 's first reading .
If I may turn to expenditure for fisheries , cuts have been made here only in the area of research , and this was the outcome of the negotiations on the Sixth Framework Research Programme , in which Parliament was involved .
EUR 55 million are now available for fisheries research .
Regarding the fisheries agreements themselves , the Commission has informed Parliament about renegotiations and the estimated costs and here , too , we shall be looking at how far the amounts provided will need to be modified in a letter of amendment in October .
The Commission has proposed an increase of 8.4 % in the budget line for the common foreign and security policy , in order , among other things , to again fund the expenditure for the special envoys from this budget line .
A brief word about pilot projects and preparatory actions ; you say in your report , Mr Mulder , that the margin of EUR 80 million is not very great .
I am actually proud to have been able to rescue the EUR 80 million margin , given the various things my colleagues wanted in this category .
If we make good use of this area for pilot projects and preparatory actions and cooperate as closely as we did last year , I think it will be possible to agree on good projects here .
I would also like to say something about the Structural Funds , which you mentioned , and the Member States ' predictions of how much money they will require next year .
We are faced here with the usual situation that the Member States estimate a very much higher amount than we have provided for in the proposal .
The Member States say they will need EUR 6.2 billion more .
But I would like to point out that last year , 2002 , the Member States ' estimates were 70 % higher than the amount that was actually taken up .
Let me finally speak about the question of the number of posts at the Commission .
I think it is clear that the Commission can cope with the work involved with ten new Member States only if it has more staff .
It is in all our interests , and especially of course in the interests of the new Member States , that the work is done and that it is done well .
Since all the institutions are making successful enlargement a matter of the highest priority , I am confident that a good solution will be found here , too .
. ( NL ) As rapporteur for the budget in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I am well aware that the budget consultation procedure between Council , Commission and Parliament traditionally focuses on three specific areas , that is agriculture , fisheries and the common foreign and security policy .
As regards the latter I can fully support the three positions that are underlined in the Mulder report .
Since the budget for external policy is approximately EUR 5 billion and that for the common foreign and security policy EUR 40 million , our committee wanted to focus attention on a number of other points than common foreign and security policy .
First of all the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy seeks further clarification from the European Commission on the financial framework for the southeastern Europe region for the period 2004-2006 .
Although the European Commission has recently promised an additional EUR 200 million , it is still very unclear precisely where this money is to come from .
Secondly , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy is also seeking special attention for the EU police mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Although the mission is being conducted more than adequately , we are receiving various signals that necessary materiel is sometimes being supplied too late or not at all .
Finally , our committee is seeking special attention for the additional financial needs of the wider Europe initiative .
Provision must be made for adequate resources for the CARDS , MEDA and TACIS programmes and possibly also for a new neighbourliness tool .
It gives me great pleasure that the Committee on Budgets has taken up this and other recommendations and I should like to compliment Mr Mulder on his clear and powerful report and wish him every success in the tripartite talks .
. ( NL ) Mr President , I should like to echo the compliments for Mr Mulder 's report and input .
In much of it we recognise ourselves as the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , but at the same time we note that the credits for agriculture and rural development are falling sharply in the 2004 budget .
For agriculture alone the share is falling from 40 % to 36 % , while there is a slight increase for rural development .
In its policy plans the European Commission says that agriculture must produce with a greater market focus , but at the same time any incentive to do so in the budget is being taken away .
It is not really acceptable that the amount for the promotion of agricultural products for example has been reduced in the preliminary draft budget for 2004 .

In addition - as Mr Mulder himself has said - the dollar rate is a great risk : a rate of EUR 1.07 is being assumed and that is substantially lower than the current rate .
The question is what that could mean for the budget in the long term .
There has also , despite a number of outbreaks of major animal diseases , been almost no extra money set aside for possible future outbreaks .
At the same time we have started on a different policy for outbreaks of animal diseases , for example the new policy for foot and mouth disease .
This means that in the event of future outbreaks the Commission might spend far less money on slaughter .
As the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development we should like to see this money being set aside to cushion the market consequences for farmers who at the time are vaccinating without the animals being slaughtered , but who experience the consequences of this , that is lower market prices .
This is also the first budget for the Union of 25 Member States and in fact it is very strange that , converted to the structural funds , there is still less money available per head of population for the new Member States than for a number of existing Member States .
To summarise , Mr President , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development thinks that the money that is to be spent on rural development , in particular in the new Member States , must be expressly intended for strengthening the small and medium-sized enterprises in rural areas .
There must be extra money for the promotion of agricultural products that meet all the food safety , animal welfare and environmental requirements and money must be set aside , perhaps through fund formation , for cushioning the effects of a different vaccination policy for animal diseases .
. ( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Schreyer , ladies and gentlemen , EUR 32 million are needed .
Who can help ?
Mr Mulder is willing , who else ?
The Commission or the Council perhaps ?
Every year we go through the rigmarole of the budget procedure again and unfortunately not everyone 's wishes can be met .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Fisheries , I naturally also regret that our wishes do not necessarily have top priority .
The 2004 budget procedure is , however , unusual in two respects .
Firstly , it is the first one to be drawn up using activity-based budgeting ; this is an improvement that I very much welcome , since it gives us a clear overview without having to spend a lot of time leafing through the budget lines , especially in the area of fisheries .
Secondly , we are faced with the unusual situation that from 1 January 2004 until 30 April 2004 the budget will apply to the present 15 Member States , but from 1 May 2004 , the date of accession of ten new countries , it will apply to 25 Member States .
We are enlarging and have still not done our homework .
The situation is alarming .
In the light of the catastrophic state of fish stocks , last December the Council agreed , after much dragging of feet , to the reform of the common fisheries policy , not least because of clear promptings from Parliament .
One of the most important features of this was the creation of a ' scrapping fund ' , which was to start before the end of this year .
So far , however , the Council has not given the green light for the use of the flexibility instrument .
That is hard to understand .
I therefore call urgently for this point to be raised in the conciliation procedure beginning on 16 July , so that we can at least learn what position the Council takes on financing reform of the common fisheries policy .
I am by no means releasing the Member States from their responsibility .
But we cannot allow the Council to use the Member States ' unwillingness to provide the relevant information as an excuse for blocking one of the main purposes of the reform .
Please give us your support .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are attending this debate on budgets at this late hour more than anything else in order to accompany the general rapporteur , Mr Mulder , so that he may feel accompanied and supported by the political groups in this House , with a view to the conciliation which is going to take place on 16 July .
I would like to say that our group , the PPE-DE , fully supports the strategy laid out by the general rapporteur with a view to the conciliation with the other two institutions .
We believe that this first conciliation is of great importance , given that it is the first real exchange of requests and strategies between the three institutions , and I therefore believe we have proposed a conciliation strategy which will be particularly useful and beneficial to the interests of the European Parliament and of the European citizens in general , which is the reason why we are here .
From this strategy which we are taking to the conciliation , the report by Mr Mulder , I simply wanted to highlight certain points which are the subjects of our group 's amendments .
In particular , with regard to fisheries , we have heard the explanations given us by the rapporteur on budgets of the Committee on Fisheries , Mrs Langenhagen , and we fully agree with them .
We believe that the Council must fulfil the commitments which were established for the financing of this scrapping fund , not only in 2003 , but also in 2004 , and that is why we are proposing amendments to the Färm report and also the Mulder report , although we know that they will possibly not be accepted by some of the groups in this House .
We attach so much importance to this that the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries will form an integral part of the delegation from our group which will go to the budget conciliation , because we want to stress how important the issue of fisheries commitments is to the Committee on Fisheries , to Parliament in general and to our political group .
Finally , another issue which we wish to highlight is the application of the N + 2 rule , which has been discussed earlier .
Our argument - and this is expressed in our amendment - is that there is a need for an assessment .
We believe we are at the beginning of the process of applying the N + 2 rule and , therefore , rather than making value judgments about what approximation the Commission should carry out in the application of this rule , what really interests us is to be given an assessment of how it is being applied , what the initial results are and , on that basis , to produce a common strategy in this Parliament on the application of the N + 2 rule on the part of the Commission in the Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to begin by thanking our rapporteur , Mr Mulder , for his outstanding success in bringing together the interests of the committee and also in taking up the matters which are necessary for the conciliation procedure ahead and resisting the temptation to rewrite all the guidelines we wrote earlier this year .
This is a report that is very cogent , very concentrated and which we very much support and welcome .
The procedure which we shall now be entering in the next three weeks with the Council and the Commission will continue to exist for a short time .
We hope , however , that it will soon be a thing of the past .
If the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure were no longer made - and there is much in the Convention to suggest it will not be - then something Parliament has been advocating for many years would actually become reality and we would no longer need this advance mediation .
That would be a good development and I hope we shall see it .
Now to the individual points .
So far as agriculture is concerned , a number of matters are raised here .
I want to concentrate on a number of questions .
First , the move to increase support for rural areas provided that there is a stronger focus on those areas in the new Member States than we had in the EU of the 15 ; we expressly welcome this .
In view of the current debates - in Poland in particular , where ministers have resigned because they are evidently missing the opportunity to actually create the structures there that will allow the money to be used properly - I believe that all states must understand that no money can flow if the relevant structures are not in place .
That must be made abundantly clear , and we shall be watching to see that the money is used according to the rules .
All we can do is urge that the foundations be laid for it here .
So far as insurance against eventualities such as disasters in agriculture is concerned , we are willing to look very closely at the survey and the expert report .
Some Member States already have voluntary insurance for such contingencies .
They would of course be penalised if the European taxpayer were to be called upon to cover these things elsewhere .
We will examine this without prejudice and we are willing to act , but we will of course not go blundering blindly into anything either , because we have to know what the long-term consequences might be .
So far as fisheries are concerned , I heard very clearly what Mrs Langenhagen had to say and we have always been prepared to support fisheries and the scrapping of ships where necessary .
We are not , however , going to write any blank cheques , and we are not going to give a few million euros away in advance for a programme that has not been finally evaluated and on which the Council has not taken a position .
We will do the same as we have done with other programmes in the past , such as scrapping in Portugal and Spain .
In those cases , we wanted to have the full programme first and we said we would evaluate it and would then say how much would be made available for it .
We will proceed no differently in this connection than we did with the Portuguese and the Spanish , even though we are now looking at other regions of Europe .
We are in favour of increases on the common foreign and security policy .
I would point out once again , however , that cooperation in peacekeeping is more than just peace enforcement as provided for in the Petersberg tasks of common foreign and security policy ; it is also conflict prevention , and we do not support the envisaged reduction in appropriations .
In this matter , we want to continue as before .
Prevention is better than having to use military means to clear up afterwards .
Finally , let me say something about the question of payment .
The N + 2 rule was introduced by us all and there was a point to it .
Wanting to check whether it is right at this stage , before it has really come into play for the first time , is quite out of order .
This N + 2 rule must be applied , and those who fail to spend their money accordingly must know that there are consequences .
Showing them a way out at this early stage would amount to killing the N + 2 rule and we will not go along with that .
Mr President , the report before us on the conciliation procedure with regard to the 2004 budget presents a good picture of Parliament 's main areas of focus .
I want to thank Mr Jan Mulder , as a member of my own group and as general rapporteur , for an excellent report .
Next year 's budget is legally problematic , as for the first four months the EU will be a community of 15 Member States , but will expand to comprise 25 Member States from the beginning of May .
Because each Member State has to be able to participate in decision-making affecting itself , the budget for the enlarged Union cannot be finalised until after enlargement .
The budget 's principles of universality and annuality , however , require that it should be drawn up immediately for the whole year .
For that reason the solution sought , where the budget will be dealt with , as appropriate , in December , with the part that concerns the new Member States not being finalised until there is an Amending Budget next May , is the proper way to proceed .
The budget has also now been clearly presented as an activity-based one .
This will clearly separate operational expenditure , administrative costs and responsibility for implementation for each policy area .
This is an excellent reform .
It will increase the budget 's information value and facilitate its monitoring .
This system , however , should be improved , for example by including all administrative expenditure in the budget for each policy area , as the report points out .
The biggest weakness in the preliminary draft budget is the meagre amounts for payment appropriations .
They represent just 0.99 % of the Gross National Income of the Member States , which is the lowest they have been for 17 years .
At the same time outstanding commitments have skyrocketed and at present are reaching the EUR 126 billion mark .
This is an increase of EUR 15.4 billion on last year .
If we want to achieve a balance in EU budget policy , commitments and payments have to be balanced .
This will mean improvements in administration and simplified systems at all levels .
I wish my friend , Mr Mulder , every success with the rest of the work .
Mr President , on the eve of enlargement and half-way through the financial year , cooperation before the Council 's first reading takes on special importance .
I concur in general terms with a large proportion of the rapporteur 's quantitative analysis of the amounts suggested by the Commission in its preliminary draft .
Even so , I want to take this opportunity to mention a deep and widespread concern at the fact that the preliminary draft budget for 2004 is the smallest , in relative terms , since 1987 .
It represents less than 1 % of the Community 's gross domestic income , and I want to point out that such a low level of expenditure is utterly incompatible with the political ambitions so often claimed for the European Union . It is also incompatible with the ambitions which should be priorities in the current climate of rising unemployment and socio-economic recession .
There is a logic of constraint , stemming in particular from the Stability Pact , with which we are not in agreement , just as we are not in agreement with the systematic budget reductions made perfectly obvious by the rapporteur 's insistence on the restricted application of the ' N + 2 ' rule .
The cancelling of authorisations and the policy of redistributing and anticipating expenses underpin this restrictive logic . These practices have not only become common : they also detract from the integrity and transparency of the budgetary process .
That is why I can only restate the need for new financial approaches as one way of resolving this situation , which is totally unsustainable .
Mr President , Europe finds itself in economically heavy weather .
All the Member States are having to tighten their belts , the European Union likewise therefore .
Apart from the fact that the 2004 budget is dominated by the accession of an expected ten new Member States , we shall be using the activity-based budgeting tool for the first time .
I want to ensure that the expenditure on administrative management is kept to the minimum possible .
As has already been said , the Commission has based the expenditure on agriculture on too low a euro-dollar rate .
Can the Commission give an indication of the expenditure at the current exchange rate ?
I support Amendment No 2 to increase the resources for the fishing vessels scrapping fund .
The Commission must then however exclude any form of capacity expansion or subsidisation from the structural funds , otherwise it is just banging your head against a brick wall .
The drop in the structural funds for the current Member States I applaud .
Strict application of the N + 2 rule is necessary , otherwise the reservoir of commitments will endure artificially .
Given enlargement this cannot occur .
Amendment No 4 does not therefore warrant any support .
. ( DE ) Mr President , I would just like to come back to the remark made by the previous speaker , Mr Walter .
He compares the EUR 32 million called for with a sum of money we once paid to Portugal and Spain and with which we now want to assist a few other states .
That is not the case .
This money is for the entire European Union .
That can be checked in the Minutes and , at the Commission 's suggestion , it will be made available only if the Council is willing , because it has agreed to the fisheries policy reform .
I just wanted to make that correction .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0233 / 2003 ) by Mr Färm , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the 2003 budget : implementation profile , transfers of appropriations and supplementary and amending budgets [ 2003 / 2026 ( BUD ) ] .
Mr President , a successful budgetary policy for the EU requires not only decisions on figures and budget items , for the EU has serious problems when it comes to implementing the budget .
An important part of Parliament 's budget policy must therefore be about follow-up and evaluation and keeping track of the implementation of the budget .
It is therefore very important that we give due weight to the annual report , which we are debating today , on the implementation of the budget .
There are a number of matters of particular concern to us this year , for example , outstanding commitments .
After four months of 2003 , total outstanding commitments - known as RAL - had increased to EUR 126 billion , compared with EUR 110 billion at the same time last year .
Even though we do not have all the facts concerning the causes of this and concerning what are in actual fact abnormal outstanding commitments , the trend is clearly worrying .
We are also concerned about the 2002 surplus of EUR 7.4 billion , even though it is an advance , given that , last year , it was more than double this at EUR 15 billion .
We nonetheless still have underutilisation to the tune of EUR 9 billion , which is an unacceptable figure .
In the case of the 2003 implementation , the beginning of the year even shows a lower level than during the same period of 2002 ; in particular , category 3 and 4 commitments entered into in April were lower than at the same time last year .
There are a whole lot of different problems .
The recent visit of our delegation to Bosnia , like a host of other contacts , also makes us worry that a lack of information about the new budgetary arrangements may have caused problems , for example for the external delegations .
It can have negative effects upon the benefits , in terms of efficiency , of the reform process and of decentralisation .
We also saw a number of problems within the common foreign and security policy in connection , for example , with the EU 's police mission in Bosnia where tenders , contracts etc were concerned .
On this subject , we believe that the Commission should investigate whether separate rules might not be needed to adapt our measures within the common foreign and security policy .
Within the separate expenditure categories , we are still critical of the way in which export subsidies for the transport of live animals are dealt with .
We regret that the Council did not accept our proposal concerning the account plan , which would have made the system significantly more open to inspection .
We must therefore make a new attempt this year .
Because I do not just want to be critical , we can also observe that , for example , rural policy in actual fact exceeds our expectations when it comes to implementation .
What most concern us , however , are the structural measures .
The proportion of implemented payments in this area has declined during the first months of the year in spite of the tough criticism in previous years .
We are also anxious about the increase in outstanding commitments , which rose to almost EUR 94 billion as per 30 April 2003 - an incredible sum !
Where this is concerned , something new needs to happen .
Quite a few fellow MEPs have mentioned the N + 2 rule , which we must arrange to be applied effectively .
When it comes to the structural funds , we are delighted about the simplification process begun by the Commission .
We nonetheless believe that it needs to become significantly more vigorous within the current arrangements but , above all , the preparations for a more thorough review prior to the new arrangements must be set in motion quickly .
In category 3 , we are a little concerned about research and development .
We are , on the other hand , pleased that there is a positive trend , prior to enlargement , when it comes to the programmes for small and medium-sized businesses , as well as for the pilot project concerning small and medium-sized businesses .
We also welcome the fact that pilot projects and preparatory measures are now part of the implementation plan for 2003 , on which we agreed last autumn .
Where external measures were concerned , there was clearly less implementation in April of this year than for the same period of 2002 , and this is something that concerns us .
On the other hand , we are pleased about the prompt agreement to activate EUR 79 million from the disaster aid reserve for Iraq , as well as about the new proposals concerning southern Africa and Ethiopia .
We only hope that the situation in Iraq and the Middle East does not give rise to such a degree of uncertainty in connection with the 2003 budget that it could entail problems for the other areas within external policy .
That is not something we intend to accept .
Finally , one of the basic problems we have when it comes to implementing the budget is that , overall , we have a rigid budgetary system that really needs to be modernised and altered .
This is , however , basically a task for the Convention , which will shortly have concluded its work , and for the future constitution .
Where this is concerned , I hope that we shall see a radical reform in the future .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that we are holding so timely a debate on budget implementation so early in the year .
Parliament receives the figures on budget implementation on a weekly basis .
These are direct figures from the accounts .
No Parliament of the Member States is kept informed like this .
I stress this because the Commission 's accounting has been and is a subject of public debate and a lot of things are said that are not always entirely correct .
I am glad that we can debate the matter properly here and I thank the rapporteur for his detailed report .
Apart from these weekly figures , you also receive a report three times a year commenting on the implementation of the budget and giving details in particular of so-called abnormal RALs , that is commitments the Commission entered into a very long time ago and commitments for which no payments have been made in the last three years .
The level of commitments entered into and which will result in corresponding expenditure in the next few years amounts now - at the end of June - to a total of EUR 122 000 million .
I agree with Mr Färm , the rapporteur , that this amount needs to be reduced quickly .
But I also agree that we must be careful not to label the total amount of RALs as abnormal because this year that is not correct .
The Commission has a budget for commitment appropriations showing their amount , something that is not the case in many Member States , for example .
I would like to comment on a few points or questions from your report , Mr Färm .
First the question of the directorates general or policy areas to which the total 717 posts approved by the Budgetary Authority in 2001 and 2002 were allocated .
You will be getting a detailed listing of these .
In the last few years we have strengthened the foreign policy area , among others , and also such implementing areas as , for example , regional policy or the growing area of justice and internal affairs .
Another point : what is the staffing plan for the Enlargement DG in 2004 , after the accession of the ten new Member States ?
The 2004 Budget assumes there will be an appreciable reduction in staffing , in the number of posts in this directorate general , a reduction of 105 posts in fact .
You must bear in mind that the Enlargement Directorate-General 's activity next year will not be confined to the candidate countries Bulgaria , Romania and Turkey , but that it will continue to administer pre-accession aid ; also , a specific programme was agreed for 2004 and subsequent years in the accession negotiations to continue to give administrative assistance for the development of a good administration .
The further trend for the Enlargement DG will then be reviewed in the course of the 2005 budget procedure .
Regarding the state of budget execution this year , you also note that implementation is less than at the same time last year .
This has in fact to do with the work involved in bringing in the new Financial Regulation .
This new Financial Regulation brings far-reaching changes for financial management .
It is a fundamental reform .
The Directorate General for the Budget trained over 1 000 members of staff last year .
But there is much that is new and requires familiarisation .
Recipients of payments have to be asked for better security arrangements , for example .
That also requires a degree of familiarisation on our side .
I would like to make a few special comments about budget implementation in the external fields .
Generally speaking , the rate of utilisation in the first few months of this year does not necessarily set the trend for the rest of the year .
So far , commitments totalling EUR 1 800 million have been made , which is not at all bad .
With regard to pre-accession aid , I would also like to point out that in this case implementation continues to be unsatisfactory .
If , however , you compare this year 's budget implementation figures with those from last year , you can see that there has been some acceleration .
We had a special situation with humanitarian aid .
You mentioned it yourself .
Here , funding was cut in the course of the 2003 budget procedure , even remembering that there is the emergency reserve .
The Budgetary Authority has approved EUR 79 million for humanitarian work in Iraq .
We have asked for a further EUR 25 million for southern Africa and tomorrow we will be talking about a further EUR 15 million for Ethiopia .
I hope we will find agreement on that , too , because it is essential that aid be provided really quickly here .
I think everyone involved agrees with that .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , early or late we can now discuss the implementation of the 2003 Budget .
I would like first of all to thank the rapporteur , Mr Färm , most sincerely for carefully reading the figures that he has kindly made available to us .
What he read was of course not so pleasing , and I would like to sum up in only very general terms by saying that , as a member of one part of the Budgetary Authority , I have to ask myself what force and what decisiveness we must bring to bear in order , together with the Council , to prepare a budget - which is , after all , policy in figures - when those who have to implement it are far from being in a position to implement that policy in the way the Budgetary Authority wanted .
That is in fact a fundamental criticism that I have already voiced in this place on a number of occasions , and things get no better , they get worse .
That cannot of course be the Commission 's long-term strategy .
The budgets we present are always tight ones , and then we want to make ourselves more popular with the Member States by not spending the money we have just argued over so passionately .
I now have a large number of complaints on the table where individual groups that are supposed to be supported out of the Community budget , as is stipulated in the rules on the matter , are faced with massive administrative problems in negotiations with the Commission , especially this year because of the new Financial Regulation .
All the rules must be followed , but my plea here would be that we also help to ensure that in the end resources actually can flow .
Bureaucracy - or the proper control of the use of resources - is not there to make payments basically impossible .
Mr President , this year 's general rapporteur for the budget , Mr Göran Färm , has produced an excellent report on the implementation of the budget and I wish to thank him sincerely for that .
The report quite rightly examines two key points in detail , those being outstanding commitments and decommitment , that is , the N + 2 rule .
As I mentioned earlier on , outstanding commitments stood at EUR 126 billion in April , which was an increase of over EUR 15 billion in one year .
These outstanding commitments were especially evident in the Structural Funds where they stood at EUR 94 billion , which is to say the amount for appropriations for almost three years .
The situation is grave .
At the start of the present programming period the N + 2 rule was approved .
It states that there is to be decommitment if no payments have been made for two years .
The Commission seems to be interpreting the rule in such a way that advance payments , which are not even based on any invoices presented , should be regarded as payments .
A project can be kept alive in this way from one year to the next by means of small advance payments , even though the project itself might not have even begun to be implemented .
The Commission should improve the way the N + 2 rule is monitored and restore its original purpose .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the motion for a resolution ( B5-0320 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on trafficking in children and child soldiers .
Mr President , the European Parliament has already issued two resolutions on the question of child soldiers , one in 1999 and one in 2000 .
Why use the procedure for urgent cases , then , to include on the agenda a recommendation for a new resolution , one which goes further , of course , since it extends not only to child soldiers , but to all forms of trafficking in children ?
The reason is that the problem is still growing and the European Union is not showing enough determination .
Three hundred thousand children , boys and girls , are enlisted in combat units in more than 30 countries .
Every year , 1.2 million children are victims of a traffic which has now become a rapidly-expanding ' industry ' , worth almost EUR 3 billion per year .
After drugs and small arms trafficking , it is the third most lucrative criminal activity in the world .
The fight against this scourge - beyond comprehension in the twenty-first century - should be a cornerstone of European Union development policy .
It is a sad fact that this is not the case .
On the world stage , however , more and more action is being taken , as demonstrated by the coming into force , in 2002 , of the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children , child prostitution and child pornography .
We request that the Council encourage Member States to ratify this protocol with immediate effect , for too few of them have done so up to now .
We also request that children 's rights become a political priority for the Union , to be reflected in budgetary decisions involving the allocation of sufficient resources to a specific heading , with a view to improving their effectiveness and raising their profile .
This priority is also to be reflected in a common strategy .
The Council , of course , adopted such a common strategy in principle on 10 December 2002 , but the final document should appear and come into force without delay .
Our motion for a resolution suggests several courses of action in this connection . These include the appointment of a high-level representative for children 's rights ; a common policy focusing on preventive measures ; support and protection of victims ; closer cooperation with the countries of origin ; and international arrest warrants against the organisers and perpetrators of this unspeakable traffic .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Carlotti on her speech .
I am surprised that no-one from the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party , that tabled three amendments to this report , has spoken in this debate .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes the draft report on children 's rights that has been prepared for the meeting of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
It highlights the enormous challenge facing the international community over the protection of children 's rights .
First , on the subject of child soldiers .
The European Union supports the UN special representative and welcomes the initiatives of the UN Security Council , in particular Resolution 1460 of 30 January 2003 .
The European Union calls on all states to ratify the optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and to hasten ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court , which describes the conscription and recruitment of children under the age of 15 or their deployment in hostilities as a war crime .
At the political level , the European Union is endeavouring to find a common line on the problem of child soldiers .
In December 2002 , the Council authorised the development of a strategy or guidelines on this subject .
UNICEF and other agencies then organised a meeting of experts on children 's rights on 14 March 2003 .
The recommendations made at that meeting stress among other things the importance of a pre- and post-conflict strategy and the necessity of making this subject a cross-sectional topic in the European Union 's entire decision-making process .
The Council working party on human rights will , in due course , be examining what steps should be taken next .
Regarding European financing for measures to help children in armed conflicts , the following must be said .
Children are a focus for humanitarian aid in ECHO .
This commitment is reflected in specific projects , advocacy measures and research activities .
Children are one of the three focal points of the ECHO strategy for the current year .
Secondly , on combating trafficking in children .
The European Union has introduced a large number of legislative , political and financial initiatives .
In 2002 , the Council adopted the framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings and reached political agreement on the draft for a framework decision on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
On the Commission 's initiative , the ' European Conference on Preventing and Combating Trafficking in Human Beings - a Global Challenge for the Twenty-first Century ' was held from 18 to 20 September last year .
The Brussels declaration was a concrete outcome of that conference .
Then on 25 March 2003 the Commission decided to set up a group of experts on trafficking in human beings , which will assist the Commission in putting forward further concrete proposals at European level .
The group will in particular present the Commission with a report based on the recommendation of the Brussels declaration .
In 2002 , more than EUR 1.7 million were used as part of the STOP II programme to finance 16 projects to combat trafficking in human beings and to combat sexual exploitation .
The TACIS and CARDS programmes also support projects to combat trafficking in human beings in east and southeast Europe , and an action plan against trafficking in human beings has also been developed as part of the EU-Africa dialogue .
Thirdly , on the subject of ' children and development ' , the Commission is pursuing the Millennium Development Goals as its objectives , in particular the achievement of universal primary education and the reduction of infant and child mortality .
Although children as such are not a specific target group of our development policy , they benefit from a large amount of aid in the areas of education , health , AIDS and population policy .
Finally , the Cotonou Agreement , for example , contains specific provisions for the protection of young people , in particular combating child labour .
The Commission has also intensified its cooperation with the International Labour Organisation as a whole for the purpose of promoting these objectives .
Finally , I would like to note that the report contains many interesting proposals for increasing the European Union 's commitment to children 's rights .
It is true that the Community currently has no specific competences in this area .
We await , however , with interest the outcome of the talks on the draft constitutional treaty , the European Convention , which for the first time provides for the protection of children 's rights as a specific objective of the European Union .
Thank you very much for your attention .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for that detailed response .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 12.38 a.m. )
The programme of the Italian Presidency
The next item is the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the programme of the Italian Presidency .
, President-in-Office of the Council . ( IT ) Mr President , as one of the founding countries , Italy has a long experience of remaining true to the spirit and the letter of the Treaties , which , within the space of a few decades , have enabled us to develop peacefully one of the most remarkable political and institutional experiments in the history of mankind .
Italy is therefore keenly aware of the moral and intellectual responsibility and honour of presiding over the Union in this constituent period , when we need to hold on firmly to the lessons of the past in order to build the future , to deal with new developments and seize opportunities that were previously unimaginable , and to overcome differences by finding new solutions , which in turn will enrich our shared project .
With the full accession of new Member States and the attendant redefining of our identity , it is time to recognise the value of the art of negotiation .
Europe as we know it , as built by its governing classes , is the product of enormous determination and brilliant intuition , which have given a spirit and language to shared values and feelings ; these have brought together and revitalised the separate strands of national history , traditions and culture .

The Europe of today is great : it owes its greatness to its achievements , to its potential , to its proud contribution to peace and international law , but it owes its particular greatness to the specific technical expertise which it has brought to bear , overcoming every crisis , clash of interests and difference in vision by applying a common method , common rules and a common approach to adjusting both method and rules to the realities of a changing world .
We all know that there is sometimes a price to be paid for negotiation and that it may be high .
If it is not driven by the enthusiasm of shared goals , negotiation can look very much like bureaucratic paralysis , a long and extenuating process of avoiding problems and procrastination .
The Italian Parliament , which has never feared the truth , has been acutely aware of the bouts of fatigue and the tendency to sell Europe short which have at times characterised our common European endeavour , and it has condemned those tendencies with frank , pro-European zeal .
With the self-confidence born of long experience and the humility needed to tackle crucial political issues , Italy will therefore do everything in its power and everything it feels is necessary to provide Parliament , the Commission and the governments of the European Council with the environment most conducive to taking informed , calm and responsible political decisions on our future .
The purpose of negotiation is , indeed , to enable decisions to be taken on substance , and the measure of our success in settling our differences will be whether it enables us to make a great leap forwards and to give our gradually integrating economies , our cultures , our foreign policy and our defence policy a new and efficient institutional shape .
A great Europe needs great institutions .
If the world calls for Europe to act authoritatively in tackling today 's major challenges - the fight against terrorism , the reduction of inequalities and imbalances , world economic recovery - it is our duty to respond with a Union which can act decisively and therefore exert influence , a Union which can take resolute , clear decisions on the basis of a clear grasp of the common interest and commonly held convictions which are above any form of particularism .
This Union , which we have decided to build together , whose shape has also been discussed during the splendid work of the Convention chaired by Mr Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing and benefiting from the vigorous contribution of the Greek Presidency and representatives of the Commission , the European Parliament and the national Parliaments , can only be founded on the framework of values and historical experience that , for over half a century , has bound us to that other great exponent of modern liberal democracy , the United States , co-founder with us of the Atlantic Alliance .
If this web of different partnerships - at a different level of political integration - is again to live up to its ambitions and its civilising achievements , for the sake of peace and world security , relations between States must cease to be conducted in monologues and , instead , we must seek to reinstate open , genuine , honest dialogue .
Europe can be cured of its Hamlet syndrome and decide to become a wholehearted , active player on the world stage ; it can acquire the diplomatic , economic and military means to perform that role convincingly , without jeopardising its autonomy , its roots or the great freedom-giving structures defended over the years within the framework of its Western alliances .
As we found at the recent Summit in Thessaloniki , there is deep , shared understanding of this , set out in the very valuable document coordinated by the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , Javier Solana , which seeks , in a new strategic vision , to overcome the differences that have emerged over recent months with regard to the tragic crisis in Iraq and developments in the crucial issue of the Middle East .
Italy knows that it is not alone in venturing once more to wager on successful negotiation in order to move the situation forward .
In the European Parliament , under its President , Pat Cox , and in the political groups with which we had an enjoyable , valuable meeting in Rome , we feel we have an attentive , patient partner but one which would not fail to hold us to account for our mistakes .
In the Commission and its President , Romano Prodi , we see the essential link ensuring continuity in the administration and day-to-day coordination of our institutional system .
The European Council , in both the reinvigoration of the plan for growth , based on large-scale investment in civil infrastructure , and the great constitutional opportunity presented by the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference , will be the forum in which this six-month Union Presidency , which falls to Italy , will seek to define a bold but not reckless agreement on the major issues of institutional balance , the extension of qualified majority voting , the limits of the common foreign and security policy and the European area of justice .
We cannot overlook the fact that Member States ' views on some of these questions still differ .
The Italian Presidency will do its utmost to bring about convergence of these positions although it is fully aware that the debate on the Convention 's draft Constitutional Treaty cannot be completely reopened .
The Intergovernmental Conference will therefore have to focus its efforts on the genuine points of contention still outstanding .
This ground plan has also dictated the Presidency 's goal of adhering to the timetable suggested by the Thessaloniki European Council .
Thus , we will open the Intergovernmental Conference in October and keep the proceedings to a tight schedule with a view to reaching agreement by December .
( Applause from the right )
The European Parliament will be involved in the work of the Conference in the most appropriate manner .
I call upon the European Council to involve the President of the European Parliament in the work of the Prime Ministers and Heads of Government on a permanent basis .
( Applause from the right )
I call upon the General Affairs Council to involve the representatives of the European Parliament in their work on a permanent basis .
The proceedings will be conducted at a senior political level in order to avoid the impetus provided by the Convention getting bogged down in detailed diplomatic negotiations , as has happened in earlier Intergovernmental Conferences .
With this in mind , I undertake to return here to address you after the opening of the Intergovernmental Conference and the day after the December European Council , so that we can review together what has been achieved .
The goal is to enable the future Constitutional Treaty to be signed sometime between 1 May 2004 ( the date on which the ten new Member States will officially join the Union ) and the elections in June 2004 for the next Parliamentary term .
Any extension of the negotiations beyond those dates would mean dissipating the precious store of constitutional wisdom developed by the Convention ; it would also involve asking European voters to elect their Parliament without knowing the institutional shape of the future Union .
I can , moreover , only rejoice that , for appreciable reasons of historical and symbolic continuity with the original Treaties of 1957 , it has been agreed that the final signing of the Constitutional Treaty is to take place in Rome .
We are honoured by this prospect and will do everything possible to ensure that the Member States ' representatives are welcomed in a manner worthy of the occasion and , of course , of our traditions of hospitality .
Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , constitutional reform is certainly a top priority for the future of European integration , but the Union must also be able to meet its citizens ' legitimate day-to-day expectations .
Europe must increasingly live up to its role of creating economic growth and prosperity .
Here , we are on solid ground : the euro is an element of stability for the economies of the Member States which have chosen to support monetary union , and the Lisbon Strategy mapped out a process of convergence to increase European competitiveness .
However , we cannot overlook the persistent flaws of our economic structures , evidence of which lies in the lower-than-forecast growth rates .
On the basis of the annual operating programme presented jointly with the Greek Presidency at the beginning of 2003 , the Italian Presidency has set out a number of specific initiatives .
The modernisation of agriculture , environmental protection , consumer protection and food safety are essential requirements for our citizens ; in these areas Italy will steer work towards the goals identified by earlier Presidencies .
I will therefore confine myself here and now to three points which we feel are crucial for Europe 's competitiveness .
The first point is the need to provide more effective support for the economy by increasing public and private investment with the cooperation of the European financial institutions , especially the EIB .
We consider that such a strategy should be based especially on boosting the policy of major Trans-European infrastructure networks .
If the internal market is to work efficiently in the enlarged Union , it will require greater mobility of goods and services and a more efficient transport network .
The need here is to square the legitimate requirements of monetary stability and financial rigour - which must not be called into question in any way - with the need to stimulate economic growth more powerfully through investment in research and technological innovation as well as infrastructure , for we firmly believe that the European economy 's most important resource is its human capital .
( Applause from the right )
The second priority is discussion of the sustainability of the European pension and welfare systems .
Intergenerational solidarity and the adaptation of existing schemes to the reality of a progressively ageing society are challenges that we can no longer shy away from .
Bearing in mind that situations differ from Member State to Member State , we must investigate policies to increase the level of employment among older workers and to reduce the trend towards early retirement .
Our third and last point is the need to modernise the labour markets and promote entrepreneurship , particularly where small and medium-sized enterprises are concerned .
In this field , too , the opportunities offered by the great internal market which is being extended to include the ten new Members will elude the EU Member States unless they adopt a coordinated approach .
These strategies can be implemented through dialogue between the social partners .
Indeed , the European model is based on a market economy which seeks to strike a balance between free enterprise and the claims of cohesion and solidarity .
In this connection , there can be no neglecting that more vulnerable , silent section of Europe 's population , whom legislative inertia all too often prevents from taking a leading role but whose civil and moral contribution remains invaluable .
I am referring to the 38 million European citizens with disabilities .
The European Union has proclaimed 2003 the ' European Year of People with Disabilities ' .
In addition to the awareness-raising and information events and campaigns already organised , the Italian Presidency will endeavour to lay the foundations for legislative action to combat discrimination , for an instrument to protect people with disabilities in all aspects of daily life and give them a future of hope .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union also contributes to international stability , and its responsibility in this respect starts at its immediate borders and depends on its capacity to be open to increasingly advanced forms of cooperation with neighbouring countries .
In this case too , the Italian Presidency intends to carry on the work of previous presidencies .
During the current period between the signing and the entry into force of the Accession Treaties , we shall seek to ensure that the 10 new Member States participate fully in the work of the Council , making it easier for them to be fully integrated into the Union 's institutional mechanisms .
At the same time , we shall attempt to establish by December a roadmap for Bulgaria and Romania which paves the way for the accession of both countries by 2007 .
We shall continue the pre-accession strategy vis-à-vis Turkey on the basis of the conditions established at the Copenhagen European Council last December .
We know that the decision on the date for opening negotiations will not be taken until the end of next year , but , with this in mind , we consider it all the more advisable that the Union should actively support the reform process already initiated by the current Turkish Government .
We shall continue to emphasise the European prospects of the countries of the Western Balkans , in line with the Zagreb Process .
The agenda we agreed upon at Thessaloniki represents a further step forward .
In retrospect , analysing the European Union 's role in the Balkans , we can be proud of ourselves .
If we compare the current situation to the situation 10 years ago , we can see that intervention by Europe and the United States made it possible to bring to an end the bloody conflicts of the former Yugoslavia , the last major European civil war , and we hope that this will also prove to be the last time that European blood is shed on European soil .
We believe it is now time to move on from the present phase of association and stabilisation agreements to a more integrated strategy , with a view to strengthening our relationship with the countries of the region .
We are aware of the complexity of this approach , but we also know that Europe is offering the only prospects able to provide the governments of those countries with an effective incentive to proceeding without delay along the path of reform , modernisation , the free market and the rule of law .
The Italian Presidency sees the invitation from the Commission , supported by the Member States , to encourage increasingly close relations with the areas closest to us to bring about what we have labelled ' Wider Europe ' , in a very positive light .
We shall therefore seek to strengthen our relations with Ukraine , Belarus and Moldova .
We shall likewise seek to consolidate relations with the Russian Federation particularly strongly through increasingly close dialogue and specific measures that are tangible confirmation of Russia 's desire to belong to the political , economic , social and cultural fabric of Europe and the West .
We consider that the focus on Eastern Europe after the collapse of communism should now be mirrored by equal interest in the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue ; this dialogue is crucial for relations between the West and the Islamic world , an issue we feel to be as important today as Eastern Europe has been in the past .
Our aim is to establish a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area , already launched by the Barcelona Conference .
The economic and social development of the southern area of the Mediterranean is essential to world stability , in view of the culture , politics and demographics of the southern Mediterranean .
The integration of Europe 's economy with that of the Arab countries is a major challenge of our time and is the key to peace and security in this area and in Europe as a whole .
We shall therefore cultivate the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue , to which we shall devote a large number of economic , cultural and social initiatives - including a Foundation for Dialogue between Cultures and Civilisations - and we shall cultivate the project to transform the financial facility currently operating within the EIB into an autonomous body , in other words a genuine Mediterranean Bank .
On the basis of the decisions adopted by the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Conferences in Valencia and Crete and approved by the Thessaloniki European Council , the Italian Presidency endorses the wish expressed by the European Parliament and the national Parliaments to see a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly established during this Presidency as a mark of a constant commitment to dialogue between Europe and the countries of the Mediterranean seaboard .
Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , establishing conditions for international security is now a key task for the countries which share a set of universal values based on freedom , democracy and peace .
This is the main area in which fundamental transatlantic relations and the partnership between Europe and the United States must now be reinvigorated .
We wish to confirm our conviction that there is no incompatibility between a strong European undertaking and equally strong transatlantic solidarity .
Mindful of this , we will strive to restore depth and dynamism to the relationship between the Union and the United States , which are also vital if Europe is to have greater authority on the world stage .
The establishment of a solid , balanced transatlantic relationship also depends on a substantial European undertaking in the field of defence , in line with the NATO framework .
The fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and support for the promotion of democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are specific areas in which to test our ability to build a solid relationship of cooperation between the two shores of the Atlantic .
We are thinking in this particular instance of the need to establish a democratic civil fabric in the reconstruction of Iraq and support for the peace process in the Middle East .
As regards the Middle East , we are quite aware that the situation is extremely complex .
Our Presidency , together with the United States , the Russian Federation and the United Nations , will work in support of the roadmap towards the establishment of time limits and procedures for launching an international peace conference .
My country has offered to hold the conference in Sicily .
There are at least two lines of action that we intend to promote : firstly , restoring a relationship of greater trust with Israel with a view to broader and more structured mutual cooperation , and , secondly , implementing the plan - already launched by Italy at European Councils and G8 Summits - for rebuilding the Palestinian economy , which could act as a tangible , effective incentive in negotiations between the parties .
Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in the interests of brevity , I cannot list all the Union 's responsibilities on the world stage , but I feel bound to mention the economic , cultural , civil and , I would venture , spiritual ties that link Europe with Latin America , a region currently experiencing a period of change which Europe hopes will generate freedom and justice .
The Latin American States have asked us to open up our trade frontiers .
The success of Latin America is that of the other America , linked to Europe in a different but no less significant fashion than North America .
I also wish to say that we shall work to strengthen our existing ties with Africa , to which we are bound through its unhappy history , with Asia , with the regional organisations and with the United Nations system to move forward together on the great challenges of the fight against poverty and disease , environmental protection and conflict prevention .
We will also focus on the balanced development of international trade as a source of greater well-being and reduction of inequalities - the subject of the World Trade Organisation Ministerial Conference in Cancun next September .
Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the citizens of Europe want democratic , transparent institutions , a prosperous economy and a free society , but also an area of freedom and security .
At Tampere , Seville and , most recently , at Thessaloniki , the European Council recognised the need to enhance Europe 's capacity to combat transnational organised crime , illegal immigration and related trafficking , through more effective controls at the Union 's external borders .
We will endeavour to work on these points , focusing on the mobilisation of adequate financial resources , the gradual implementation of a common readmission policy and the integrated management of external borders .
Above all , however , we will emphasise the need to include illegal immigration issues in relations between the Union and the countries of origin and transit of migration flows .
We must introduce effective forms of cooperation with some of our neighbours , especially in the Mediterranean and the Balkans , in the field of control and management of migration flows .
Our legitimate request for more effective cooperation from these countries in endeavours to prevent illegal immigration will be matched by willingness on our part to integrate citizens of third countries legally resident on Union territory .
As well as continuing legislative work on asylum and visas , we consider it a priority to improve the operation of all the Union 's operating mechanisms for combating crime , starting with the strengthening of Europol .
Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear from my remarks just how sensitive and complex the challenges facing the European Union are , challenges to which our Presidency will endeavour to help find a solution in the limited time available , in a spirit of humility and service and in the full , firm knowledge that the security and prosperity of our future will depend increasingly on the process of European integration which has guaranteed us peace , freedom , security and well-being for half a century now .
The Europe of today is no longer the airy kite capable of playing the winds of history that it was at the time of the Treaty of Rome .
Our Union has become much stouter and is weighed down with responsibilities and duties towards its partners and the rest of the world .
My hope is that , during the Italian Presidency and looking onwards to the Irish Presidency , we shall succeed , with the cooperation of all those involved and with the particular help of the new Member States , in restoring to our institutional giant something of its lightness and its original energy .
( Applause from the right )
President Cox , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Italian Presidency is beginning at a critical point in the life of the Union .
It has the tough but exhilarating task of carrying through the revision of the Union 's founding Treaties and delivering the first European Constitution .
Indeed , the six months of the Italian Presidency will see the start of the Intergovernmental Conference , which will work on the basis - the ' good basis ' to quote the Thessaloniki Conclusions - of the draft Constitutional Treaty drawn up by the Convention .
The Convention is Europe 's first experience of a constitution-building process .
We should therefore not underestimate the impact of the word ' Constitution ' on our European life , which has made it possible to achieve results that appeared quite unattainable a while ago .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights will be enshrined in the Constitutional Treaty . The Union will have a single legal personality : this considerably strengthens its international status .
Defining the powers of the Union will allow the citizens to distinguish more clearly between the competences of the Union and those of the Member States .
I have never pretended , however , that I was happy that certain reforms I consider indispensable - and which many have called for - have been tackled too timidly or not at all .
In September when the Intergovernmental Conference opens , the Commission will accordingly be putting the key issues still unresolved on the negotiating table with its opinion .
Qualified-majority voting has been extended to many areas but not enough to meet the needs of an enlarged Union : there are other areas where unanimity should no longer be required .
The Union can hardly function effectively if decision-making calls for unanimity among 25 Member States : it would be impossible .
The proposed arrangements for the make-up of the Commission do not reconcile the need for representativeness and the need for efficiency .
A permanent presidency of the European Council is likely to bring overlapping and conflicts with the Commission .
The euro , one of the Union 's greatest political achievements - maybe the greatest - is still not represented effectively and coherently on the international stage .
Clauses also need to be inserted on amending the Constitution by an enhanced majority .
I cannot see how the Constitution can be adapted to the Union 's new requirements without a procedure for amendments based on majority voting .
No reform is possible on the basis of unanimity .
Lastly , a more democratic and efficient institutional framework , which should come out of the Intergovernmental Conference , is vital , not least for an economic and social policy and a foreign policy with more clout .
The Commission has the political will , the arguments and , if I may say so , the enthusiasm to press these points home forcefully .
President Cox , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the other major challenge of the next six months is to press ahead with the building of ' Greater Europe ' and to implement the new neighbourhood strategy .
As we push on with enlargement , we also need to fully implement the pre-accession strategy for the candidate countries .
The Commission is working actively on this .
The aim is for this process to work well to the benefit of our fellow citizens and the Member States , both current and acceding .
With the momentum provided by the Thessaloniki Council we can also continue to forge an ever-closer partnership with the Balkans , without which this phase of the enlargement process can never be considered to be complete .
At Thessaloniki , we agreed on an agenda to take the Balkan countries to full membership of the Union .
I am sure that the Italian Presidency will do its utmost to keep this region at the top of the Union 's priorities .
I am pleased that the strategy I proposed , the development of a ring of friendly countries , is starting to produce the anticipated results , and I welcome the unanimous support of the Heads of State and Government for this long-term European Union policy .
In this context , it is vital that we move on to the practical phase of the new neighbourhood strategy without delay , with specific action plans and new systems of assistance .
We are preparing a number of proposals along these lines for Parliament and the Council to consider and develop .
In particular , as regards the Mediterranean region , I hope the Euro-Mediterranean Bank and the Foundation for Intercultural Dialogue will be in place by the end of the year .
As you said , President-in-office , the European Union made an invaluable contribution to the drafting of the roadmap , alongside the United States , Russia and the United Nations , and it must also play a key role in its implementation .
We will continue to pay close attention to transatlantic relations .
The recent EU-US Summit in Washington marked an important milestone in our relations with the United States .
Quite apart from the matters discussed - and the discussions proved to be amongst our meatiest in recent years - the most important aspect was the firm determination displayed on both sides to reestablish a climate of cooperation and solidarity .
I am not saying there are no differences in our viewpoints and approaches to particular issues , but even where this is so , the strength of our relationship cannot be called into question .
As I said at the Summit , our goals are the same , even if we seek at times to achieve them in quite different ways .
Perhaps the clearest example of this fact is the relationship between the United States and the European Union in the field of international trade .
Both sides want fewer barriers and better access to markets , fairer trade and clearer rules that are also appropriately tuned to encouraging the poorest countries .
On some of these topics our practical approaches are different , but this does not stop us having a close , ongoing relationship that allows us to work round our differences , nor does it stop us working together to achieve a positive outcome in the multilateral talks within the World Trade Organisation .
I want to make this quite clear , for all this is possible because the Union speaks and negotiates with a single voice in trade matters .
It makes it a powerful , influential partner , which it is most certainly not in areas where competence is divided and fragmentary .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , the toughest challenge we face is to restore the conditions for vigorous , balanced , enduring economic growth in the Union .
The situation is difficult : economic growth has slowed down significantly , although I do not believe there is any reason to speak of deflation .
At the same time , we must tackle the reform of Europe 's social security system too .
Competition from our trading partners and the ageing of our population make such reforms extremely urgent .
However , before us there is also a great , unique opportunity : an integrated Single Market of almost half a billion people .
I do not think we have realised what a powerful tool we have for the future .
It is therefore crucial that we give practical thought to instruments for strengthening coordination of the Union 's economic and fiscal policies , so that we can tackle the difficulties together and exploit together the enormous advantages the Union offers .
The Commission is aware of how serious these challenges are and , in recent months , it has proposed two initiatives , which the European Council strongly supported .
Firstly , we proposed - and our proposal was taken up - to utilise all the flexibility in the Stability and Growth Pact so each country can adapt its fiscal policy to its own economic situation , without losing sight of the stability objectives and without overshooting the 3 % limit laid down in the Pact .
As I have said on a number of occasions , this was necessary but not sufficient .
We need to move towards a period of closer coordination , and tax policies in the Member States - particularly those with the highest public debts - need to become more sustainable in the long term .
Secondly , at the Brussels European Council last March , I raised the issue on behalf of the Commission of the need to give fresh impetus to completing the infrastructure necessary for European development and for supporting research , increasing spending to reach our target of 3 % of the Union 's GDP , as , moreover , is provided for in the goals we ourselves set at Lisbon .
At the same European Council , I voiced my concern that investment in research in the Member States has actually , without a doubt , declined compared with last year , while Europe 's major firms are transferring a growing proportion of their research outside Europe .
Hundreds of thousands of our brightest talents are leaving Europe to work - and stay all their lives , unlike the Asians , who return home - in the United States .
That is why the Commission has decided to react .
In conjunction with the European Investment Bank , it is finalising an initiative to help to increase overall investment and private-sector participation in two key areas - trans-European networks and research and development projects - with a view to achieving the Lisbon targets .
We want to mobilise and coordinate all the Union 's current sources of funding and explore possible alternatives , without jeopardising Member States ' budget stability .
The Commission is pleased to note that the Italian Government has recently expressed its firm support for this strategy .
Lastly , we need to speed up the approval of proposals prepared by the Greek Presidency but not yet approved .
Approval of these measures in the course of the Italian Presidency will help to improve the Union 's economic and social outlook .
In particular , the proposed legislation concerns the following fields : temporary-employment agency work , take-over bids , measures in the wake of the ' Prestige ' disaster , security of gas and electricity supplies , the second rail services liberalisation package , environmental liability rules , implementation of the 10-year action plan for people with disabilities , due to be presented by the Commission during the Italian Presidency , public procurement rules , the creation of the Single European Sky , the extremely important , impatiently-awaited directive on traceability of GMOs , the finalisation of the Directive on the European Patent , harmonisation of asylum procedures , the status of refugees , and , lastly , the Agreement with the ESA on the development of the European Space policy .
I am confident that , with the help of the Italian Presidency and with your own help , President-in-Office , we will be able to adopt speedily the practical decisions needed to achieve these goals .
Economic recovery is not just about reform : it also calls for confidence that proposals can be put into effect quickly .
President Cox , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , these are the main challenges we must meet in the coming months .
We are about to lay the foundations of a completely new Europe , and these foundations are political and economic , not just constitutional .
The Commission is working to preserve and consolidate a strong and prosperous Europe that is also just and inclusive .
The greatness of the European project lies precisely in its capacity to foster and extend peace , democracy , justice , prosperity and solidarity .
Lastly , the Commission has fulfilled its responsibility to launch a wide-ranging internal debate on the post-2006 Financial Perspective .
In the autumn , we will be presenting our political project for the enlarged and reformed European Union for discussion at the December European Council under the Italian Presidency .
The forthcoming Financial Perspective represents a crucial stage in the European project .
By 2007 , the Union will have a new constitutional framework , in all likelihood 27 Members and a population of almost 500 million .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are at a crucial time in the Union 's history .
A time that calls for unity and a strong commitment to cooperation among all the Community institutions and between the institutions and the governments of the Member States .
I am confident that we will find the right solutions to the great issues facing Europe today .
This calls for vision and conviction .
For vision , because we really are laying the foundations for the Europe of decades to come , and we cannot accept short-term solutions that merely respond to the - albeit difficult - current economic climate .
For conviction , because Europe is not just one of several options , one of a number of different alternatives .
Europe is the only way forward : without Europe , our countries and societies will be irreversibly relegated to a marginal role .
Italy has been there since the start of the European integration project and has always played an extremely important role .
Think of the Treaty of Rome , think of the preparation of the Single European Act , think , on a more general note , of the enthusiasm and conviction with which Italy has helped to achieve the major goals of European integration , starting right here in this House with great Parliamentarians such as Altiero Spinelli and Emilio Colombo .
We are all confident that Italy will continue unhesitatingly along that path .
For a man with limited speaking time you did well !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the President-in-Office of the Council began by talking about Italy 's historic role in European construction .
I am going to speak to him frankly on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists : we want Italy and its Presidency to present a bella figura , which succeeds , rather than a brutta figura , which fails .
What worries us is that , when we hear President Ciampi talk about Europe , we feel more reassured , but when we hear President Berlusconi talk about Europe we feel more concerned .
Today you have taken the Ciampi line .
The problem is when you tell us that the Commission must be abolished and that Russia and Israel must join the European Union tomorrow morning .
We agree that the Convention has produced a historic result .
If you will allow me , Mr President , I will remind you of the first sentence of the preamble of the Constitution produced by the Convention , which was written 2 500 years ago and is still relevant - it is our fundamental creed - and it is a quotation from Thucydides : ' Our Constitution ... is called a democracy because power is in the hands not of a minority but of the greatest number ' .
( Applause from the left )
This means that we are obliged to make laws for the general interest and not to resolve specific cases involving a minority .
That is the cornerstone of European construction .
( Applause from the left )
With regard to the Convention and the Constitution , I have taken good note of the fact that you have expressed a will to negotiate .
I would like to say that we , who would improve the text of the Convention , believe that there must only be formulations of a technical nature , in other words , negotiation over outstanding problems , and that the Constitution must not be rewritten and , in particular , not be moved backwards .
You have made a proposal on the participation of Parliament .
I am grateful for this , but I would like to say one thing to you : this is what we have had since the Treaty of Amsterdam , and even since the Treaty of Maastricht , that the President can attend European Councils and the conclaves , that we have representatives in the Intergovernmental Conference - we call them observers , but we want representatives .
Now there is something else , however .
The Convention has taken place .
The doors cannot be closed .
What we are also asking - and I hope that Parliament will approve this in its resolution - is that the Presidency should be obliged to provide information regularly , here and in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , chaired by Giorgio Napolitano , and that we should be able to invite , as we do , representatives from national parliaments .
Yesterday we spoke about this with President Casini and we agree , because what we cannot do is return to diplomacy behind closed doors .
You have also talked about the European economy .
I was surprised that you did not refer to the Lisbon strategy , because what you have talked about is largely the implementation of the Lisbon strategy .
But in relation to the so-called ' Tremonti ' proposal , which is a resurrection of the Delors plan and the van Miert proposal , it is good to hear from conservative politicians and conservative governments that a degree of Keynesianism is acceptable , because we have been asking for this plan for ten years .
Well , let us see how we can do so , how you will apply the ' golden rule ' ?
( Applause from the left )
? how guarantees will be established ... even you , who are a successful businessman , could begin by making a first subscription to the bridge of Messina which would overcome the division between Scylla and Charybdis , which has been fundamental to European history over the last 3 000 years .
With regard to the issue of intergenerational solidarity and the future of the welfare state , it is true that we must talk about pensions .
I do not believe that you are proposing that Social Security and pensions should become a European competence - that would go further than what we are saying - but it is important that it be linked to our demographic situation and our future , above all in relation to immigration .
There was recently a debate on this issue in your government , moreover , between hardliners and advocates of a more intelligent , human policy .
We believe that Thessaloniki has been a very important step .
With regard to another constitutional issue , which concerns us because it was a resolution approved by the whole of this House , including the votes from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats : at the end of last year we expressed the need to implement the Charter of Fundamental Rights in relation to freedom of expression and , specifically , in relation to the media at European level , in order to counteract the growing disparity between the national anti-concentration rules and in order to guarantee the rights of the citizens .
This is a Green Paper which was produced by the Commission ten years ago and has yet to bear fruit .
We believe it is important - given the prospect of an enlarged Europe and in the interests of guaranteeing these fundamental rights - that we work on this .
I would also point out , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that this does not bear any relation to an issue we faced when you were a Member of Parliament : the issue of the waiving of immunity in relation to a case in my country .
What we are proposing is the development of a constitutional right for all Europeans .
Finally , Mr President , I will refer to foreign policy .
If you continue the work of the Greek Presidency with regard to transatlantic relations , we would consider that to be positive and we also believe that an important role can be played through the Quartet in the Middle East .
I would ask you to act like Mrs Rice , that is , when you go to the Middle East , not to talk only to the Israelis .
She has had no problem talking to everybody .
Why should an important European have such a problem ?
I very much appreciate what you have said in relation to Latin America , which is also a transatlantic issue , and above all in relation to Mercosur .
I will end by thanking you for your generosity and by talking about Italians : when the Treaty of Rome ' II ' is signed at the Campidoglio , I am sure that my group colleague and Mayor of Rome , Mr Veltroni , will be very happy to receive the Italian President-in-Office of the Council .
I can assure you , Mr Berlusconi , that we will not be partisan and we will judge your Presidency on the facts , on what you can do , and not just on promises .
( Applause )
Mr President-in-Office , until last night your programme was available only on your website and only in Italian and it is still now available only in Italian and English .
While I have the good fortune to use a computer and to read both languages , some colleagues do not .
I hope this is not a presage .
Your primary task will be to convene the IGC to examine the draft Constitution .
My group shares your ambition to finish this work as soon as possible , and in good time before next year 's elections .
We trust that you will provide adequate representation of the European and national parliaments whose involvement in the Convention helped make it such a success .
But the future of Europe is up to the Member States .
If they continue to fight over it , it will be not a Treaty of Rome - not even a Treaty of Dublin - but perhaps a Treaty of Utrecht , representing peace through exhaustion .
Liberal Democrats agree with your priorities on the European economy .
Our economy is in a bad way ; the German motor of European growth is stalling .
So initiatives to revive growth are welcome .
Yet the completion of the trans-European transport networks must be viewed as a means to an economic end - the smoother functioning of the internal market - and not as an end in itself .
As a British Liberal , I am delighted by the fidelity of your programme to John Maynard Keynes , and my delight is matched only by my surprise .
However , I hope you agree that the spending you propose on TENs and on defence must be compatible with Member States ' commitments under the Stability Pact , which is already under great strain .
For Liberals the continuing value of Keynes lies in his insistence on solidarity .
Your programme speaks much of consumers , but we are citizens first and foremost .
Market ideology tricks people into equating buying power with voting power , and it robs us of the civic freedom by which we control the social consequences of our private choices .
Where regulation is needed is where the gains from remedying market failure for citizens or the environment outweigh the costs of government intervention .
In Italian political debate this is the difference between liberalismo , in which we believe , and liberismo , which we very much reject .
My group supports the closer cooperation you propose with countries around the new borders of the EU , but we should not offer false hope of membership to our neighbours .
Closer relations with the Union must be linked to democracy , respect for human rights and development of a market economy .
We particularly welcome your emphasis on the Euro-Med partnership , which has long been a Liberal priority , and your plans for Albania , where Italy can surely show a lead .
Your programme 's proposals on transatlantic relations , which are on the mend after the breakdown caused by the crisis over Iraq , and your aim to rebuild ties with America are welcome .
However , while seeking common ground with the United States , we must not shy from speaking up for Europe 's interests where we disagree , and we welcome the strength of your statement on the International Criminal Court
On the Middle East too , the Union must project its voice in the Quartet strongly and clearly .
Assistance in rebuilding the Palestinian economy must be conditional on action against terrorism , as improved cooperation with Israel must be conditional on progress in implementing the road map , notably on dismantling settlements .
On agriculture and on immigration , Liberal Democrats find much less in common with your priorities .
These two policy areas are linked .
You say very little in your programme about CAP reform and yet at present every cow in Europe gets a subsidy of EUR 2 a day , while one billion of our fellow citizens worldwide must survive on less than EUR 1 a day .
Unless we open our markets to farm produce from developing countries , their people will vote with their feet .
The policies you propose on justice and home affairs seek mainly to prevent immigration .
They will not work because you cannot beat the law of supply and demand which operates in labour markets like elsewhere .
When you tell us you are concerned about Europe 's reputation ' Cercheremo di fare bella figura per l 'Europa ' , lei ha detto , please bear in mind that white Caucasians are in a minority on our planet .
We hope that you will be guided in justice and home affairs by the balanced approach of the Greek Presidency , rather than by the tenor of Seville .
Mr President-in-Office , your country assumes the presidency following a highly successful Hellenic Presidency , marked by the search for compromise and agreement .
Liberal Democrats in this House hope that in your tenure in the Chair you will , in your words and actions , respect the dignity of the office and honour Italy 's traditional European vocation .
Mr President , a number of us feel a particular affection for Italy , for the extraordinary vitality of its society , the creativity of its people , its exceptional cultural heritage and the richness of its local , socially aware democracy .
We love the Italy of the great popular demonstrations demanding employment , social justice and equality ; of the vigorous anti-war movement ; of the socially aware demonstrations in Genoa against social and police violence ; and of the European Social Forum in Florence . It is an Italy that is young , demanding , enthusiastic and combative because it is convinced , as emphasised by its main watchword , that another Europe is possible and because it is determined to bring it about .
This other Europe is one which provides itself with the resources to loosen the grip of neo-liberal globalisation in order to make employment , training , retirement and social welfare more secure for its citizens , to guarantee proper public services and to improve the standard of living - in short , to place people 's lives above the demands of the market .
This other Europe is one founded upon ethics and equality before the law , one that banishes elitism and exclusion , prohibits privileges and submission and eradicates the poison of intolerance , racism and xenophobia from within our societies , as well as from Europe 's relations with the rest of the world .
This other Europe is one emancipated from US tutelage and daring to make another voice heard in the great international institutions in order , together with its allies from the South , to tackle the open wounds that make the planet less and less safe and habitable and that go under the names of poverty , underdevelopment , environmental disaster and war .
Like ourselves , this fine , unbiddable Italy does not identify with current European Union trends . With all the more reason , it is disgusted by the policies of those in government in Rome who are carrying European trends to the point of absurdity .
Their neo-liberalism is unrestrained , their Atlanticism unconditional and their taste for democracy rather half-hearted .
One of the priorities of this Presidency is a mammoth project to develop infrastructure .
This would warrant careful examination on a case-by-case basis , for blatant needs do , in fact , exist , like that for a ' piggyback programme ' on a scale appropriate to the EU .
Relying upon private capital to carry out such work that will only be profitable in the very long term is , however , to head towards certain failure in the areas of employment , growth and quality of services .
Another of this Presidency 's priorities is to force the pace at which advantages in terms of pensions and social welfare are dismantled .
This is the trademark of the most conservative forces .
As for the plans relating to immigration and the right of asylum , which need to be finalised in the course of the next six months , revulsion is the only possible response to the idea that this ultra-sensitive debate might be sullied by the barbarous cries of rage to which one of the personalities in the current coalition is frequently given .
We finally learned yesterday that formal decisions will have to be taken between now and December concerning the EU 's new strategic doctrine which , when outlined before the start of the Italian Presidency , had already elicited great fears .
Therefore , extreme vigilance will be required in all respects throughout these six months .
If the current constitutional process is to have any meaning , let us begin by ensuring compliance with Article 2 of the draft Constitution , devoted to the values of the EU and worded as follows : ' The Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity , liberty , democracy , equality , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
These values are common to the Member States in a society of pluralism , tolerance , justice , solidarity , and non-discrimination ' .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , as we know , Europe is a continent of widely differing peoples and cultures , but one thing is certain : there is nothing surprising in the concern which has greeted your arrival at the helm of the Union .
Italy is tainted with a stain which could well spread to the rest of the new Union : an extraordinary concentration of power , primarily economic and media power but also political power , which has placed you in a position , inter alia , where you are now above the law .
However , we realise that just continually protesting will not suffice : we prefer to act .
During these six months too , we will continue to urge the Commission to respect its undertaking to present a communication on the degree of pluralism of the media in the Union and to fulfil its role as guardian of the Treaties .
Indeed , we feel that Italy is rather hesitant , so to speak , when it comes to enforcing the ' Television without Frontiers ' directive .
We have fought to have pluralism included among the founding values of the new European Constitution , so that the lack of a legal basis can no longer be used as an excuse not to take action in Europe regarding media concentration and pluralism .
At a time of economic crisis , it is usual to endeavour to find ways of boosting the economy .
We know that Italy has extremely creative ministers who are anxious to expound their ambitious plans for bridges , tunnels and motorways at European level .
We are ready to enter into constructive dialogue on TENs and the role of the EIB , but we must be under no illusion .
It is not true that only three of the 14 projects decided on at Essen were executed because of a lack of funds : if there were not enough investors , one reason is that the appropriateness , socio-economic viability and - we would add -environmental sustainability of many of those projects were not guaranteed .
We must recapture the spirit of the Delors plan and two powerful principles contained in the Commission 's White Paper on Transport Policy , which I am afraid we sometimes all appear to disregard : investments must serve not just to fill Europe with infrastructure but to promote economic and social cohesion too .
We must banish the idea that economic growth must of necessity go hand in hand with transport growth , for , otherwise , we will soon find ourselves stuck in a permanent traffic jam .
It makes no sense to spend EUR 6 billion on the Messina bridge to shorten journeys by half an hour when thousands of Sicilians are without drinking water and it takes three hours to complete a 100-km journey by train .
It makes no sense to invest 15 years of work in a 54-km tunnel for the Turin-Lyons link , drilling a hole through a mountain full of asbestos , when modernising and enhancing the present line would make it possible to absorb twice as much freight traffic in five years .
We do not want to discuss grandiose projects which may not be achievable - we want investment which promotes innovation , renewable energies and land regeneration with regard to which the participation and acceptance of the citizens living in the areas concerned are seen as an asset rather than an annoying obstacle .
President-in-Office , your European programme states clearly in black and white that we must open a new season and that we must combat environmental bureaucracies .
This is an interesting circumlocution , which we believe refers to the desire to extend to Europe a principle which is in great vogue in Italy - total deregulation .
We will oppose this attempt to export Italian produce , which is particularly risky at the time of enlargement , for it directly serves the policy of making everything subservient to infrastructure and is based on an antiquated concept of the environment as a commodity to be used and sold off .
Italy is second only to Spain when it comes to breaches of environment legislation .
Your government , President-in-Office , has changed the laws on waste so as to make monitoring more difficult , even though 11 million tonnes of waste are lost without trace and the turnover of the ecomafia is estimated to be around EUR 2.5 billion every year in Italy . It has weakened the laws on the assessment of environmental impact so much that it has become purely a formality .
It has consented to the indiscriminate promotion of hunting in parks by regional authorities . For this year , it has appropriated EUR 56 million for protected areas , which is less than the cost of building 1 km of motorway tunnel .
It is preparing to decriminalise environmental offences across the board .
In all this , it is disregarding Community law . In this matter too , as in the issue of the media , we feel that this is a situation specific to Italy .
President Prodi , in a sector in which the Union has genuine competences and international responsibilities , we fear that the unnecessarily complicated infringement procedure is no longer sufficient , and that by maintaining an excessively tolerant attitude and giving more consideration to the details of form than to substance we are in serious danger of helping to render Community legislation on the environment completely ineffective .
President-in-Office , as regards foreign policy , we would all like to benefit from your excellent relations with President Bush , but certainly not to organise an impossible contest in military expenditure , maybe reducing contributions to development cooperation organisations in order to fund the Italian presence in Iraq .
A fundamental dispute has arisen with the Bush administration over the International Criminal Court .
We would like to know , President-in-Office , whether you are going to press ahead with and update the action plan for the Court , which was adopted in May 2002 .
Then you are on excellent terms with President Putin .
Once again , it is our genuine hope that we will all be able to benefit from this friendship .
You have listed all the countries in the world : how can you forget Chechnya ?
We need incisive action to bring about resolution of this conflict .
We must adopt an initiative , and we will support you if you do so , with a view to convening a regional conference for the Caucasus in which all the current conflicts can be addressed without fail .
Moreover , President-in-Office , we believe that we and you would be proud if you succeeded in persuading President Putin to ratify the Kyoto Protocol .
One final word on the European Constitution .
We will support the Italian Presidency 's endeavours to achieve a short Intergovernmental Conference so as not to disperse the - moreover , few - positive results of the Convention . However , President-in-Office , you must keep nuclear energy out of the Constitution , and I call upon the deputy Prime Minister , Mr Fini , to help us keep it out .
Just as for GMOs , it would be unwise to underestimate the negative reaction of the citizens of many European countries , Italy included , when faced with the explicit promotion of such a costly , dangerous source of energy , as is currently contained in the Constitution .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President , a constantly-changing society demands from politics new debates , the ability to take rapid decisions and , above all , the willingness to reflect deeply , with full knowledge of the facts , on the geopolitical and different economic and cultural situations which , in some respects , contribute to the ever-widening gap between north and south and between citizens .
As a member of the Convention , I would like to express my satisfaction and the satisfaction of the Group which I have the honour of representing in that forum - the Group of the Union for a Europe of Nations - with a text which recognises the value of the national States in the new European Union : a Union which we hope will have stronger and more transparent institutions after the Intergovernmental Conference , which can prove to the world that the European Union exists as a model of civilisation and development .
A civilisation which wants to see its values recognised without wishing to abuse the values of other cultures ; development which must be compatible with the rate of adaptation of man .
It is our hope that , with regard to the preamble , the Intergovernmental Conference will come to an agreement on the acknowledgement of the roots from which the Union has sprung to life .
The ancient history of Greece and Rome , the Judaeo-Christian traditions and the secular , liberal values which came gradually to be established cannot be disregarded because it is from them that the future of Europe is drawing cultural and moral strength .
We can see , moreover , that it would be appropriate to reflect once again on the need for there to be a European Commissioner for each Member State , in order to achieve greater cohesion between all the institutions .
The Constitutional Treaty will , at last , give rise to a politically cohesive , free , independent Europe which respects the languages and traditions of each nation .
The Italian Presidency has some extremely arduous tasks ahead of it and we are confident that , in the spirit of cooperation that it will foster with the other European institutions , with the Members of the European Parliament , the elected representatives of the people , it will give fresh impetus to the process of unifying Europe and to Europe 's role in the world .
The urgency of the migration issue demands an overall view .
As I had occasion to write on the eve of the Thessaloniki Summit , only Europe , not least through a new Mediterranean policy and , at last , adopting a new principle of cooperation with the poorest countries , will be able to stop illegal migration of biblical proportions becoming a collective tragedy .
I look forward to the European border police corps and the new agreements with third countries , I look forward to reinforced cooperation in combating organised crime , terrorism and fundamentalism , but the issue of a European approach to the globalisation of the markets must be addressed too , to prevent cultures and traditions becoming fragmented and dying out .
A healthy social market economy cannot continue to accommodate unrestrained financial speculation such as that we have witnessed in recent years , which has broken out intermittently without there being any attempt to destroy its roots , to eradicate its causes .
The health of the economy also depends on the parameters governing our actions , and one good parameter is that the financial economy must move at the same rate as the real economy .
Europe cannot disregard the fact that the mobility necessary to allow the economy to develop further is dependent on two requirements : cultural education , which provides young people of all nations with the basis for mutual understanding - which means the national governments will have to address the need to provide more and better information on the activities of the European institutions - and the question of accommodation , which cannot be the responsibility solely of individuals or the private sector but to which the institutions too must help to find a solution ; likewise , infrastructure- and transport-related issues need solutions at both national and European level , and so we would point out again here the need for rapid completion of Corridor 5 and Corridor 8 .
To combat the new forms of poverty which are emerging increasingly in the countries of the Union , we feel that it is vital for Europe to have a stronger energy policy which , based on seeking new sources and more efficient use of known sources , goes hand in hand with preserving those environmental values without which the very life of the planet would be endangered .
At the same time , the issue of funding for research must be addressed : without substantial increases European research will not reach a level of excellence , with all the predictable ensuing consequences .
In this connection , a more effective European food safety policy becomes particularly important in order to safeguard the quality of products and to protect their origins , thus safeguarding the citizens ' health , which is the Union 's main asset .
Today , Europe is called upon not just to uphold the right to life of its citizens and of all human beings but to send out the message that all people have the right to a dignified life .
Indeed , in the third millennium , all the most highly developed communities are , in any case , being called upon to take the political , cultural and economic measures necessary both within and outside their states to ensure that the tragedies we are witnessing do not continue .
Children in Afghanistan currently have the lowest life expectancy in the world . Like millions of other children - in Africa , South America and the Middle and Far East - they are deprived of the right to life and the right to a dignified life .
The relentless combating of terrorism and the consolidation of peace are dependent , not least , upon Europe 's ability to deliver what it has promised over the course of recent years : the right to a dignified life , Mr President , not least in order to put an end to practices involving physical mutilation , to which many women are subjected in their countries of origin , suffering this abuse in Europe too .
The Group of the Union for a Europe of Nations also expects from the Italian Presidency policies seeking to combat forms of discrimination , to crack down on traffickers of arms and human beings and to destroy the arcane , yet powerful world of child abuse .
These criminal organisations have unrestricted , unregulated use of the Internet , which they use to spread their evil culture throughout the world .
We therefore call for the drawing up of rules to stop a tool which exists to facilitate communication between citizens being transformed into a tool for use by those who violate the laws of the national states of the Union .
In order to stop this happening , every technological invention must be subject to a European screening process , a scientific experimental control process which provides the guarantee that it is safe to use .
Mr President , if freedom is to be true freedom , there have to be rules : a small number of clear , enforced rules .
We appeal to these rules in the hope that the Italian Presidency will enjoy today the good will and cooperation of the European Parliament , the Group of the Union for a Europe of Nations and of all 25 countries which make up our great Europe .
( Applause from the right )
Mr President , Italy insists that the Intergovernmental Conference must be ready to begin by December so that President Berlusconi can issue invitations to the Rome Summit and solemnly bury the Treaty of Rome and give birth to the Rome Constitution .
A serious constitution cannot be devised as quickly as that .
When the EU is equipped with common citizenship , fundamental rights and a whole charter of rights that can be invoked directly before the courts , the character of the whole cooperative enterprise is altered , and every single provision of Title III is to be read in a new light and can acquire new significance .
To cite just one example : when the Treaty of Maastricht introduced common citizenship , it was expressly stated in writing that citizenship had no direct effect .
The judgments of the Court of Justice nonetheless caused citizenship to be of direct effect , and people are now free to settle anywhere in the EU and have their rights further extended by means of the many fundamental principles in Title I of the Constitution and Title II of the Charter .
The people and the elected representatives should be aware of all the consequences of the Constitution before it is adopted .
This will require a large number of working parties , opportunities to table amendments and transparent democracy .
What would the Constitution mean , for example , for the Danish summer house protocol ?
Denmark prohibits Germans from purchasing summer houses in the way that Danes can .
This quite clearly contravenes the ban on national discrimination under Article 4 and the principle of equality under Article 44 .
Can two such fundamental principles be set aside by an exemption , in the form of a protocol , to the rules governing the free movement of capital ?
Is there a hierarchical relationship between the fundamental principles and the other provisions in the Constitution and protocols ?
Alternatively , take Article 51 , which protects the structure of the churches .
Denmark can in this way retain a Protestant state church , but can Article 51 also lift the ban on religious discrimination in Article 2 , paragraph 21 of Title II ?
Is the Danish constitution lawful or unlawful ?
It would be nice to know the answer before the Constitution is signed .
Article 12 ( 2 ) renders the majority of all the international agreements unlawful , for the EU would be given not only shared competence but also sole competence to enter into any agreement if only an internal act were affected .
Ought it not at least to be stated in writing that all existing agreements shall continue in force until such time as they are altered ?
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , let us take a practical look at what is already happening .
We must measure in this way , with intellectual honesty and , I believe , this form of cooperation , any difference between what is said and what is done .
On 7 June , Mr Berlusconi , in Jerusalem , you said , and I quote : ' In the future , Europe must include Israel . We look on Israel as a European nation to all intents and purposes : cultural , economic and political ' , going on to describe it as the Middle East 's only true democracy .
I repeat : ' In the future , Europe must include Israel . We look on Israel as a European nation to all intents and purposes . '
This is the official wording of the written document we have .
' In this context , ' ( the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership ) - and I quote - ' we shall not neglect the need to consolidate relations with Israel with the prospect of more extensive and structured reciprocal cooperation ' .
This is the line taken by those who oppose Israel 's entry into the European Union , for , clearly , those who are opposed do not say ' We don 't want these dirty Jews ' ; they say ' Cooperation is enough ' .
We support Mr Berlusconi who , at that time , was not yet President-in-Office of our Council .
Similarly , as regards Turkey , we have always heard Russia , Turkey and Israel specified .
Here , too , your text explicitly denies the goal of Turkey 's accession .
What does it say ? ' The Italian Presidency furthermore considers it essential to inject more specific content into relations with the Russian Federation ' and so on .
This is quite clear .
As regards Turkey , ' ? we are engaged in jointly monitoring its path to integration , encouraging the Government in Ankara to continue its efforts in the fundamental process of internal reforms . '
And that is supposed to herald its accession !
It is true that Mr Buttiglione has said in recent days that Turkey is a military regime which can never become part of the European Union , but without the soldiers it becomes a theocracy .
This is Christian Europe !
I would just like to say one thing very briefly , and we must admit it .
It is not true that there is a history of Europe - just one : there are many .
There is the history of the Reformation and the Counter Reformation , there is the history of a Europe which produced victorious communisms and victorious fascisms and nazisms , which produced , and still produces today , antidemocracy .
Then there is the other history , the history condemned , I regret to say , by our Polish Pope when he condemns liberalism .
By the way , it is liberalismo , Mr Watson , not liberismo : here we have had liberalism for a century . There is a Europe of the Pontifical Zuaves - European and French Zuaves - fighting the Italian risorgimento .
There is a Europe which is the Europe opposed to our Europe of Altiero Spinelli , of Ernesto Rossi , of the Europe , Mr Berlusconi , which you heralded at the G8 in a way which I applauded .
We Radicals applauded ! We want to take Europe closer to the World Democracy Organisation and focus actively on the Community of Democracies .
We applauded at the G8 !
Today , of course , Mr Watson was quick to stress the Keynesian nature of your speech , but I have always maintained that , culturally , there is essentially great similarity between you and President Prodi when it comes to the political choices you make .
Giulio Tremonti talks of ' Colbertism ' rather than ' Keynesianism ' , but when all is said and done ?
There are just two things we have to ask from you , then .
Firstly that , at the United Nations General Assembly , the European Union includes or brings about the inclusion , as Mr Fini announced , of the question of the moratorium on the death penalty .
Secondly that , starting with the UN events , the Democratic Caucus representatives should be convened by the Presidency of the European Union .
If you comply with these two requests then we will be more than content .
As far as the rest is concerned , I wish you and us all luck .
Mr President-in-Office , the problems we have to face at this moment are vital for the future of the Union and we intend to give them absolute priority .
It is on these that we shall assess the work of your presidency .
The concerns that have surrounded it , however , are not all due to prejudice .
The unresolved conflict of interests remains a legitimate source of concern that extends well beyond our own country .
In addition , the resignation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr Ruggiero , had a significant effect on the way people understand Italy 's role in Europe , the same Europe that Minister Bossi dubbed ' Forcolandia ' [ ' Gallowsland ' ] because it is repressive , and which he has today branded a neo-Jacobin project , intrinsically authoritarian and globalising .
Perhaps this accounts for your coolness towards working seriously on the construction of a European area of justice , freedom and security , starting with the European arrest warrant , which ought to be approved by December 2003 .
Major problems , I was saying : the Constitution , first of all .
We ask that the next Intergovernmental Conference should not put the Convention 's results forward for further discussion and that Italy should make every effort to improve the text on essential points , such as the extension of majority voting .
On economic questions , we see that the Italian Presidency intends to relaunch the idea of public investment for infrastructure .
We shall also add training , research and the environment .
This proposal can only make headway if it adopts a truly European perspective , if it is firmly anchored in the Community method and is financially viable .
With regard to pensions , you are well aware , Mr President-in-Office , that Europe has no competence in the field of social security schemes , which are so diverse and so closely tied in with welfare policies .
Does the Presidency really mean to promote a European initiative in the economic and social field ?
Well , then , it should do its best to have taxation and social policies brought within the Community 's competence in the new Treaty , based on the guidelines of real European control of the economy , as this Parliament has been demanding for some time .
In these matters , however , the method of consulting the social partners has to be followed , as laid down in the Lisbon strategy .
As regards immigration , one cannot invoke just one piece of European policy - the part relating to frontier controls to combat illegal immigration - and ignore all the others , on the management of the influx and the reception and rights of those who , by coming here to seek work , contribute to the economic growth of our countries , those , let us be clear , whom your Minister for Reforms lumps together as ' Bingo Bongos ' .
Lastly , on the matter of foreign policy , it is possible to be both Europeans and friends of the USA .
Friendship , however , is a relationship that must not fall into subservience .
After the difficult Iraqi crisis , it is therefore even more urgent to define a sound common foreign and security policy , backed by overthrowing the right of veto .
A clear framework for the Union 's foreign relations was drawn up at Thessaloniki , distinguishing further prospects of enlargement from closer relations with our neighbours ; in this context , after the contradictory statements that you and your Minister for European Policies have made regarding Turkey , we hope that what you told us this morning will stand .
Similarly , for the Middle East , we hope that the peace process will be supported by the Italian Presidency , but to reach this goal it will be necessary to talk to and take into consideration all the parties involved .
I wish you success in your work , Mr President-in-Office !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , today we are talking as Europeans ; we do not bring to this House opinions on the internal politics of our countries .
In the next six months Europe must start moving faster ; the constitutional treaty for a Europe of 25 should make the world realise whether our continent will continue to be a driving force for economic and social progress and , after the serious Iraqi crisis , whether it will equip itself with effective means to take a leading role in matters of security and freedom in partnership with the United States , in a new multilateral cooperation .
As a European , therefore , I hope for a successful Italian Presidency working in close collaboration with the Commission under Romano Prodi and with our Parliament .
Today , Mr President-in-Office , you have been cautious and made an effort to present your programme along lines of collaboration with the other countries and not in discontinuity with Italy 's traditional policy for Europe .
We need to be bolder , however , if we do not want our compromises to slip away , especially as regards control of the economy , foreign policy and the necessary new defence policy , so as to minimise the risk of paralysis due to the need for unanimity .
Over these six months we expect a radical change that can remove the reasons for all the criticism , scepticism and concern that have surrounded these first few days of the period with you at the helm .
Indeed , it is not the internal politics of one country but all Europe that is calling for an end to conflicts of interest and media concentrations .
It is the liberal fundamentals of the separation of powers and the balance among the powers as reflected in the European Treaties which we have freely signed and by which we are bound .
The spirit of Rome of the 1957 Treaty was based on a daring vision of the future , and it constructed fifty years of democracy , prosperity and peace .
If we are guided by that vision , even from alternative political positions , we shall harvest common fruits for the good of Europe and its future .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , our aversion to your politics and your government , as you know , is deep-rooted , and it would not make sense for us to do a U-turn now that your politics are being applied to Europe and not just Italy .
I think there is a rhetoric surrounding the six-month presidency of a nation , which cannot hide the political reality : the reality is that every presidency is the presidency of a government , not of a country ; therefore , if people are against the Bush Administration it does not mean they are anti-American , and if people in Italy and Europe are against their government , it does not mean they are against Italy .
Europe is , of course , an important episode ; it is a challenge that has quite rightly been called historic .
We are afraid that your government will aggravate rather than favour the necessary choices .
You are starting with a handicap : in Italy the country 's consensus is split , a major part of European public opinion is contrary ( and I believe the causes lie precisely in your politics ) , the bases for the economic crisis in the country have been distorted , as it has been under severe strain with the conflict of interests and the conflict between the established powers .
I personally feel the worst damage has been done by a minister in your government who can speak of the need to open fire on convoys of immigrants at sea .
We shall not , however , protest about your government 's presidency ; we shall confine ourselves instead to criticising your politics , the bases of which are essentially the primacy of the United States of America and the primacy of the market .
Both are factors of potential crisis for Europe : one , the United States , driven today by a doctrine of pre-emptive war ; the other , the market , faced by a clearly developing crisis of social cohesion .
You , Mr President-in-Office , have put forward a proposal for a transatlantic , neo-liberal , post-democratic Europe .
We think this proposal goes against the vocation and historic mission of Europe today , of a Europe that needs another perspective .
Someone spoke of a Keynesian policy ; I beg to differ : large-scale infrastructure is not a Keynesian policy ; it may instead be a threat to the environment through deregulation , and it also runs the risk of not being completed because of the difficulties in financing it .
There is another side to your politics , however , which is neo-liberal through and through : it is what we call job insecurity and you call flexibility ; it is what is shown - as , indeed , in other European countries - in the attack on the social security system .
This , Mr President-in-Office , is not Europe .
The real Europe is the one calling for independence from US policies for the sake of a different political culture , the one calling for a different social model .
Your strongpoint today is the weakness of political Europe , because the truth is that this political Europe is founded on a democratic deficit , and because I think that the Convention , too , is ambiguous and weak , a far cry from the great progressive constitutions .
Therefore , Mr President-in-Office , we shall not oppose you for the sake of this Europe , but for the sake of another Europe : a social and democratic Europe .
That is why our hope is - and please do not take this as a sign of hostility - that mass movement action in Europe will grow in both numbers of participants and importance during the Italian Presidency .
There is just one thing on which we should like to be able to come together with you : in calling loudly for a moratorium on the death penalty .
That , at least , would be a good sign of civilisation .
Mr Berlusconi , I believe the most important task during the Italian Presidency will be that relating to the new constitutional treaty , which , let us recall , is not just concerned with ideas or concepts but addresses a territory and the people who live in that territory .
The work the Convention has done is good work : the initial basis is sound , it may be that only a few adjustments will be necessary , such as a better definition of the balance of legislative powers between Europe , between the Union and the individual states .
As for the problem of majority voting or unanimity in decision-making , we have to reconcile two needs : the need for efficiency and the need to respect the sovereignty and interests of the states that make up the Union .
In your speech , you repeated the word ' negotiation ' several times .
I think some effort to reconcile different needs is also required in this area .
Lastly , I should like to mention something which I do not think it will be possible to achieve but which I must highlight : the need for a reduction in the Commission 's monopoly on legislative initiatives to the benefit of this House .
Parliament does not have the right to initiate legislation - the only case in the world , I believe .
Even a mere town councillor can table proposals , but Members of the European Parliament do not have this right .
I believe this question at least deserves your attention .
I too offer you my best wishes for your Presidency .
Mr President , certain people should remember that we are debating today the programme of the Italian Presidency with which - and I am keen to point this out - I am essentially in agreement .
I hope that throughout these six months , at all times in fact , we will be able to distinguish between domestic ideological differences and the institutional responsibilities such as those which the great country of Italy is now taking on .
We take note , in this regard , of the commitment of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
The main task of the Italian Government is to successfully organise the Intergovernmental Conference ( IGC ) and to employ all its capacity for dialogue in order to bring the positions of the Member States together .
In this regard , we are grateful for the commitment of the Presidency-in-Office of the Council .
The objective is for the IGC , in any event , to begin and end in Rome .
Time periods here , Mr President , are very important so that the countries which decide to hold a referendum on the ratification of the Constitution of Rome , allowing it to coincide with the European elections on 13 June 2004 - and I wish that were all of them - are able to do so .
In this regard , Mr President , please allow me to take this opportunity to urge the political opposition in my country to agree to a reform by consensus of the rules governing the referendum so that such a vote may be possible , as we all wish .
We would also like during this six-month period for strong impetus to be given to the negotiations for the accession of Romania and Bulgaria and we call on the Presidency to do everything possible so that these negotiations may end within the time period of the current European legislature .
In terms of the European Union 's internal policy , we fully support taking further steps on the Lisbon strategy and continuing to make progress on the area of freedom , security and justice , particularly in combating illegal immigration , and in terms of the foreign policy of the Italian Presidency we hope that it relaunches the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue in Naples and we welcome its commitments in this respect on the creation of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly , but in particular the relaunching of the idea of the Euro-Mediterranean Bank .
And we would also urge you to promote progress in the negotiations with Mercosur which the WTO will promote and which your Italo-Argentinian compatriots will no doubt welcome .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we wish you the best of luck because success during these six months will be a success for Europe .
Mr President , as an Italian and a Member of the European Parliament I feel embarrassed and worried but at the same time proud that my country , Italy , is today taking on the leadership of the European Union .
I feel embarrassed at all the criticism , censure , sarcasm and derision levelled at my country for what has , I regret to say , quite rightly been called the Italian anomaly , or the serious conflict of interests that involves our Prime Minister .
I also feel humiliated , because I recognise indeed that , whenever our Prime Minister expresses an idea , illustrates a proposal or presents a measure on the economy , finance , information or especially justice , we never know whether in doing so he is thinking of our interests or his own and those of his friends .
Or rather , we in Italy know only too well , unfortunately , given what he has done up to now .
I am worried because I do not want the conflict of interests virus that is humiliating Italian democracy to spread to a European level , because this is the real cancer for democracy , Mr Berlusconi , not the work of the judges , as you foolishly stated the other day .
I am , however , also proud - yes , proud - because , thank God , Italy 's institutions are not just made up of the Prime Minister and the friends he has brought in with him , especially in the Italian Parliament .
That is why I am sure that Italy 's leadership of the European Union will , as a whole , with the involvement and collaboration of all the institutions , including the oppositions , rise to the occasion despite the Italian anomaly , which I am glad to say is transient .
Mr President , Italy , which so long ago was among the founders of the European Community , today has the great task of taking Europe fully into its historic continental enlargement and the launching of its first Constitution .
This is our hope and also our commitment but , frankly , it is bad for Italy and for Europe that the person who is to represent us during the coming six months is Silvio Berlusconi .
The whole of Europe knows that he represents an anomaly unparalleled elsewhere in the world .
An immense weight hangs over him and his actions because of the ongoing conflict between his own personal interests and those of the people of Italy and Europe as a whole .
He is the richest man in Italy : his immense economic power and his private affairs , which are present in every field of activity , conflict with the laws , the standards and the very principles of the State ; they conflict with justice , and that is the truth .
It is very sad for Italy and for Europe to have to read fierce criticism of him in the most respected newspapers in every country .
You have all read it , ladies and gentlemen , so I will not repeat it : it is harsh criticism , but it is true .
For all of us it is a cause of the greatest concern to see someone at the head of the Council who , during the war in Iraq , acted not to unite Europe but to divide it , by coming out against the feelings expressed by the vast majority of the people of Europe and once again adopting subservient positions towards the United States ; someone who on international issues departs from the prevailing European line , on relations with Israel and Palestine , for instance , or the dramatic immigration question ; someone who , on economic and social issues , starting with the attack on pensions , has espoused an extremely laissez-faire and deeply anti-popular line .
Mr Berlusconi is the right , and the worst , most dangerous kind of European right , and I therefore have no illusions .
Frankly , I expect the Berlusconi term of office will prove to be a total disaster .
I hope at least that , in the interests of Europe and my homeland of Italy , the damage can be kept to a minimum .
Let this be quite clear : for this reason we shall act decisively out of a pure sense of national responsibility and a staunch European spirit . For this very reason , we shall oppose him and his politics .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , in this Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , and in European society , there is a profound distrust of the Italian Presidency .
Not because of Italy , of course , the foundation of our culture , of many of our languages and of the very idea of Europe , but because of the political personality of President Berlusconi .
You , Mr Berlusconi , are one of the main representatives of the authoritarian right of our day , protagonist in the battle between the classes , internally and globally , between the rich and the poor and the workers .
You even call people such as President Prodi , critical journalists and the judges who judge you ' communists ' .
You use antiquated language , even troglodyte language , forgetting which century you are in .
You are a friend of Sharon against Arafat .
This distrust was ratified by certain key elements in your speech today .
You subordinate the constitution of the European Union to relations with the United States .
You are unaware of the chaotic and tragic situation in Iraq , caused by governments friendly to you .
You forget the Prestige disaster , which was suffered principally by my nation , Galicia .
You underplayed the constant deaths of immigrants , off both our coasts and in your island of Sicily .
You said nothing about the social Europe , about social and territorial cohesion , not even in view of the prospect of enlargement .
You did not expressly defend the draft constitution .
In Italy , Mr President , you were granted immunity .
Here , as President-in-Office of the Council , you will not have it .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , having welcomed , as is only right , your taking over the reins of the European Union , I must immediately express profound disagreement with the main emphasis you intend to give to your Presidency : that of positioning the European Union in the wake of the United States of America .
The peoples of Europe do not want this and demonstrated as much during the war in Iraq .
Nor is it the option favoured by the European institutions .
Following the example of Parliament , commitment to a multilateral world under the aegis of the United Nations rather than that of the United States has been expressed by the Commission in the shape of Commissioner Patten and Mr Prodi - the former hardly a dangerous left-winger , the latter perhaps a little more in that vein - and even by the Council , or at least to all appearances .
What Europeans are waiting for is the affirmation of their own European identity .
Public opinion has come into its own on this matter , Mr Berlusconi .
Do not disappoint it .
What , indeed , would be the use of this would-be constitution which , whether it be a source of delight or indignation , is a considerable leap forward in the direction of European sovereignty , if our continent were to end up becoming the handmaiden of the US empire ?
Mr President , given that this treaty is to be signed in Rome at the beginning of May 2004 , I hope you will be very keen to propose to your colleagues in the Intergovernmental Conference that the peoples of Europe , as sole wielders of sovereignty and , therefore , as those who alone are in a position to relinquish such sovereignty , should vote on this Constitution in a referendum .
Finally , the Ministerial Conference of the ' World Commercial Organisation ' - a name I think is more apposite than World Trade Organisation - will be held in Cancun during your Presidency .
In the same spirit , I do not want this meeting to be the opportunity for our old Europe , to which we are ultimately rather attached , to sacrifice its cultures , its ways of life and its Community on the altar of unrestrained free trade .
Already , our agriculture has been more or less remodelled in accordance with the rules of the World Trade Organisation .
I fear that our cultures , our identities and our specific character , which has , moreover , given birth to world civilisations , might suffer the same fate .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I want to begin by offering you our unqualified good wishes for a successful presidency .
Recently the debate over the structure , the powers and the institutions of the European Union has come to dominate almost every European discussion .
It therefore comes as a breath of fresh air to see that you have put the pursuit of the Lisbon strategy at the forefront of your policy objectives .
We need to face up to the challenges of economic change and reform .
At a time when Europe is facing deflation and stagnation , it is encouraging to see that you recognise the need to revive the process of major liberalisation of European economies .
We need real action on the Lisbon strategy rather than empty rhetoric .
The millions of unemployed throughout Europe want sustainable jobs , rather than our apparent obsession with institutional design and architecture .
Jobs and prosperity will have a more direct and real impact on the lives of the people that we are here to represent than tinkering with EU institutions .
Turning then to the IGC and the prospective new constitutional treaty , I urge you and your fellow Heads of State to return to the objectives that were set out in Laeken .
You were amongst the European leaders who called for the Convention to bring the EU closer to the citizens .
Some of us seriously question whether the outcome really achieves that .
The European governments should have that Laeken statement firmly in their minds when they begin the negotiations in the IGC .
Our political élites have always assumed that the only way that Europe can succeed is by regular , institutional change .
But our enlarged Europe of 25 states should be a place where proper respect for the diversity of nation states is upheld and defended .
Imposing a straitjacket of uniformity can only damage the true interests of unity in the EU .
I also applaud the statement that you made in your priority objectives , in which you say your desire to complete the work of the IGC is dictated by respect for the values of democracy and transparency .
We trust that you will keep to this in the intergovernmental negotiations that lie ahead .
I would also like to clarify a matter I raised in Parliament with President Cox yesterday .
The accession countries will be affected by the outcome of the IGC in the same way as the current 15 EU states .
I note that they will participate in the IGC on an equal footing with current Member States .
President Cox repeated that statement to me yesterday after my speech .
But what does it really mean in practice ?
Surely it should mean that the accession countries have a full and equal right to vote in the Council on the outcome of the IGC ?
Perhaps you can confirm whether that is also your understanding .
I also welcome your clear commitment to revive and reinvigorate the transatlantic relationship .
Recent events have damaged the strong ties that exist between Europe and the USA .
In a newspaper yesterday , you said that the West must be united .
There cannot be competition between us and America .
Given the growing strains between America and some countries in recent times , we are looking to you to take this priority forward as a high priority .
We must ensure that the European Union in the defence field does not pursue objectives that lead to antagonism with the institutions of the NATO Alliance .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , as an Italian Member of the European Parliament from the Movement of European Republicans in the ELDR Group and for Mr Martelli 's Liberal Socialists , I can only hope that these six months will prove an assured success for Europe and for Italy .
To solve the difficult tasks that lay ahead of you - from major infrastructure to pensions and illegal immigration - you will not be needing sensationalist television formats but intelligent , creative work of political mediation , in order to honour the commitment you have made before this Parliament .
The profile of your actions must therefore be very high and focused on the major international options , most of all the new Constitution for the Twenty-Five , under which every step forward will be welcomed but no step backward will be allowed at all .
Rebuilding a real partnership with the United States must start with a direct relationship with the European Union , with Europe gradually taking on responsibility and leadership in NATO , with a moderate , rather than antagonistic or subservient view of the relations .
Therefore , Mr President-in-Office , we believe it is essential to encourage the United Kingdom to join monetary union so as to strengthen Europe at an international level .
The other difficult test lying ahead of you is the solution to the Middle East problem , bearing in mind that the roadmap requires a highly impartial attitude , and therefore European intervention must not be directed to just one side .
These are major challenges , Mr President-in-Office , for which , on behalf of myself and also our country , I wish you every success .
Mr President-in-Office , if there is one thing that worries me about the situation in Europe - and we have had a few examples this morning - it is a type of politics that all too often appears to be self-referential .
I am therefore sure - and the facts will confirm this - that your commitment to respond to the expectations of your European citizens every single day will mark out your Presidency .
The rule in our speeches is to try to make a contribution to the reports .
There is a great difficulty here , Mr President-in-Office , because the subjects dealt with have covered all our expectations .
There is just one point to which I should like to call your attention : during the six months of the Italian Presidency the new rules on cohesion policies will be drawn up .
In this context , I think the Italian Presidency should remind the European Union of a number of specific responsibilities , which are : to strengthen economic and social cohesion ; to reduce the disparity in the development levels of many regions , which is still present in our Union and will be even more accentuated with enlargement ; and to implement ideas of geographical solidarity , and in this respect we are thinking of the remoter regions .
This is based especially on three principles : that without resources the cohesion policy will be difficult to implement ; that the sectoral policies that the Union is developing - just think of the effects of the reform of the agricultural policy - should contribute to a great ideal of European cohesion ; and that the new idea of European cohesion should also include the flexibility criterion .
One last point , which my colleague Mr Tajani has already touched upon : all these policies will come together in the work of the IGC , confirming the Convention .
Well , I believe a reference to the founding values of Europe , an explicit reference to Christian values , would be a contribution to our history .
Mr President , in Italy you often maintain that you are exposed to political persecution by your critics .
That will not happen in this House .
Your work will , however , be scrutinised carefully , for there is no immunity in this House against political blunders and infringements .
This autumn , the EU is to unite around an asylum and immigration policy based upon humanitarianism and shared humanity .
That is something you did not say very much about in your speech , Mr Berlusconi .
Success demands clear leadership that can act with legitimacy and authority .
I must unfortunately ask myself the question as to whether the Italian Government really is capable of shouldering that responsibility today .
One of your own ministers , mentioned earlier in this House , demands that the police use live ammunition upon refugees seeking freedom in your country .
That is something you must now clearly reject .
Your own role as Italian media proprietor has led to the government directing the content of both the private press and of public television .
That is a very worrying development that affects the whole of the EU and that would not have been accepted if it had happened in any of the EU 's new Member States .
The gloomy question we now have to ask ourselves is whether Italy is a country that fulfils the political Copenhagen criteria .
May you demonstrate that we critics and sceptics are wrong .
I nonetheless wish you good luck over the next six months .
Mr President , allow me to say to you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that we have confidence in Italy 's Presidency .
We know that you will be able to combine political will and the spirit of conciliation in order to take European integration one stage further .
In international affairs , transatlantic relations are obviously fundamental .
The European Union 's discussions with the United States , along the lines of those held recently in Washington , must become more regular .
Issues such as environmental protection that are the subjects of conflict between the two sides of the Atlantic , should be approached on a more pragmatic basis .
We share the opinion of the Italian Presidency on the need for a short IGC , examining , if possible as it stands , the draft constitution of the European Convention and , above all , not re-opening the Pandora 's box of national requests .
We are on the verge of adopting a common constitution drawn up in the full light of day .
May we succeed in seizing this unique opportunity , and let us get ready for the new constitutional Treaty of Rome .
Parallel to the enlargement of the EU , people need to feel safe within the borders of an EU alert to the external threats represented by illegal immigration , organised crime and terrorism .
From now on , we need to show the determination required to achieve the desires of the Thessaloniki Council .
At an economic level , the Italian Presidency 's plan to give new impetus to the trans-European network of road , rail and sea transport , as well as to the research and development project , is a necessity .
As the French Prime Minister , Mr Raffarin , pointed out , the pact that links Europeans to one another is called the Stability and Growth Pact .
We are therefore in favour of the European Union taking initiatives in the area of growth .
As representative of the overseas regions , I would emphasise the importance , in terms of the EU 's social cohesion , of doing everything possible to open up the regions far from the centre of Europe .
European solidarity depends on such efforts .
We can only encourage the new Presidency , in the run-up to the Euro-Mediterranean Conference in Naples on 2 and 3 December 2003 , to develop its relations , particularly in the field of trade , agriculture , infrastructures and migration , in order to ensure that the Barcelona process does not run out of steam .
Finally , we would keenly encourage any European or national policy designed to promote linguistic diversity .
A Europe rich in 20 languages and as many cultures must not be reduced to a Europe of just one language .
That requires effort on the part of everyone , however , and we await practical initiatives in this area from the new Presidency .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I shall let you into a secret : I prefer your own emollient presentation to the contribution , here in Strasbourg yesterday , by the French Prime Minister , whose game was one of national division .
That said - and I imagine you will have realised the fact in the course of this debate - we shall judge you by your actions and not by mere words .
You will also be aware that Parliament has high ambitions for a successful IGC , and it is the task of your presidency to bring it about .
That is the ambition of Parliament and of my political group , in the service of a European democracy that operates at all levels , be it at European level or in each of our Member States , a democracy that respects this Charter of Fundamental Rights that we have just incorporated into the draft Constitution .
I have just , very belatedly , come across your programme in English - I do not , unfortunately , read Italian - and I see that there is again talk of Jacques Delors 's White Paper .
I am delighted , because I think Jacques Delors was right .
Since he proposed that the EU undertake this grand project of trans-border networks and European infrastructures , we are , quite simply , coming up against the same problem , namely that of funding .
You raise the idea of funding by the EIB , but the EIB is still just a bank .
You will find no solution other than a European loan .
Are you prepared , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , to fight for a European loan to fund this major work ?
Otherwise , it will be a case of just words , words , words .
At the end of the day , does this reinvigoration plan serve the cause of European growth or simply that of the Italian economy as it struggles to comply with the Stability and Growth Pact ?
Mr President-in-Office , among the points on the agenda for the Italian Presidency , this Parliament has naturally paid particular attention to the Intergovernmental Conference , which should approve the Convention 's draft .
The Constitution will be an historic development recalling the 1957 Treaty of Rome .
Parliament , however , expects a step forward on the majority vote and a common foreign policy , which it believes is the only alternative to American unilateralism and the most worthwhile basis for Euro-Atlantic understanding .
I also hope there will be some thought about the fact that human values , which are clearly expressed in the clauses of the Constitution and are there to protect the European citizenry , have Christian roots .
Christianity is no restriction to the secularity of politics .
The Italian Presidency has the opportunity to incorporate the trans-European networks - which the Commission 's priority projects have marked out as an objective for strengthening European territorial cohesion - into a broader programme .
We must , however , allocate more resources to the research and innovation policy , as you , Mr Berlusconi , have said and Mr Prodi has confirmed , since the competitiveness of the European economy depends especially on this investment .
This Presidency should , finally , put into practice the initiative outlined at Thessaloniki for an immigration policy that finds a steady balance between legality and reception ; that is , one that upholds the values we read of in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Lastly , to reinvigorate Europe 's Mediterranean policy , we must be aware that no initiative involving the southern Mediterranean countries can be successful unless it is based on a strong peace policy that guarantees the security of Israel but also a homeland for the Palestinians .
I wish you success in your work !
Mr President , the Italian Presidency is proposing economic policy initiatives that are interesting and disconcerting at one and the same time .
In fact , the Italian Government seems to be practising a gelato caldo , or ' hot ice ' , strategy .
It talks in riddles .
The Stability and Growth Pact should thus become both stronger and more flexible at the same time .
There is talk of a ' Maastricht of pensions ' , a slogan that , at first sight , is devoid of meaning .
President Berlusconi has just invited us to reflect upon the durability of European social welfare .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists is fully aware of the problems at present posed by the contract between the generations .
The fortunate increase in life expectancy , together with shorter working lives , have led to a decrease in the number of people actively employed , as compared with the number of retired people .
That obviously presents a problem of funding for the public systems operating on a distribution basis .
It may be seen , however , how private pension funds operating on a capitalisation basis experience similar problems .
In the United States , the United Kingdom and elsewhere , pension funds are accumulating losses and experiencing serious liquidity problems .
Everywhere , companies are converting the basis of their pensions funds from one of defined benefits to one of defined contributions .
In other words , employees know what they have to pay but are no longer aware of the money to which they will be entitled once they have reached retirement age .
Does not this ' Maastricht of pensions ' conceal a desire to reduce the public commitment where pensions are concerned ?
The Presidency must clarify its real intentions in this matter as quickly as possible .
The PSE Group will not , at any event , accept a pensions Waterloo .
The proposals by the minister , Mr Tremonti , in favour of trans-European transport systems comply with a political priority defended by my group for years .
As the concept is not very clear and as the funding is by no means assured , it is difficult , however , to see what might be the impact upon the European economic situation of bringing about future trans-European networks .
As President Ciampi said - and I shall conclude at this point - there will be no stability without growth and no growth without stability .
Growth and stability are the two motors that will enable the European economy to move forward .
Mr President , I want to wish the Italian Presidency every success .
Taking place , as it is , at an extremely important time for the future of Europe , I want it to be harmonious and effective at one and the same time .
I support what has already been voiced by a number of other speakers , namely the wish to allow a new constitutional treaty to see the light of day during this Presidency .
Italy is a great European country .
It is also a country of great Europeans , and I am sure that , faithful to this heritage , the President-in-Office of the Council , the President of the Commission and the Vice-President of the Convention will be very keen to agree upon essentials in order to give Europe a new face .
This new Constitution that we shall adopt , I hope , by referendum will , as I see it , have one great virtue : that of finally existing .
This fundamental text must , however , be a point of departure for a new Europe and not an end in itself .
I also think that the next elections will be an opportunity for our fellow citizens to affirm their desire to go further in common European policies , whether it is a question of coordinating economic , budgetary , fiscal and social policies , of creating a Europe of defence and research or of defining a common foreign policy that can finally count for something in the world .
That will be the next challenge for those who like this idea of a Europe that both unites and transcends us .
The Italian Presidency will also have a great responsibility for making advances in the fields of education and culture .
You will have to give further impetus to a Europe of knowledge , and I want us to be able to adopt the Erasmus Mundus programme as quickly as possible so that it might be put into effect no later than 2004 .
Finally , I would take the liberty of drawing your attention to the meeting of UNESCO 's General Assembly in October 2003 , which should tackle the draft international convention on cultural diversity .
It is more than desirable that the EU should adopt a clear and public position on this draft .
In conclusion , I want to express the wish that this Italian Presidency might be informed by the spirit of the signatories of the Treaty of Rome .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , our timetable means that it falls to you to hold the Presidency during a six-month period which is key to the implementation of the European arrest warrant , a request of this Parliament , a request of my country , Spain .
I would ask you please to do everything necessary to make it possible .
The European Union must contribute its own approach to the fight against terrorism , particularly since we have seen recently that the military approach has its limitations .
It also has it limitations in relation to the issue of immigration .
Through military means we resolve nothing , and I am not talking about rights , I am talking about effectiveness .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , there is nothing easier than to criticise the immigration policy of the current government .
You , Italy , are a clear example .
You attacked the last government on the issue of immigration , and now you are faced with the same or worse problems and you do not even need the opposition to say so : they say it within your own government .
You ask us not to bring Italian arguments here .
Let us make a pact : I would ask you exactly the same thing .
Do not raise the tone by bringing the problems you cannot resolve nationally to the seat of the European Union .
Do not bring the Italian debate on immigration here .
We do not need it .
We do not need an escalation of press headlines .
Instead , we need to continue with the Thessaloniki conclusions , with their content and with the tone in which they have been written .
We need to establish an admission policy , a policy on border control , on integration - a word which has disappeared from your programme - and dialogue with third countries , not on illegal immigration , but on immigration , on all aspects of immigration .
In a measured and rational tone , without mixing up illegality , security and legality , without insinuations which are always at play , not because it is not politically correct , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , but because then we would fail in our management of immigration and in the fight against crime and we cannot afford to do that .
Mr President-in-Office , you spoke of a great Europe and , indeed , with the arrival of the new countries , we are experiencing a moment of Europe 's reconciliation with its own history and its own civilisation .
Europe will only be great , however , if it can preserve its ability to compete in the economic field .
As you said , Europe will be able to exert influence if it can act decisively .
If , today , there is a ghost haunting Europe , it is the risk of losing its competitive ability on a world scale .
I therefore applaud your mention of the Lisbon strategy and also the reference in your programme to competitiveness in the service of shared prosperity .
Since Lisbon , Mr President-in-Office , three years have been wasted - and I mean wasted .
That is why it is right to seek new lines of development and new economic instruments , as you have done .
We need imagination , we need the ability to see beyond what is obvious , and therefore the proposal to build up our infrastructure , both tangible and intangible ( such as human resources and research ) , by mobilising private resources as well as public funds is the right road .
It is also necessary to bring the subject of a sustainable pensions system to European Union level .
Many of us , in this Parliament and outside , are convinced that your Presidency will be the key to success in this critical period in the construction of a united Europe .
I should like to remind those who today have brought us the venom of a certain mediocre kind of Italian politics that in a democracy it is the citizens ' votes that give legitimacy , and nothing else .
Perhaps for them the concept of democracy is too recent for them to have adopted it completely .
We , as Italians and Europeans , are proud that you are going to lead Europe for these six months .
I wish you every success in your work , Mr President-in-Office !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , two golden rules have emerged from Mr Berlusconi 's speech : continuity in foreign policy and security , and a call for judgment based on the facts .
The approach of negotiation announced by Mr Berlusconi is the approach of wisdom and true hard work , the approach that Europe needs in everyone 's interests .
The facts speak for themselves : Europe is at an historic turning-point , it is about to give itself a constitution , but the draft presented has received general acceptance which for the time being , however , has glossed over the objections of several governments , and these objections will surface at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Negotiation will be the only means of reaching a positive conclusion .
In foreign policy there are four objectives : the Middle East peace process ; restoring the transatlantic relationship , which has been damaged by the Iraqi crisis ; launching new operations in the Balkans run by European forces under the European flag ; and lastly the dialogue with the southern Mediterranean countries , which is one of the strong points in the line of action of the European Commission , under the excellent leadership of Romano Prodi .
In these cases too , the negotiation you have indicated , Mr President-in-Office , will be decisive .
Since your first appearance in this House , you needed to clarify not only the priorities of the Italian Presidency but also the methods it intended to use , and you have done so clearly , coherently and with a sense of true democracy , especially when you announced greater involvement for the European Parliament .
Finally , we appreciate the commitment to boost the Union 's economy and define the future of the common agricultural policy , and highlight your spirit of collaboration on thorny problems like immigration and the security policy .
I should like to end by expressing my pride as an Italian Member of this Parliament - a feeling that any other European Member would feel in these circumstances - at taking part in a founding action of the European Union , a Union which is today led by two Italian representatives , Silvio Berlusconi and Romano Prodi .
We are certain they will not disappoint us but will , instead , prove worthy of Italy 's history and the creation of the Community .
Mr Berlusconi , your Presidency will be successful , despite the Italian and European malcontents who rant and rail today , and you will have the full support of the Christian Democrat group in this Parliament .
I wish you success , as this will be the success of Europe !
Mr President , Mr President of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , the Italian Presidency of the European Union begins in a climate of complex and difficult economic choices .
If this Presidency is to be successful , the period of euroscepticism which only a little while ago led the Italian Government to voice reservations about the single currency must be completely left behind .
In the meantime , the aim that the Italian Presidency has made its priority should from now on be acknowledged as a positive one . That objective is to reinvigorate the European economy , which is currently stagnant and appears overly-dependent on the recovery of the US economy .
It is therefore important to acquire detailed knowledge of the new Presidency 's concrete proposals , from the launch of a broad-based programme of investment in infrastructure , backed by the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , to a reopening of the debate on the flexibility of the Stability and Growth Pact , which forces European economies into a strait-jacket of budgetary constraints , even when , as now , their growth rates are negative or very close to zero .
This Presidency , regardless of who happens to be at the helm , can only succeed fully if everyone shares the desire for European integration to succeed .
I wish the President success .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , it is unfortunate that the Italian Presidency 's programme of work in the field of transport , as it stands , contains two major omissions . The first is to expedite and complete the conciliation procedure on the second rail package , and the second is the conciliation procedure on the ports directive .
As European Parliament rapporteur , I appeal to the Italian Presidency to give priority to these two legislative proposals , since promoting rail transport and ports could well be in Italy 's national interest also .
The Italian Government in particular could have a great interest in the further gradual opening up of rail networks , thus revitalising the rail sector and shifting more goods and passengers from road to rail .
As Parliament 's rapporteur , I wish to offer the presidency an early conciliation procedure in the context of the second reading in Parliament , so that we can complete the second rail package by the end of the Italian Presidency .
Increasing the efficiency of port services by means of increased competition and transparency could , however , also be in the interest of the Union as a whole , as well as of Italy with its long coastline and its pivotal role in the Mediterranean .
That is why I hope that the Italian Presidency will take this conciliation procedure seriously and accept it as a priority .
Mr President-in-Office , I would like to take the liberty of calling on you , as a former member of our group and as a friend of our group , to help us in expediting these two important transport projects , that is opening up rail networks and opening up port services to increased competition and greater efficiency , by working quickly and effectively with us .
Thank you very much !
Mr President-in-Office , as I have the fortune to take the floor at the end of this debate , I should first of all like to express my satisfaction as an Italian at the recognition , shown by so many , of the historic role played by Italy in the process of European integration : a role , I may add , that has always given particular value to those original supranational institutions , the European Commission and the European Parliament .
I am sure , Mr Berlusconi , that you , as an Italian , will share this satisfaction and understand that any reservations , concerns and demands directed at you reflect everyone 's expectations for the Presidency of a great founding and federating country of the European Community .
I shall now express my concerns and expectations as Chairman of the Committee for Constitutional Affairs .
The Convention on the future of Europe has been an innovation of extraordinary importance .
The draft Constitution it has adopted will certainly be referred , under the Treaty , for final decisions by the Heads of State and Government , but it would be foolish to call into question the most significant innovations in it after sixteen months of hard work put in by the representatives from the governments , the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
You , Mr Berlusconi , have talked about differences of opinion and hence the need for negotiation , but significant efforts at negotiation have already been made in the Convention , and in its Praesidium in particular .
Negotiation by the Italian Presidency in the preparation and running of the Intergovernmental Conference must aim at further advancement of the draft Constitution , clearly addressing those essential options that have remained unresolved , which the President of the Commission pointed out today and also yesterday morning in this House .
Parliament fully agrees with the Commission 's recommendations .
We are shortly going to vote here on a resolution tabled by members of the PPE-DE , PSE and ELDR Groups , calling for a courageous formulation of Parts III and IV of the Constitution and , in particular , further extension of qualified majority voting .
As Parliament , we shall make our contribution to the Intergovernmental Conference in the ways that have been indicated by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and that you have undertaken to propose to the Council .
I too naturally welcome the way you have taken a position and I hope it will be extended to the other aspects suggested by Mr Barón Crespo .
I hope , Mr Berlusconi , you will look upon the dialogue with our Parliament dispassionately and with an open mind .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I sincerely welcome the Italian Presidency 's programme and believe that , with the necessary caution , with the humility that marks the Italian people and with the almost unique ability to place our inspiration and intelligence at the service of the many , we shall be able to make port in the new Europe .
The true aim of politics must be the noble government of people 's needs , in a society that is constantly changing at an ever-increasing rate .
To do this one needs great political sensitivity to manage the technostructure and oppose technocracy .
The society governed in this way consists , in simple terms , of a vast majority of ordinary , good , simple people : men , women , young , old , children , of varying abilities , who work and live anonymously but are driven by good and simple feelings of solidarity and love .
This is the important Europe that we have to address , by moulding the economic structure to the growth of these ordinary people , who should not have to live with the insecurity and instability in which the globalised economy would trap them .
The Euro-Atlantic partnership with all the Americas is not just an economic and political need or choice ; it is a cultural fact that arises from our common roots and shared values .
It should be strengthened , it must grow , not least through the transformation of NATO into a tool of international policing at the service of a reformed United Nations , going beyond the rationale of Yalta .
A last thought concerns world poverty .
There is too much poverty , and it requires aid .
Therefore , in the discussion on the Union 's financial perspective , we should boldly and decisively set ourselves the target of increasing our contribution to 2 % of GDP , because opening up our markets and reforming our institutions is not enough for the international agencies .
Mr President-in-Office , I hope our Italian Presidency will have a very great ability to listen , because that is the only way it will be able to celebrate the Constitution of the new Europe , and also to satisfy the Commission under Romano Prodi , a staunch champion of the Community method and of the Europe we want .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , many Members have highlighted the extraordinary nature of the events and turning-points of European politics that will occur during your Presidency , from the Constitutional Treaty to the Middle East roadmap , the preparations for enlargement and the relaunch of the Lisbon strategy .
I certainly mean to recognise the historic importance of these events , but I should like to call your attention , Mr President-in-Office , to the very ordinary nature of the work done by the European institutions .
We need to make step-by-step progress on many important files , and I refer in particular to the traffic and transport sector , which Mr Jarzembowski has already mentioned .

This sector is in a happy situation , with the arrival of the Van Miert proposal , which has finally given us a new programme of new projects that are equal to the challenges facing us as a continent ; your government 's proposal of an ingenious way to finance these projects ; and the Commission 's proposal to increase European funding to 20 % .
This is certainly a scenario with significant possibilities , but we have to round it off , Mr President-in-Office .
The Council has been a little remiss in the matter of liberalising port services , in the matter of the railway package and as regards the thorny , age-old problem of the Alpine passes .
Tomorrow , Parliament will be voting for the umpteenth time on a call to shelve the ecopoints idea , and I hope this time the Council will agree to follow our lead .
Then there is the air sector , and the maritime safety sector .
Just an example , then , Mr President-in-Office , to remind you of the commitment which , I am sure , your presidency will be ready to demonstrate in these areas , particularly because every time we manage to make some progress with these files we shall be showing our fellow European citizens tangible proof that Europe offers greater opportunities , well-being and prosperity for all .
Mr President-in-Office , the vulgar and tendentious attacks by certain elements of the foreign press - and some Italian elements too , I have to admit - which have been echoed in this House in some Members ' speeches and then in that pathetic demonstration , have given the start of this Italian Presidency an unnecessarily polemic tone .
Paradoxically , I believe all of this is a good sign , Mr Berlusconi : remember that malice of this kind was loudly voiced in 2001 and only contributed to your resounding victory in those elections .
I should like to hope that , after all this initial noise , the success of the Italian Presidency will be judged not on the private affairs of Mr Berlusconi the citizen or on your conflict of interests - which you are trying to resolve and I hope will resolve soon - but on your ability to impart that much-needed leadership and impetus to the construction of Europe , and today 's programme speech was an excellent first step in that direction .
As a member of the Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , I am sure that in this area , the area that concerns me , some problems can be resolved , such as mending the damaged relations with the United States .
Progress will be made on other issues , such as the Middle East , where Italy has already shown great diplomatic skill , or the assimilation of the new countries that are about to join , who quite rightly see in Mr Berlusconi a defender of their interests and their principles , a political leader who , unlike others , has understood that there is no contradiction between European commitment and Atlantic solidarity .

Having said that , Mr Berlusconi , I believe your task remains a difficult one , because there will be no concessions for you : every decision , every gesture you make will be subjected to close appraisal and scrutiny , and you will not be forgiven for any false move .
However , this is not the first time you have undergone this kind of examination : good luck , Mr Berlusconi !

Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , constitutional reform and economic reforms in Europe today are merely two sides of the same coin .
Competitiveness , social cohesion , solidarity across generations , the valuing of human resources , solidarity towards the countries in the many southern parts of the world are not just many objectives within our reach , but they are also the founding values of the best episodes in our peoples ' histories .
Today , we are faced with a great opportunity : to combine the constitutional process with the will and the need for reform - reform as the steady , day-to-day implementation of that work in progress that is , and will be , our formal Constitution .
The conditions , both positive and negative , are all there to be turned into opportunities : an integrated internal market , as Mr Prodi has mentioned , the largest and richest in the world ; low interest rates , but also - a negative point that can be turned into an opportunity - still high unemployment ; job markets that are still too inflexible ; and insufficient infrastructure .
The action plan you have proposed , Mr President-in-Office , for developing the great trans-European infrastructure networks through public and private investment , is a step in this direction .
As is well known , investment in infrastructure produces higher returns through Keynes 's multiplier , greater competitiveness , and more economic and social cohesion in the north , south , east and west .
The same may be said for the objective of making our welfare systems sustainable through reform , not by taking away but by giving more with fairness ( not least to our children ) , guarantees and security .
Infrastructure investment and welfare reform , however , require an efficient , flexible , well-structured labour market that is well regulated and fairer .
Mr President-in-Office , you won the Italian elections with a modernising programme , just as the programme you have presented today is modernising .
There is no doubt that you will carry them both through .
I wish you good luck and success in your work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , mine is the last speech and therefore in some way also the most confused .
My confusion has been caused to a great extent by the acumen of some of the speeches that came before .
I no longer know whether the President-in-Office will preside over the IGC in Rome in the fullness of his prerogatives or whether , as Enrique Barón Crespo claims , he will be an occasional guest of the mayor of that city .
Most of all , however , I no longer know whether the epithet ' human atom bomb ' should be applied , as it has been historically , to the unforgettable Rita Hayworth , or whether it should be transferred , as Mrs Frassoni would have it , to Vice-President Fini .
Therefore , in order to set my values straight , I have decided to make a dull but clear speech , something along the lines of ' God , country and family ' , hinging on the subject of Europe 's Christian roots , which is not an ideological subject but one of democratic procedures .
Indeed , this reference is not a contribution to the clerical concerns of certain social groups but the historical memory of the truest meaning behind our institutions .
Our democratic institutions are in fact the result of a freedom pact with the citizens , who transfer some of their own sovereignty to them in exchange for guarantees and services .
From this viewpoint , the states and especially the supranational institutions , are guarantors of the attempts that we citizens make to respond to our needs - they are guarantors , not masters - and they are such because they are well aware that they cannot be the final answer to people 's heartfelt desires .
The reference to Europe 's Christian roots merely shows that today 's Europe realises that , without its bond with the uniting and personalistic tension of Christianity , it will always be weaker , more exposed to the political short cuts of totalitarian regimes . To be able to reject humanity to the utmost , such regimes have always preferred to begin by rejecting God , though for less explicit reasons than the politically correct of today .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Poettering for his words of support , encouragement and best wishes , and all the Members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats who , in their speeches , have made demands of us on one point or another but who have shown us a token of the support that they will give us in these busy months to come .
I also thank the Chairman of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reformist Party and extend my thanks to the Chairman of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Barón Crespo , who expressed his critical demands with great courtesy and also a subtle sense of humour .
I should like to tell him that I am still convinced that the great Europe of the future , if it genuinely wants to be a leader in world politics able to sit at a table on equal terms with the United States , will have to be a great Europe that can also include Ukraine , Belarus , Moldova , Israel , the Russian Federation and its military strength .
This is certainly a vision that the Prime Minister of Italy has , and one that he can , of course , express quite freely when speaking for himself and for his government , but when the Prime Minister becomes the President-in-Office of the European Council he has to adhere to the prevailing opinion within the European Council , and it is therefore clear that what he says and the activities to which he must devote himself have of necessity to reflect the mandate he is given by his fellow members of the Council .
( Applause from the right )
I also want to respond to that other witticism , that a dyed-in-the-wool liberal has at last adopted a doctrine that forms part of socialist thinking , that is , Keynesianism .
I agree with you , sir , that one might find a Keynesian or Colbertian flavour in the request for European intervention through the EIB and the raising of private capital in order to realise major trans-European infrastructure , which were proposed as much as ten years ago by Mr Delors , but , you see , we are faced by a fact that nobody can deny .
What has happened in the world since 11 September ?
There has been the war in Afghanistan , there has been the war in Iraq , but , above all , the world stock markets have crashed .
This has caused a reduction in all the financial assets invested in shareholdings and has caused a critical cut in all their returns .
If you used to have assets worth 100 , you now have assets worth 35 ; if you used to get a return of 8 or 10 % on your assets , you now get a return of 1 % .
This has led to a reduction in private-sector demand on the market for consumer goods and high-value consumer goods , and , therefore , when private-sector demand falls , when consumption falls , there is nothing one can do but call on public-sector demand to sustain the economy .
This public-sector demand cannot come from individual Member States , because the individual states can no longer develop a monetary policy because there is the euro , they cannot change exchange rates , and they cannot create a development policy , for the simple reason that they have to keep within the Maastricht parameters .
Thus , it is Europe alone that must , at last , create its own economic policy capability .
Italy 's proposal is that Europe , through one of its institutions , the EIB , should raise those private capital funds that are on the market and can be had at low interest rates , in order to try to boost demand through transnational infrastructure works , through the need to invest in new military technology , and through investment in research and education .
The fact that we are faced with an economic situation that has changed is the only justification for resorting to state investment and , in this case , European Union investment .
( Applause from the right )
I shall also , if I may , answer that point you put to me when you said , ' I hope Mr Berlusconi 's Italian flair for making laws just for specific cases that are , perhaps , somehow of close interest to him will not be extended to the European level . '
I should like to quote you some figures to remind you that my government , which is Italy 's fifty-seventh in 50 years and has the responsibility - and also the opportunity , seeing that it has a large majority in both sections of parliament - to work for five years , is putting 24 different reforms into practice .
In fact , it inherited a country in which none of the previous governments , which were only able to work for less than five years on average , was , of course , able to do this .
I remind you that my government has drafted a record three hundred and fifty bills and decree-laws , two hundred of which have already been passed by our majority in parliament .
Therefore , while I do not admit you are right , I can say that those three bills were a response - using a democratic method , a parliamentary vote - to a person who takes advantage of their position as an officer of justice to use the courts to attack their political enemies ; although I believe that this has happened , it has only happened in three cases out of 350 : 1 % , Mr Barón Crespo .

I confirm , however - God forgive you if you did not know - that we shall be keeping Members of Parliament and Parliament itself informed on the progress of our negotiation operation , which it will not be at all easy to complete in the short time available .
We shall be using the time between now and about 15 October to contact the Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers of all the other 24 European Union Member States so that , at the opening of the Conference , we can already present some possible solutions on which everyone can agree .
I would , of course , also like to thank the other Members who have spoken - Mr Graham Watson , Mrs Monica Frassoni , Mr Francis Wurtz - for wishing me success in my work .
I must , however , reply to them and to all those who have given an utterly distorted view of Italy that is far from the truth .
I invite them to come and enjoy something that the Berlusconi government has clearly not succeeded in eliminating , which is Italy 's sunshine , its beauty , its 100 000 monuments and churches , our 3 500 museums , our 2 500 archaeological sites , the 40 000 historical houses in Italy , which we have not managed to destroy over the last two years .
Mr Schultz , I know there is a producer in Italy who is making a film about Nazi concentration camps .
I will suggest you for the role of guard .
You would be perfect !
( Laughter , protests from the left )
I shall conclude this diatribe by saying that my Social Democrat friends and colleagues should probably expand their acquaintances beyond the Italian Members they find here in Parliament and they should perhaps extend their reading beyond the far left newspapers , which have evidently shaped these convictions of theirs .
I should also like to reply to Mr Pannella , who made a point about the personal line that I have consistently followed , and which I still believe in , with regard to Israel - which I mentioned a moment ago - and Turkey .
I must tell him as well that , in the coming six months , I must expound the line of the European Council ; after that I shall have the opportunity , within the European Council , to uphold these views of mine , which are , of course , not views for the next six months or that can be realised in one term of office but visions that will require much longer to come to fruition .
I can reassure him , however , as regards the moratorium on the death penalty .
I have always upheld the need for this intervention , and I shall therefore certainly take this demand to the United Nations Assembly in September as a demand from the European Parliament too .
( Applause from the right )
Another thing that has been ascribed to me is subservience to the United States .
I have recalled several times that I see Europe as a joint protagonist in maintaining security and peace , for the development of well-being throughout the world , but to do this Europe must not be just an economic giant but an economic giant that can also find a way to express itself with a single voice on foreign policy , and one that can also invest more in its military forces .
No diplomacy , no policy in history has ever been successful without the support of adequate military strength .
With regard to the United States , I think we should be friends of the United States , but I do not believe there has been anything in the Italian Government 's conduct that could be seen as subservience .
I repeatedly tried to dissuade the person who has been mentioned here as being my friend , President George Bush , from launching a military initiative in Iraq .
I did not succeed , and then I insisted - even signing that letter with seven other European Union Member States , to which 10 other countries were then added , including , first and foremost , some of the new Members of the European Union - that one evil , the war in Iraq , should not be followed by other evils , and particularly that it should not be followed by the discrediting of the United Nations , which I regret to say did happen since it was shown to be impotent , or by the crisis in transatlantic relations , which did happen ; or by the final evil , which is the division among the countries of Europe , something which did happen and which we are all endeavouring to put right and overcome together .
Regarding the conflict of interests which many have mentioned : well , perhaps you are not aware that , in Italy , the newspapers and the television channels that still belong to my group and my family , especially , are among our strongest critics .
Why ?
Clearly , you have not experienced Italy 's sunshine ; you have never been to Italy and you have never tuned into an Italian television channel .
You ought to know - and yet many of you have a background in journalism - that the greatest concern of all journalists is to appear independent to their colleagues .
This independence leads them to be constantly critical towards the one they consider the boss .
If this is the kind of democracy you mean to use to silence the President-in-Office of the European Council , I can tell you that you should come to Italy as tourists , because you look like democracy tourists here .
( Uproar on the left )
I was leader of the opposition in Italy for six years , so these speeches do not frighten me : I am used to being contradicted .
On immigration , I should like to remind you that , if there is one country that is rooted in Christianity , a generous country , open to those who have the least and to those who suffer , I am proud to say that this country is mine , Italy .
Let us not , therefore , confuse the war we must all wage together against the traffickers of slaves , the new slave trade , with the welcome we must give to those who come to improve their lives on the continent of Europe .
We give them this welcome , and we give it generously .
We want to fight this new form of slavery which is emerging through numerous international organisations : no more than that , and there is nothing in that which might cast doubt on Italy 's generosity .
Regarding the environment , perhaps the Greens are not aware that Mr Berlusconi 's favourite hobby is to do with flowers , nature , gardens and parks .
It has been practically my only hobby since football left me behind .
If you read page 49 of our programme , Mrs Frassoni , you will find that we want to introduce high levels of environmental protection ; our policy , over and above the way it is being misrepresented , is directed precisely towards greater protection of the environment , and we are the first to be puzzled by the fact that , all too often , the expansion of production and industry has been to the detriment of the environment .
In relation to the implementation of the Kyoto protocol , here too we shall take steps to convince those who have not signed it to do so .
Finally , I should like to say to my adversaries , with a smile , that they should not make a tragedy out of our Presidency. when all is said and done , six months pass very quickly .
To my friends , however , those who have encouraged us and will continue to encourage us , I should like to say that , with regard to a man 's past and the man himself , I believe the important thing is not just what he says - in politics , very often , one changes , or other people change , the things one says - but his record , what he has done .
Well , I believe that there are only successes in my record and only good intentions behind my actions .
Therefore , we shall also make these six months bear fruit and try to reach a conclusion that enables Europe to be a positive factor for world peace , security and prosperity .
We shall apply ourselves to our work , Mr President , with humility , dedication and conviction ; we shall apply ourselves to brokering a solution from the various , still widely differing positions of the different Member States , that will give us a stronger Europe , able to make decisions on the international stage ; that will give us a Europe through the new Constitution , a Europe that is closer to its citizens .
This is our hope ; this is our undertaking ; this is our goal .
I thank you again for your good wishes for our work , and I wish you all every success in your work .
May you succeed in making all your heartfelt hopes reality .
My best wishes to all of you and , once again , good luck with your work !
( Applause from the right , uproar on the left )

In the course of Mr Berlusconi 's vigorous and colourful response to the debate , a remark was made in respect of one of our colleagues , Mr Schulz , who , under the Rules of Procedure , is entitled to make a statement to the House if he so wishes .
I would like to make that quite clear before I invite President Prodi to speak .
What I will do first , following procedure , is hear President Prodi and then , if he wishes , I will invite Mr Schulz to make a personal statement at the end of the debate , as provided for under Rule 122 .
I am speaking to ask you , as President , to protect the rights of the Members , in particular the honour of Mr Schulz .
You have made a proposal .
I would ask you , as well as giving the floor to Mr Schulz , to call on Mr Berlusconi , the President-in-Office of the Council , to withdraw those comments , out of respect for the values we all share as Europeans .
( Applause )
Mr President , who was not in the Chamber to hear Mr Schulz 's speech ?
That he should insult me seriously on a personal level , gesticulating and in a tone of voice that really is unacceptable in a Parliament like this .
I said what I said ironically .
If you are all unable to understand irony , I am sorry .
But I will not withdraw what I said ironically unless Mr Schulz withdraws the personal insults he made .
I said it ironically ; he did that maliciously !
( Applause from the right , uproar on the left )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Members of Parliament , this morning 's debate has most of all highlighted the extent of the tasks and difficulties of the six months that lie ahead : six months of crucial importance for the great initiatives that must be completed and the new paths that are to be opened up .
The objective that stands out above all others is the Intergovernmental Conference , which is to give us a Constitution that should not only contain an architecture for our institutions but also constitute a set of visions , values and models of society .
We expect a lot from the Italian Presidency , because this is our great challenge and because this Constitution will dictate the rules of this Europe of ours for a long time to come .
The line of action should lead on from the Greek Presidency , but with certain particularly significant moments .
At these moments the Commission will carry out its mandate - a mandate that is not only executive but also one of instigation and proposal - I repeat , leading on in terms of the policies and collaboration that we have built up over these years together with the European Parliament and the various Presidencies .
The Commission must be the guarantor of this continuity and it will encourage and help the Italian Presidency to move with us in the same direction .
The debate focused precisely on these major problems , and the Commission will put these objectives into practice and carry them out using its institutional methods for representing and promoting the Union 's interests .
In what fields ?
We shall do so in the field of institutional reform , as we have said , in the drive for economic revitalisation , for the normalisation of friendly relations with the United States in a position of dignity and equality ; we shall do so by furthering and speeding up the difficult , complicated process of the accession of the Balkan countries into Europe and with the gradual achievement of the project of the ring of friendly countries , thus putting our vision into practice .
Here , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to recall the debate which has run all this year , focusing on the borders of Europe : a difficult and complicated debate which , you will recall , it was impossible to commence at the beginning of the legislative period , and which looks towards the completion of our Union with the candidate countries , with the addition of the Balkan countries , and looks towards the construction around them of strong , close and friendly relations with the surrounding countries , from Russia to Morocco , with whom we must share everything save our institutions , since our Union must have its own borders , its own strength and its own depth .
We shall do so by furthering our work on the security of our citizens , and on the rules for and rights of emigrants .
I should like to dwell just a little more on some of the points I have listed because I consider them key points for our future work .
Firstly , I must assure you all that we shall always be true and strict guardians of compliance with the Treaties and the new Constitution .
Secondly , we shall strongly support the balanced development of our society .
The Lisbon process , which has emerged today as a strong point , is our point of reference , because Europe must overcome the worldwide challenge , but it must overcome it through balanced and socially sustainable development .
The increasing differences between the citizens of the various European countries in almost all our nations over the last decade concerns me at least as much as the lack of growth .
At this historic moment , we cannot throw social dialogue and consultation out of the window , since these are the pillars of the European social model on which we have laboured so hard in recent years .
With regard to infrastructure , we have already underlined our new undertaking and it will be our responsibility and duty to be rigorous and selective in assessing the costs and benefits , and just as rigorous in finding sources of finance that are compatible with our rules and with long-term sustainability .
We are working on this side by side with the European Investment Bank , and we shall be making the same effort in the field of research , without which Europe will be a lost continent .
With regard to immigration , the Commission will be supporting a European undertaking to combat the new slave traders , but we shall not tolerate , as happened at Thessaloniki , people confusing firmness with inhumanity , or regulation of migration flows with violence and discrimination .
With regard to international relations , lastly , the Commission maintains its commitment to peace and a multilateral approach to resolving conflicts .
Moreover , the Union 's humanitarian commitment will continue to provide the long-term aid that is by far the greatest priority to every country in the world .
These are the guidelines for the coming six months .
I believe it will be a period of cooperation and a period which , with the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference , will genuinely open a new chapter in the history of Europe .
( Applause )
I know that many colleagues wish to speak , but we have considerably run over our time .
Before closing this debate and handing over to one of the Vice-Presidents to conduct the vote , I should like to say that personally I regret the offence caused to our respected Member and colleague , Mr Schulz .
( Loud applause )
The debate is closed .
WRITTEN STATEMENT ( RULE 120 )
The Italian Presidency has cited immigration policy and the fight against illegal immigration as being among its priorities , and we assure it of our support .
We hope , in particular , that it will prove to be clearer and more resolute than the Thessaloniki Council , held two weeks ago .
Although it devoted a large proportion of its conclusions to immigration policy - seven and a half pages , compared with the one and a half that came out of the Convention - the Council was particularly obscure , even impossible to understand , defining , in particular , its objective in terms of a ' two-way process ' , aimed at simultaneously fighting illegal immigration and exploring ' legal migration channels ' .
Europe now needs a clear , firm policy for controlling its borders , returning illegal immigrants to their own countries and reforming the right of asylum in order to put an end to abuses .
On this subject , we are sorry that the Thessaloniki Council did not really deal with the British demand that transit centres be created , responsible for examining asylum requests at the EU 's external borders , together with ' regional protection zones ' close to the countries of origin of those requesting asylum .
We are relying upon the Italian Presidency to make progress on this issue .
Mr President , I wish to table an oral amendment whereby the word ' European ' would be omitted so that both national and international labels could be used .
This would correspond to what we decided under Amendment No 32 , whereby we can still use all the labels , and it applies to both Amendment No 88 and Amendment No 89 .
In other words , I am tabling an oral amendment designed to remove the word ' European ' .
Mr President , I hope you will hear me out .
I , like the other Members still present , am one of those who stay on until the conclusion of a vote like this .
Others have long since left the building .
I would like to say , without mincing my words , that those who really work should not be penalised because others pack their bags on Thursday morning !
As the rapporteur states , the directive on the prospectus is a central plank in the Financial Services Action Plan , an integral part of the Lisbon Strategy , which aims to integrate financial markets by 2005 .
One can therefore understand why the rapporteur believes that it is ' vital to reach consensus and ensure a rapid adoption of the directive ' , since ' the creation of a legal framework which enhances the conditions for raising of capital via Europe 's financial markets ' depends on it .
In other words , as well as ensuring the refinancing of ( large ) companies , the directive is intended to encourage greater liberalisation of investment and capital .
From this perspective , the amendments tabled by the rapporteur to the Council common position aim to make regulations more flexible , to speed up the procedure for approving the prospectus and reduce the scope for independent decision-making by Member States and national legislations . Specifically , States ' power to define who may be considered a qualified investor and to shorten approval periods has been curtailed by the introduction of the concept of deemed approval .
The directive also finds the provision for the competent authority to carry out on-site inspections to monitor compliance with the directive to be disproportionate .
It even wants to raise the investor threshold below which there will be no obligation to publish a prospectus .
In short , it wants to liberalise .
That is why we voted against it .
I largely share the rapporteur 's concern to enhance the conditions for raising of capital via Europe 's financial markets .
I feel that the transparency and clarity of these markets , which will result from the process of simplification set out in this report , are reason enough to justify minimal levels of Community regulation in this sector .
These measures may contribute to the creation of a legal framework which strengthens and facilitates the raising of capital via Europe 's financial markets and improves disclosure standards for investors . This will benefit issuers , investors , operators and the markets themselves .
I note the rapporteur 's sensitivity to the need for a loosening of certain regulations in order to adapt the legislation to the demands and fluctuations of the market and to reduce the burden on small and medium-sized enterprises . In particular , he would like to see the requirement for a ' register ' of bodies recognised as qualified investors waived , and small regional banks to be permitted to issue bonds without having to meet the costs of producing a prospectus .
These are the reasons why I voted in favour of the report .
Mr President , many of my colleagues have shunned the idea of including environmental targets in the criteria for public procurement .
This is nevertheless fully in harmony with the view contained in the Treaty that environmental policy should be integrated with all EU policy .
Parliament has done some good work to increase the number of acts that support sustainable development in legislation regulating production .
This effect , which comes from the supply side also , however , needs support from the demand side , and it is precisely public procurement that can have an impact on that when it can be shown that there are grounds for including environmental criteria in an invitation to tender .
The so-called Helsinki case , on which the European Court of Justice has given a decision , highlights an important point .
When the party placing the order is a public body , it represents the general public .
In that case it should not just protect the public 's financial interests but one also has to think , for example , about protecting the health of the general public .
The Helsinki case was about this very issue .
It goes without saying that public health is at the same time a long-term economic benefit , through which a public body will save at least just as much as it could have saved by choosing a cheaper supplier .
The aim of this proposal for a directive , which follows the Lisbon Strategy guidelines closely , is to establish provisions promoting coordination in order to ensure the freedom of movement of goods in the field of public supply contracts . It also aims to achieve freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services with regard to public works contracts and public service contracts .
The authors of the recommendation argue that there is a need to ensure non-discrimination , especially on grounds of nationality , and to facilitate competition by further standardising existing national procedures , choosing the most economically advantageous tender . To this end , they make it compulsory for national regulations , especially technical ones , to be non-discriminatory and not to run counter to the objective of opening up the markets in the field of public contracts .
It has been forgotten , however , that although the transparency of public contracts is crucial , they can still be an important economic policy instrument , even if they discriminate positively in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises in the award of public contracts .
Regional development can be taken into account , and social and environmental objectives ( especially working conditions , protecting jobs , or even the means of production themselves ) can be promoted , by inserting special provisions into the contract .
The most economically advantageous factors may not be the cheapest price , but rather the number of jobs created .
For these reasons , we voted against this proposal .
The award of contracts , services and supplies by public tender accounts for more than 14 % of European GDP .
In spite of this , the sphere of public contracts and tenders has reaped few benefits from the creation of the internal market .
While it is true that these directives are very important for the equilibrium of the internal market and crossborder awards , the greatest benefit of these directives does not reside in this fact , but in the opportunity they provide for promoting sustainable development .
Environmental and social objectives must be built in to public tenders and contracts .
It is unfortunate that neither the proposal for a directive nor Mr Zappalà 's report grant public bodies the right ( not to mention the obligation ) to choose a given service or product by public tender on the basis of its sustainability .
I therefore support the amendments intended to grant public bodies this right .
It is hard to accept the fact that , on the one hand , through its European sustainable development strategy and the commitments undertaken at Johannesburg , the EU acknowledges that environmental costs must be factored into the economy , while , on the other , it prohibits the Member States from basing their acquisitions policies on that same principle .
This directive follows the Lisbon Strategy guidelines closely . It aims to complement the general directive establishing rules on coordination in the sphere of public contracts , responding to the specific requirements of the regulations on the award of contracts in the water , energy , transport and postal services sectors .
These reports are anchored to a large extent in the broader philosophy of liberalising and privatising markets and public services . Such policies were given fresh impetus at the last Spring Council , especially in these essential sectors .
The reports are also linked to the next round of World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) negotiations , not only because of the general agreement on the liberalisation of services , by which I mean the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) , but also because they address the issue of opening up the markets and public contracts , which was on the Doha Agenda and to which the EU attaches so much importance .
Where essential socio-economic sectors are concerned , of course , we cannot leave them at the mercy of market forces , obeying the principles of opening up the markets and of non-discrimination whilst at the same time curtailing the powers of Member States and national administrations .
For these reasons we voted against this proposal as well .
.
( NL ) The same objections apply even more to this directive than to Mr Zappalà 's report on public works contracts , public supply contracts and public service contracts , which was discussed at the same time .
This time , it is about large and long-term contracts and concerns tasks regarded , for a century or longer , as forming part of the core tasks of the government itself .
It is about products and services that are essential to society as a whole , households and industry , and which , at one time , were intentionally taken away from private companies , which had failed to offer continuity , a quality service , acceptable prices and a reasonable treatment of the consumer .
A government monopoly under democratic control was seen as the only acceptable solution that could guarantee the required product and consumer protection .
This choice was , at the time , scarcely contentious even among advocates of capitalism .
For deliveries and services in these areas , private companies preferred to depend on a reliable government monopoly than on the uncertainty and lack of continuity that characterises the free market .
Meanwhile , governments wishing to reduce taxes and suffering from a lack of funds have sold such companies to internationally operating concerns that wish to make a profit from them .
If this is what they choose to do , then it is true that rules are desperately needed .
However , it is then wrong to give much consideration to company secrets and other company interests .
. ( FR ) During this second reading of the draft regulation on genetically modified food and feed ( Scheele report ) , I voted in favour of the following amendments , which are appreciably tougher than those adopted by the Council :
amendments , in particular Amendment No 19 , reducing the threshold for labelling authorised GMOs from 0.9 % to 0.5 % ;
amendments putting an end to the tolerance of non-authorised GMOs in the food chain when their percentage is lower than 0.5 % , in particular Amendment No 43 ; ( incidentally , the question arises as to how the Council can , in this case , propose a threshold of 0.5 % , when it maintains that such a threshold is technically impossible where the labelling of authorised GMOs is concerned ) ;
amendments requiring the Member States to take measures to prevent the contamination of traditional crops by GMO crops ( Compromise Amendments Nos 44 and 45 ) ;
amendments authorising the Member States to take emergency measures to restrict or prohibit the use of an authorised GMO when the latter subsequently proves to present a risk ( for example , Amendment No 40 ) .
Above and beyond these technical questions , I shall explain the position I have adopted on principle in my explanation of vote on the parallel report relating to the traceability of GMOs .
. ( FR ) In the series of second-reading amendments , we have voted in favour of everything that is in pursuit of transparency and of as comprehensive a labelling as possible .
On the other hand , we have voted against the compromise amendments that , in actual fact , would endorse the lifting of the moratorium .
. ( FR ) No compromise is entirely satisfactory .
The compromise on GMOs in favour of which the European Parliament has just voted means simply that it was impossible to take the negotiations any further .
The moratorium on GMOs will therefore be lifted , as desired by the Member States .
The 0.5 % threshold beyond which the adherents of the precautionary principle wanted the presence of GMOs to be indicated would not have obtained a qualified majority either in Parliament or in the Council .
To my regret , the vote has therefore gone in favour of a threshold of 0.9 % .
Nonetheless , there are significant benefits to this compromise , because there has also been a vote in favour of greater traceability , which will enable consumers to be more vigilant , will make for tough regulations when it comes to detecting GMOs and will make precise labelling possible , as well as the ability to distinguish clearly between GMO and non-GMO production .
Transparency has won the day , even if the precautionary principle looks a little the worse for wear .
It is not a victory , but the amendments voted in favour of are important markers that will need to be further augmented in the future .
That is why I have voted in favour of the Scheele report .
Although this Council common position does not meet all of Parliament 's demands , it improves the current legal framework for controlling genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) . We know , however , that it will constitute yet another step towards justifying lifting the moratorium , which should be maintained .
The compromise reached , though far from perfect , does ensure that all food and feed containing , consisting of or produced from GMOs will in future be regulated by a more coherent and uniform authorisation process , with authorisations lasting no longer than 10 years .
Furthermore , all genetically modified foodstuffs must be labelled as such , regardless of whether GMOs can be detected in them .
The possibility for Member States to take appropriate measures to prevent adventitious contamination of conventional or organic crops by GMOs is also accorded prominence , though it is difficult to conceive of effective control mechanisms once GMOs have been released into the environment , since borders have been removed and goods can move freely .
Nevertheless , I regret the fact that the thresholds for adventitious or technically unavoidable contamination by as yet unauthorised GMOs have been set at 0.5 % , even if only for a transitional period .
There should be ' zero tolerance ' in this area .
The problems associated with genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) turn on apparently contradictory issues .
On the one hand , we have the issue of scientific and technological research , and especially its application to everyday life . Measures supporting and encouraging such research should never cease .
On the other hand , we come up against the risks facing anyone whose work involves scientific research on foodstuffs or the food standards which must be ensured for citizens . All these must be addressed with the greatest attention and utmost caution .
My position towards this report therefore rests on the lack of conclusive proof that such genetic mutations pose absolutely no threat to human and animal health . GMOs elicit in me the reserve and caution which are second nature to those whose concern is the common good .
On the other hand , though , I would not want my position to be understood as standing in the way of scientific progress , which is always desirable and should not suffer from excessive legislative obstacles .
I would , however , emphasise the need to respect life in all its different forms , as well as the strict codes of conduct that govern the handling and use of substances as delicate and complex as these .
. ( FR ) With regard to GMOs , we do not want Europe to commit itself lightly , as the United States has done , to the ill-considered and uncontrolled large-scale spread of genetically modified organisms , guided solely by the interests of the firms that produce them .
Nor , however , do we want Europe to stand aside on principle from a technique that may be the source of certain hopes for feeding humanity .
Faced with a technique enabling human beings to manipulate the genome , that is to say to act upon the very core of life , it is vital that society should ask itself questions and that the necessary ethical debates should not be evaded .
It is the duty of the public authorities to legislate and regulate .
State sovereignty implies that states retain the power only to admit onto their territory desired and chosen products corresponding to real needs .
The Cartagena Protocol on biodiversity recognises this right .
Let us make full use of it in order to retain , in Europe , our expertise in the area of GMO culture .
Freedom of choice for the consumer and producer also implies that the necessary measures should be taken to safeguard the co-existence of production that draws upon GMOs and production that does not .
. ( FR ) Like the Scheele report , the Trakatellis report on the traceability and labelling of genetically modified organisms is , for us , an opportunity to address a serious warning to the Commission and Member States .
Indeed , we have a strong sense that they are awaiting only the final adoption of the regulations on traceability before lifting the moratorium at present imposed on GMOs in Europe .
Such adoption would therefore serve as a guarantee , even if two other essential conditions had still not been fulfilled : the existence of a clear definition of liabilities ( accompanied by corresponding financial guarantees ) in connection with the damage likely to be caused by GMOs ; and the entry into force of hitherto non-existent rules definitely guaranteeing the non-contamination of traditional crops by GMO crops .
This last point is essential .
It may be remembered that union leader José Bové was convicted in France for having uprooted transgenic corn plants , an act considered to be a violation of a private property right .
Had not this violation , however , been preceded by another , much more serious , one : violation , in the shape of the risk of contamination by GMOs , of neighbouring private properties and of the natural environment in general , which is owned by all ?
. ( FR ) In the name of the precautionary principle and because the development of GMOs makes me think of the sorcerer 's apprentice in the service of easy money and an outmoded emphasis on high productivity , I am now hostile to the use and development of GMOs .
That being said , since GMOs exist - and whether we are for or against them - neither I nor anyone else can be opposed to improving traceability and labelling .
This improvement is a lesser evil that must not cause us to forget the basic question .
This regulation complements the Community system for authorising and controlling GMOs , which now comprises a compulsory labelling scheme for all genetically modified food and feed .
We know that approving it constitutes one more step towards lifting the current moratorium , which should be maintained given the risks of releasing GMOs into the environment and of the coexistence of GMOs with conventional and organic crops .
The US biotechnology industry is exerting great pressure to open up the European market to imports of GMOs .
It hopes , consequently , to force the acceptance of these technologies , especially in developing countries , as Mr Bush demonstrated in his recent speech to the convention of the Biotechnology Industry Organisation in Washington . In his speech , he accused the EU of contributing to hunger in Africa by blocking imports of GMOs , and demanded that Community restrictions on GMOs be lifted .
Meanwhile , he refuses to ratify the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety .
The USA and the multinationals want not only farmers but also the agricultural and food policies of Member States to come under their sway .
This pressure exerted by the USA and the multinationals , moreover , is bringing closer the lifting of the moratorium and the abolition of the traceability and labelling system . This system has become the first line of defence both in the battle against genetically modified food and the release of GMOs into the environment , and also in the attempt to rally consumers and farmers alike on this issue .
. ( FR ) Everyone without exception is in favour of labelling foodstuffs containing GMOs in order to inform the consumer and ensure the traceability of these products throughout the production and distribution chain .
These measures are mainly a matter of show , however , because it will be difficult for labels , controls and other inspections to prevent the propagation of pollen , the interpenetration of the two food circuits - the one with , and the other without , GMOs - and , finally , the victory of the biotechnologies of the multinational , Monsanto , and of the other giant American seed companies .
This Pharisaism on the part of European leaders , who pretend to control the GMO phenomenon - for health reasons as uncertain as the would-be positive contributions of these genetically manipulated products to world agriculture - is made all the more ironic by its timing .
Indeed , it was when the French farmers ' leader , José Bové - of symbolic importance throughout the world in alerting people to the real or overestimated dangers of GMOs - was imprisoned at excessive , disproportionate expense that the European Parliament pronounced upon this subject .
Labelling for GMOs and imprisonment for those who oppose GMOs . Therein , in short , lies the ambiguity of these biotechnologies and of the European position .
Due to the absence of tough and integrated legislation on genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) , legislation capable of safeguarding consumers and the industry alike , EU procedures for awarding marketing authorisations have been suspended for the last three years .
I applaud the legislation that we have today adopted on the traceability and labelling of GMOs , since it allows those GMOs on the market , as well as food and feed produced from GMOs , to be registered and their movements monitored .
This gives consumers the right to choose , and the procedure for withdrawing a product , should that be considered necessary , has been made easier .
The proposal for a directive does contain provisions , however , that could pave the way for falsification , for misleading the consumer and for distortion of competition .
The rules should be clear and simple .
For these reasons , I voted for the proposals for amendments geared towards the following : increasing detectability ; ensuring coexistence between GMO crops and GMO-free crops ; applying traceability and any subsequent labelling only to GMOs and products in which genetically modified DNA or proteins have been detected , rather than to all products .
. ( FR ) Traceability is the basic principle on which the protection of consumers and respect for their freedom of choice in the face of GMOs must be based .
Such traceability depends upon introducing systems for identifying GMOs , that is to say procedures guaranteeing the ability to know , at every link in the production and marketing chain , where they have come from and who has put them on the market .
Companies are also obliged to indicate if a product has been obtained on the basis of GMOs , as well as to retain this information relating to their identity and traceability and to make it available to the competent authorities .
With regard to the presence of authorised GMOs , we are in favour of the most demanding thresholds , given that the rate used must be realistic , that is to say based upon measurable , technical criteria .
This requirement will have to be kept constantly up to date as methods of detection and analysis become more refined .
Finally , it must be ensured that operators who choose not to use GMOs can derive a commercial advantage from their choice .
After salmonella , listeria and other food infections , Northern European health fundamentalists are now directing their attention to the allergies that might be caused by the ingredients present in foodstuffs .
Hence , the need for a directive on the labelling of these allergenic additives .
Since , however , wine is treated as a food , bottles of wine too would need to be labelled in the name of the right to information concerning the risks of intolerance , particularly to the eggs and fish cited in Annex 3b , which lists the 20 ingredients that present risks .
It is true that egg- or fish-based glues are used to eliminate suspensions in wine during production .
It is clear , however , that these glues disappear along with the deposits they cause to form in the flocculation process .
There is therefore no reason for listing these processing aids on a label since there are no allergens left at the end of the process .
Together with the champions of wine growers and of common sense , we have tabled the amendments needed to extricate wine from this phobic and neurotic demand for labelling .
We believe it is vital to develop measures which help to reduce , recycle and reuse urban and industrial waste by means of rational , integrated solutions . Packaging is a particularly important aspect of this process , as are incentives to use biodegradable materials .
Defining and implementing such measures , however , will have to take into account the particular circumstances and interests of each country . It is , therefore , hard to understand why EU rules would be loosely transposed into national legislation when they do not take account of the variations existing between countries .
While I share some of the concerns expressed in this report , then , especially those on developing preventive measures , I am bound to wonder about the feasibility of the deadlines and targets proposed for the recycling of products .
I repeat that the effectiveness of any environmental policy depends on the will and commitment of national institutions : these are responsible for planning and mobilising resources , for holding industry directly responsible for reducing packaging waste .
The public in each country , however , also has a role to play in protecting and caring for the environment . Ceaseless efforts are thus required to educate people , to raise their awareness and to engage them in the existing problems and in the means of overcoming them .
Examining this Commission proposal , the aim of which is to revise only the targets for recycling and reuse of packaging and packaging waste , is a laborious exercise for our Assembly .
The fact is that national , not to mention local , situations are very varied .
The Member States have also achieved different results in meeting the targets laid down in the 1994 directive .
The outlay they would have to make today to meet the targets set in the Commission 's proposal therefore differs greatly from one State to another , not to mention the specific cases of the candidate countries .
That is why the Council has to date only managed to reach a common position which the rapporteur considers very inadequate .
Personally , I cannot agree .
We cannot deny reality , even if it does not correspond to our ideals .
In a virtual , ideal world , Mrs Corbey would have had my support and I might even have been bolder than she has been .
In the real world in which we live , however , every decision has consequences and involves costs that have to be met by taxpayers and consumers , by us all .
It would have been counterproductive to have voted today for measures that have never been costed , and which impose unrealistic obligations on all our Member States .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The first essential requirement for a waste recovery and recycling policy is prevention .
The prevention of packaging waste involves ensuring that producers base their decisions as to the type and quantity of material used on an analysis of the life cycle of the products , quantifying their environmental impact from the planning stages to disposal . In this way , they can factor those environmental costs into the final price of the product .
I regret to say that the Commission 's proposal for a directive did not go far enough in terms of waste prevention .
The second essential requirement is that legally binding targets be set .
From this point of view the directive is more ambitious , since it establishes targets for the recovery and recycling of packaging waste , especially for the following materials : glass , paper , plastic , metals and wood .
Targets , though , only guarantee a change in behaviour if they are realistic , by which I mean achievable .
For this reason , I support the targets set in the common position and dispute those suggested by the rapporteur .
In particular , I dispute the proposal that the recycling and recovery deadlines set for Portugal , Greece and Ireland be brought forward from 2012 to 2009 .
It should be remembered that certain characteristics of those three Member States , in particular their scattered territories ( which include outermost regions ) and populations , make it more difficult for them to reach the targets for recycling and recovery of packaging waste .
I broadly shared the rapporteur 's stance .
I am glad to say that this report responds to a broad consensus among all citizens , which was reflected particularly clearly in the almost unanimous vote at first reading .
It is essential to encourage the recovery of packaging waste , as well as recycling it when possible and preventing it from being produced .
The Union 's strategic objectives as set out in Lisbon , and especially the environmental dimension , reinforced and transformed into sustainable development in Gothenburg , require the adoption of measures and policies capable of combating environmental waste and damage .
It is an established fact that protecting the environment is our only long-term guarantee of protecting our citizens and consumers .
Like several members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , however , I must express my anxiety about bringing forward the proposed deadlines by which the Member States must move to implement the proposal for a directive .
I would prefer a more realistic approach , as proposed in the common position , based on the treatment , recovery and recycling facilities actually in existence on the ground .
We will achieve our aims , which will benefit everyone , by means of a credible and sustained strategy .
Given the mortal danger posed to the world by the greenhouse effect , proposals that seek to improve measures taken to reduce the scale of the threat cannot be neglected .
I am nevertheless one of those who think that we cannot speculate on pollution and allow the rich to buy a right to pollute from those who cannot afford to develop .
That is why I voted against , and I call urgently for the speeding up of research programmes for the production of non-polluting energy .
Fusion is part of it , which is why construction of ITER should begin as a matter of urgency .
We feel that it is a priority and a matter of urgency to pursue the battle against the destruction of the ozone layer , the greenhouse effect and the ensuing global warming .
This battle can be fought either by using more alternative , renewable energy sources , which reduce fossil fuel consumption , or by adopting measures to reduce emissions from polluting industries and their effects . That requires investment in researching and implementing new technologies , which could help us to comply with the targets set in the Kyoto Protocol .
We reiterate our opposition to the creation of ' pollution allowance trading ' , however . Such a trade would turn allowances into a commodity and allow more developed countries to buy ' pollution quotas ' from less developed countries , enshrining the status of the former as ' privileged polluters ' and stunting the development of the latter .
Recent United Nations figures , moreover , suggest a tendency towards a rise in emissions from industrialised countries .
By accepting the gas emission allowance trading perceived by some as a tool for achieving the targets of the Kyoto Protocol , this report shares that point of view .
We feel that this is not the right approach .
. ( FR ) I voted in favour of this text .
I am not particularly in favour of this world system of selling ' pollution rights ' .
Specific experiments that I have been able to conduct with manufacturers in my sector in fact show that these economic agents can make consistent efforts to cut greenhouse gas emissions .
I nevertheless wanted to amend the Commission 's initial proposal .
It seemed very important , in fact , that the scope of the directive should be extended to the chemicals and aluminium sectors .
By adopting my amendments , Parliament has endorsed my position .
I also very much regret that the Council of Ministers has not agreed with the stance taken by my fellow Members on this point , thus delaying the inclusion of the chemicals and aluminium sectors .
. ( FR ) So as not to delay the adoption of this controversial directive any further , I voted for the compromise with the Council , albeit with little enthusiasm .
My first concern is about the potential for cutting emissions .
This text makes no reference to the technical links that exist between the activities of different operators .
In the particular case of the iron and steel industry , inclusion of such a reference could have prevented the rights corresponding to blast furnace gases that are sent to electricity companies to be converted into energy that is used by iron and steel plants from being granted to the electricity companies under the national allocation plans when , without them , those companies could replace those energy sources with others such as natural gas .
Paradoxically , the iron and steel companies would have to burn off their blast furnace gases , thus increasing CO2 emissions , not to mention the emission rights they will have to buy back from the electricity companies .
This extra cost could well jeopardise the European iron and steel industry , which is facing increasing world competition .
A more explicit reference to the right for a company to trade internally the rights corresponding to its installations in different countries would have encouraged the creation and development of pan-European companies .
I welcome this proposal for a directive , which constitutes the first step towards the creation of an international market in greenhouse gas emission allowance trading . The Union has been able to blaze the trail in this area , ahead of the launch , in 2008 , of the international scheme set out in the Kyoto Protocol .
The rapporteur 's excellent work has made a significant contribution to this process .
The directive will create an EU greenhouse gas emissions market , introducing emission allowances for industrial installations . These allowances will have to be allocated by the authorities in each Member State .
I find the Commission 's amendment proposing a hybrid method particularly commendable . According to this amendment , which was adopted at first reading , 15 % of emission allowances will have to be sold and the rest allocated free of charge ( the ' grandfathering ' method also favoured by the Commission ) , throughout the period from 2005 to 2012 .
The adoption of this directive will usher in a new era , characterised by a culture of responsibility among both companies and states . It will bring operators and political representatives together on a path which citizens fervently wish them to follow .
. ( FR ) The European Union must take definite action to cut its emissions of the most polluting gases .
It must do so to protect the health of its citizens , to meet the Kyoto targets , to set an example to the world and to avoid looming catastrophe : the latest report from the International Energy Agency 's climatologists predicts that energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions will double by 2030 .
That is why I voted for the creation of this ' permit to pollute less ' that will apply to the main sectors of industry from 1 January 2005 .
Undertakings that exceed their quotas will be fined : EUR 40 per tonne excess , then EUR 100 per tonne after 2008 .
This system of trading quotas is therefore a real breath of fresh air that will enable these emissions to be cut by more than 20 % from 2010 , not to mention EUR 2 000 million in energy savings .
There is one sour note all the same : I think it is unreasonable to ask Belgium to carry one eighth of Europe 's total ' Kyoto ' costs when it has only around 2.5 % of the population and accounts for just under 3 % of European GNP .
Saving the planet is the responsibility of us all , all the rich countries , all industries , including transport , and also individuals .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 2.20 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Chechnya .
I would like to welcome Mr Frattini , President-in-Office of the Council , to the Chamber .
. ( IT ) Mr President , my greetings to the representative of the Commission and all the Members of the European Parliament present in the Chamber .
If I may , Mr President , I would like to introduce my statement on Chechnya by expressing my full personal commitment and my determination to continue as of now attending the House and playing a full part in the work of the European Parliament , my intention to pay heed to the considerations expressed in this and other debates and to keep Parliament fully informed , insofar as it is in my power , regarding the Council 's dossiers and activities .
Turning to the subject of Chechnya , as you all know , the situation in the Republic of Chechnya , one of the components of the Russian Federation , has been the object of the European Union 's attention for some time now as a result of the serious acts of military violence and terrorism that characterise it and of the likely consequences for Europe .
The situation being played out in Chechnya will have an effect that reaches well beyond that small Republic .
The effects of the situation , whether negative or positive , will affect the entire Caucasus area .
I believe that some knowledge of past events , however summary , is important when forming an opinion on the present and on the outlook for the future .
That is why I am giving you this brief history .
Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the subsequent birth of the Russian Federation , the Republic of Chechnya has been the scene of violent Russian-Chechen clashes and of bloody separatist acts .
The 1997 Peace Treaty laid the groundwork for a broad-based de facto autonomy under the Presidency of Chechen leader , Aslan Maskhadov , while guerrilla groups continued to be active throughout the country .
In 1999 , Moscow intervened in Ingushetia and North Ossetia while , in Chechnya , Russian troops occupied the capital city of Grozny .
Years of attacks and repression followed in a climate of brutality on the part of both separatist fighters and Russian forces .
The European Union , the Council of Europe and the OSCE recognised , even then , Russia 's right to defend its territorial integrity and to combat terrorism , but condemned its disproportionate use of force , inviting the Russian Government to implement a political solution to the crisis and to allow humanitarian aid organisations to enter Chechnya .
After 11 September 2001 , Russia stepped up its anti-terrorism efforts , even though the connection between Chechnya and Islamic fundamentalism - which does exist - appeared to be quite indirect .
The roots of the war remain essentially nationalistic in nature , despite its growing and dangerous susceptibility to Islamic extremism , particularly as regards the methods and instruments used .
Although , in September 2001 , a channel of dialogue opened up between the Russian authorities and one of the main exponents of the Chechen resistance , it remained uncertain and unclear whether a political solution to the conflict could be found .
It was against this backdrop that the serious terrorist incident at the Na Dubrovke theatre occurred , followed by the numerous , and equally violent , attacks of recent months .
The situation on the ground is extremely difficult : the local economy is falling apart , there is contention within the pro-Russian administration , there are terrorist threats from the separatists and brutality , and violent military action from Russian militias .
While , in the past , Chechnya had a flourishing economy , due , of course , first and foremost , to oil production and to a highly developed metal and mechanics sector , it is now considerably reduced ; unemployment is at 42 % , there are 64 000 Chechen refugees in the nearby Republic of Ingushetia , 8 000 displaced persons in reception camps and 290 000 homeless .
Civil life has , for the most part , come to a standstill , reduced to a very sorry state with the destruction of archives and offices .
Ladies and gentlemen , the major institutional reform initiative launched by President Putin with the adoption of a new Constitution , to be approved by local referendum , has been grafted onto these bases .
In Mr Putin 's plan , the process should be supported by the international community and , in particular , by the European Union , the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
The political plan consists of the concession of broad-based autonomy and greater powers to local organisations in the context of the Russian Federation , whose territorial integrity is thus safeguarded .
Withdrawal of non-necessary military contingents and the reduction of checkpoints were begun so as to facilitate the gradual normalisation of the region and the holding of the referendum .
The results of the referendum of 23 March - which saw an 89 % participation rate - were , as we know , highly favourable to the draft Constitution .
This outcome has demonstrated that the Chechen people , weary of war , have chosen the political solution within the Russian Federation .
At the same time , it has also emerged that the separatist rebel leader , Aslan Maskhadov , and his followers , have lost the better part of the support of civil society .
In accordance with the recently adopted Constitution , it is possible to foresee Chechen presidential elections by the end of October , while parliamentary elections will take place no earlier than three months after the election of the future President .
Nevertheless , despite this positive outcome , the referendum is only a first step in the political transition underway .
A large number of unresolved issues remain , including the definition of the powers held by the Chechen Republic and the Russian Federation , the provision of compensation to those who have lost property and the adoption of measures for combating crime , including the crimes committed by the Federal Forces .
As you all know , ladies and gentlemen , at present , there are 200 serious criminal cases pending against members of the police force .
On 6 June 2003 , the State Duma adopted an amnesty law for Chechnya to be applied to both rebels and members of the police force , on condition , of course , that they have not committed violent crimes .
It offers clemency to those who give up armed , separatist resistance by 1 September of this year .
Nevertheless , despite the amnesty , attacks on the ground are continuing , prompting , as a result , harsh responses from the police force .
The international community has been actively following the developments and the initiatives of Moscow .
While , in March , the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a resolution that contemplates the possibility of setting up an International Tribunal in order to bring those guilty of serious violations of human rights in Chechnya to justice , more recently , the political and institutional process begun was examined in depth in the course of the talks of the Commissioner for Human Rights in Moscow .
In the context of the OSCE , the Presidency is laying the foundations , in agreement with Russia , for the resumption of the organisation 's activities in the Republic , based on specific programmes agreed regarding elections , good governance , the judicial system , the media , the police and humanitarian aid .
In April , the 15 Members of the Union presented a draft resolution at the Geneva Conference on Human Rights that censured , that condemned the serious violations perpetrated in Chechnya , a resolution which , as you are aware , was not adopted for lack of a majority of votes in favour .
Its failure to be adopted was , as you know , described by Moscow as a ' triumph of good sense ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Council has noted the European Parliament 's views on the situation in the Republic of Chechnya and will endeavour to ensure that the political process recently set in motion leads to the reestablishment of the rule of law and the reconstruction of the region 's economic and social fabric .
The Union is united in its overall positive judgment of the start of the institutional process launched by President Putin with regard to Chechnya .
We now expect to see an about-face in terms of human rights and we call for the punishment of those guilty of abuses .
The European Union 's continuing attention was made clear through the recent visit in April to Chechnya itself of the Troika of Heads of Mission in Moscow as well as through support for the resumption of the OSCE 's activities in the region , which I mentioned earlier .
The EU-Russia Cooperation Council of 15 April last was the Union 's first opportunity to send a high-level political message of vigilance , interest and general availability .
The St Petersburg EU-Russia Summit expressed the hope that the political process recently set in motion , along with economic and social reconstruction , will lead to the reestablishment of rule of law , to the promotion of human rights and to genuine reconciliation .
The St Petersburg Summit condemned any act of violence , particularly terrorist violence , that might jeopardise the current prospects for a political solution and acknowledged the substantial contribution that international organisations can make , working together with the Russian authorities .
Lastly , once the region 's economic reconstruction is underway , the Union will also have to make a financial commitment , although one based on strict conditions , of course .
The representative of the Commission , who is due to speak shortly , will be able to describe to you the aid package being put together .
The cooperation of the Russian authorities will be fundamental in ensuring that this aid actually reaches those in deep need .
The possibility of launching a European Union initiative in Chechnya in the future deserves closer examination .
By supporting the process begun by President Putin , this initiative could extend Community intervention from the field of humanitarian aid , on which we have all been focusing up until now , to the different - but equally important , if I may say so - area of institution-building and the promotion of socio-economic development , placing a number of practical initiatives in the framework of the existing cooperation between the European Union and the OSCE .
The OSCE is currently assessing , along with its Russian counterpart , the possibility of aid interventions in specific sectors : I have already mentioned elections - an extremely important area - the judicial system , police reform and the reintegration of refugees and displaced persons .
These elements of institution-building are traditionally held to be Union priorities too .
In conclusion , with regard to the institutional process launched by Moscow , the Italian Presidency will be committed to facilitating a definitive political solution which , if possible , involves all the representatives and segments of the Chechen population not compromised by terrorism .
We believe that the institutional reform launched should have the practical , genuine result - the automatic result , if I may say so - of improving the present levels of respect for the human rights of the Chechen people .
.
( ES ) Mr President , following the Council 's position , clearly expressed by the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Frattini , I must say that the Commission can only repeat that the European Union is firmly committed to the fight against terrorism and , in this regard , that it supports Russia in its legitimate fight against terrorism in Chechnya or anywhere else .
There must be no doubt about this .
This means that the defence of human rights is an absolute and that , if the main violation of human rights is terrorism itself , which does not respect the basic right to life , that does not mean that we must not always be aware , in any action or fight against terrorism , that human rights are a fundamental element which must be respected at all times .
Having said all of this , and moving on to the areas which are more directly related to the Commission 's activity - which is what I am going to focus on in order not to repeat what has already been said - I would point out that it is necessary to make progress on the possibility of providing humanitarian aid in Chechnya .
As the honourable Members know , the European Union , by means of the European Community Humanitarian Office ( ECHO ) , is the main provider of humanitarian aid in the Northern Caucasus .
Since October 1999 we have provided more than EUR 110 million in aid to the victims of the conflicts in Chechnya .
The security conditions in the Northern Caucasus are still deficient , which means that there are considerable logistical problems .
However , the Commission trusts that the Russian authorities will adopt a more open attitude , for example , with regard to the attempts to liberate Arjan Erkel , the European aid worker who is still being held hostage .
The reluctance , in certain cases , of the Russian authorities to allow non-governmental organisations to use the necessary radio communications , as well as the system for granting residency and work permits in Chechnya , remain the principal obstacles to providing humanitarian aid .
In this regard , we will continue to call for improvements in the treatment offered , in order to facilitate the carrying out of humanitarian operations , in accordance with the basic rules on safety , efficiency and supervision and , of course , independent evaluation .
Furthermore , although the Russian authorities have assured us that they will not repatriate the thousands of displaced persons in neighbouring areas to Chechnya by force , referred to a moment ago by the President-in-Office of the Council , the truth is that ECHO has informed us that it is observing that the possibility of replacing the deteriorating tents and building more solid shelters in neighbouring Ingushetia is being denied .
Returning to Chechnya must not be the only option for the displaced people .
In addition to continuing to closely monitor how events develop in general , we will continue to insist in particular that any repatriation of displaced Chechens must take place voluntarily and unconditionally .
With a view to the future , the Commission will continue to monitor how the situation develops , including the work under way , with a view to the signature of a treaty intended to clarify the status of Chechnya within the Russian Federation , as well as the preparations for the presidential and parliamentary elections in the Russian republic , scheduled for October and December .
In this regard , we will continue to analyse how the situation develops .
The Commission is now stressing that all these actions , all this progress , should take place with the utmost transparency , entirely in accordance with international rules , and , above all , that they should be carried out in a way that helps to resolve this conflict once and for all .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the delegation I head is happy that it was able to gain first-hand knowledge of the situation .
That is what happened the first time .
We met the Russian , Ingushetian and Chechnyan leaders and members of their governments .
We met people in camps and in Grozny too , as well as the Chechen diaspora in Moscow , and obviously members of humanitarian organisations , both national and international .
Besides human rights , we wanted to get to know about social , economic and educational issues and medical facilities , the situation regarding refugees and the possibilities of leading a normal life in general .
Firstly , I wish to raise the matter of Russia 's change of strategy .
It is no longer pursuing a military solution but a political one .
This is a positive approach and one that the European Parliament has been calling for for a long time .
Secondly , it is obvious that all parties are tired of war and want peace .
I do not now mean the criminal elements that have turned the war into a means of making money .
Thirdly , it would appear that a window of opportunity has presented itself that is to last about a year , until the elections in the Russian Federation and Chechnya are over .
It is to be feared that after the elections the situation may go back to what it was before .
For that reason , there should now be strong support for the political process that has been started .
There is also the risk of ' Chechenisation ' of the conflict , with violence moving more and more in the direction of civil war .
On the road to peace it is vital that Russia should convict war criminals and that the army should withdraw .
Human rights must be protected .
The Chechens must also cease their armed struggle and terrorist attacks .
Observations have been made from several sources that combat action on the part of the Russian army has already diminished in the region over the last six months .
At the same time , however , violence on the part of armed groups has increased , which is very worrying .
We must determinedly press on with the social , cultural and economic reconstruction that has only just started .
As one possible candidate for President of Chechnya said to me , money creates peace .
The Russian Government has put together a kind of politico-economic package to normalise the situation .
It may well need revising and adding to , but the choice of direction is important here .
In connection with this , the European Union should likewise strengthen its measures in the region .
The European Union is already the biggest external provider of assistance .
The Commission recently also granted EUR 16 million in humanitarian aid , which is only right .
Our delegation is calling on the aid organisations to get to the region quickly , safely and unimpeded .
Without outside help it will take even longer to put things right .
It is also essential that the office of the OSCE in Znamenskoje can be got fully up and running without delay .
In a few months ' time they will be planning elections and the start of election campaigns there .
It will be very important to check that the campaign is made transparent and that the requirements of democracy are being fulfilled .
This will require a long-term presence .
If the campaigns are not democratic the elections can hardly be either .
Finally , the idea of a peace conference has also been proposed .
All parties could participate as well as the European Union , the Council of Europe and the OSCE .
I have not named the guilty parties in my speech because now is the time to seek peace .
Mr President , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports the joint resolution of the political groups on Chechnya .
We thus support the Russian Government 's attempts to stabilise conditions in the region on the basis of the recently conducted referendum .
At the same time we would stress that there must be respect for human rights in Chechnya .
If Russia 's current policy does not lead to the hoped-for outcome soon , it will , in my opinion , be wise of Russia to consider whether there is an alternative to it .
It is extremely difficult to bring peace to Chechnya when certain powerful groups are trying to bring about its secession from Russia .
On the other hand , Russia is holding on tightly to its regional unity , which is something the international community has also given its clear support to .
Russia undoubtedly has enough resources for military control over Chechnya , but it will have to pay dearly for it in terms of loss of human life and financial losses , and politically too .
Unless armed resistance starts to subside , the Russians will have to ask themselves whether it is worth paying such a high price for military control of war-ravaged Chechnya .
They will have to consider whether an alternative to their current policy on Chechnya can be found .
The solution arrived at in Kosovo might perhaps serve as a model in principle .
That way Chechnya would still indisputably belong to the Russian Federation , but international peacekeeping forces and local police forces would be responsible for security .
It would certainly be hard for Russia to agree to such a solution , but it will not be easy if the present situation continues either .
The solution is in the hands of the Russians themselves .
Outsiders cannot advise or guide them .
Russia itself must decide what sort of policy it wants to put into effect in Chechnya .
At least for the time being , Russia continues with its current policy , and , as I said to begin with , the ELDR Group supports the joint resolution of the political groups based on it .
Mr President , Mr Frattini , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to recommend our travel report to you , because it is , in my view , a balanced one , and it makes more subtle distinctions than do some of the speakers I have heard so far .
Commissioner , the fight in Chechnya is not a fight against terrorism only .
The situation is far more complex .
If you read up on it , you will notice that you will speak of Chechnya in a yet more balanced way .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have paid a visit to Chechnya , and I did not gain the impression that the Russians have the situation under control .
People are being abducted on a daily basis .
Soldiers are being killed on a daily basis - ten a day on average .
Human rights are being violated , and the Russians have indeed changed strategy and switched from a military strategy to a political strategy , which involves a referendum and elections being held soon .
However , Mr Frattini , Commissioner , it is a strategy that is being imposed from the top down .
It is not an inclusive process ; it is not a process that involves all the layers of the Chechen population .
Neither is it a process that involves the rebels , the resistance fighters , or even Mr Mashadov , the most recently elected President .
I think that we will need to do a great deal in order to remedy this situation .
As far as the humanitarian situation is concerned , I can fully support what the Commissioner has said .
She has , I think , given a correct summary .
Something must be done about what the humanitarian organisations are going through over there .
Mr President , I should like to conclude with the Arjan Erkel case .
Arjan 's father is in the public gallery , together with representatives of Médecins sans Frontières .
I should like to tell him here officially that in our resolution on which we are voting tomorrow , a paragraph has been devoted to his son 's abduction .
I also give you the assurance that this text will be translated into Russian the day after tomorrow .
We have a delegation meeting of the Russian delegation in Moscow next Monday and Tuesday and as the chairman of this delegation , I can assure the relatives that we will bring up their son 's case for discussion during our delegation meeting in the Duma next Tuesday .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I really do feel that no man is more blind than the man who refuses to see .
What sort of political process is this ?
We have witnessed a referendum in which less than 15 % of the population voted , in which Western journalists present in Grozny were able to vote : what more do we need to prove that it was a complete charade ?
I am pleased to hear that Mr Oostlander found when he went to Chechnya that the normalisation process described by his friend , Mr Putin , has had no effect whatsoever for months .
What is happening in Chechnya is that a policy of terror is being implemented by a state which has succeeded - and the resolution does not mention this - in killing 200 thousand people in 10 years , which has succeeded in turning 300 thousand out of a population of a million inhabitants into refugees , which eliminates dozens and dozens of Chechen civilians every day , and I am talking about civilians , not soldiers , through the Russian armed forces present in Chechnya .
So this is the normalisation process !
If we want to pretend , in the interests of a potential great Russian market , that the policy of terror implemented by the Russian Federation in Chechnya does not exist , then we can continue to do so , but , in that case , we will be accomplices to genocide - and we must be aware of that - for when 20 to 25 % of the population of a country is eliminated in less than 10 years , that is called genocide . This is worse than Bosnia , it is worse than Kosovo .
Therefore , President-in-Office of the Council , I believe - as Mr Staes said - that the way forward is through negotiations between the two parties concerned , that is between President Putin and President Maskhadov .
The rest is pure and utter garbage that we are inventing in the name of interests which we do not want to admit to .
It was suggested earlier that the war in Chechnya is linked with the war on terror .
I wish to make it very clear that I believe that what Russia is doing in Chechnya is not a war on terror , but that it is actually giving rise to terrorism .
We need to be quite clear that Yelena Bonner , Andrei Sakharov 's widow , is right when she says that what is happening in Chechnya is genocide .
I shall not mince my words - I believe that this is a colonial war driven by the energy interests of Gazprom and others .
That is what it is really about .
So it is vital that we should not deceive ourselves .
Many well-regarded international human rights organisations came to the conclusion that the so-called referendum was a total sham .
Convenient partners for bogus peace talks have been created .
The OSCE has already observed elections in Chechnya .
There has already been peace in Chechnya once .
Mr Mashadov was democratically elected in the presence of OSCE observers , so why are we not negotiating with him ?
Why has he been forced to go underground ?
This has happened precisely because he represents his people and is not a puppet .
This will not lead to peace , Mr President-in-Office , so the basic presumptions underlying this debate are utterly false .
Choosing puppets as your partners in talks has never been effective and has never led to peace .
I would therefore like to make one point very clear : what I regard as being dishonest about this debate and about many of the speeches we have heard - including speeches made by Mr Putin , who used Chechnya as the bloodiest election platform in history in order to come to power - is the word ' normalisation ' .
When was the last time we heard about ' normalisation ' ?
It was in 1968 , when the national uprising by the Czech and Slovak peoples was put down .
That is not the sort of normalisation we want !
Mr President , Commissioner , one thing of which I am certain , having taken part in this delegation , is that , today , it is completely inappropriate to apply the word ' peace ' to Chechnya .
Three thousand were killed at the start of the year . Forty-nine communal graves have been found , a very small proportion of which can be ascribed to terrorism and a very large proportion of which can be attributed to the abuses perpetrated daily by an army which has established itself as an occupying force .
The referendum was an illusion of normality .
It is difficult to decree normality in a country by waving the barrel of a kalashnikov .
In view of all this , we believe that the political solution must genuinely be a political solution , and for that to be so , Mr Frattini , I put it to you that all the parties need to be involved .
The former President , Mr Maskhadov , must take part too , and he cannot be dismissed so hastily , Mr Frattini , as a rebel separatist .
Former President , Mr Maskhadov , was elected democratically by the Chechen people at the end of the first war .
Today , Mr Maskhadov is an essential point of reference if we want to achieve genuine peace , true peace .
There is also a danger that Chechnya will become a permanent war zone where old grievances are superseded by new .
One last recommendation to Mr Frattini and to the Commission .
We must ensure that Russia is involved in this peace process and that it shoulders its responsibility .
If we continue today to talk about the possibility of Russia acceding to the European Union , without considering this ongoing conflict as an element which is already causing difficulties in our relations with Russia , we will certainly not be facilitating the peace process .
Apart from being extremely premature , talking about the accession of Russia could be extremely dangerous in terms of the fate of Chechnya .
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , I think there is a lot of truth in what my fellow MEPs , Mr Fava and Mr Staes , said about the continuous violence in Chechnya .
The reports they have submitted about the lack of reconstruction and about obstacles placed in the way of the humanitarian organisations are shocking .
The information we have obtained to the effect that 30 000 Russian soldiers took part in the referendum is mirth-inducing .
Chechnya is an international issue .
I think it is an outdated notion , incompatible with the EU 's general policy , to say that it is an internal matter for Russia to resolve .
We must call for more vigorous efforts to be made and for greater support to be given , as well as for the OSCE to be allowed to open its office again .
We need effective election monitoring .
At the same time , we in the EU , too , must contribute to the reconstruction .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the Commission statement on p reparation for the World Trade Organisation Ministerial meeting ( Cancun , 10 / 14 September 2003 ) .
Mr President , I have tried to be as quick as possible .
It is very fortunate that Parliament sometimes gets ahead of the agenda .
It obliges us to get away from our usual responses and I am very glad of that .
Thank you for asking me to bring you up to date on such an important event as the fifth ministerial conference of the WTO , which will be held in Cancun in September .
Our basic position is well known : we want the Doha development programme to succeed by pursuing the European Union 's three fundamental objectives .
The first objective concerns support for economic growth , which we need in Europe as much as in the rest of the world .
The second concerns the need for multilateral rules to govern more open markets , which will make for a better link between our trade interests and the values of our societies .
The third objective is that the developing countries should be integrated into the international trade system , which has been the recurrent theme of this round of negotiations .
We see it not as a matter of rhetoric but as something very specific .
Each part of the negotiation programme must have added value in terms of development .
We are only a few weeks away from the Cancun conference ; the time we have remaining to make the conference a success is therefore limited and the preparatory process must be stepped up .
The necessary political impetus needs to be given in several areas , namely agriculture , access to industrial markets , investment , competition , facilitation of trade and public contracts .
In all the areas I have just mentioned , details need to be decided in preparation for the final negotiations .
In other matters , like geographical names , the link between trade and development and questions concerning the settlement of disputes , we are looking for initial results at the Cancun conference that will probably be modest and will have to be amplified in the final agreement .
There is still therefore much to be done .
Our feeling is that these objectives can be achieved and that the issue is not the complexity of the questions but the political will .
This is also true for a subject I have not mentioned but which will be important for the Cancun conference : the problem of the poor countries ' access to medicines .
As you know , the United States prevented a decision being reached on this last December despite our having reached a balance around the WTO table .
There seem to have been a few developments , but they are not confirmed and it is clear that the US position will have to change if a global agreement is to be reached at Cancun .
Without going into the details , let us consider each of these subjects .
Firstly , agriculture .
We need a complete set of rules and a date for the submission of bids .
From this point of view , the agreement reached in the ' Agriculture ' Council last week strengthens the hand of your negotiators .
That agreement clearly marks the start of a new era .
This progress will make for a better use of resources , greater transparency and improved quality , environmental protection and animal welfare , which are all things that farmers , consumers and taxpayers have said they want .
This reform also sends a clear signal to the rest of the world : we are very much turning our backs on an old system that created certain distortions of trade .
The new agricultural policy is more favourable to trade , as the developing countries wanted .
Thus , after consulting your Parliament , the ministers of agriculture have given your negotiators , Commissioner Fischler and myself , a line of credit which we are not going to make public - we are not so naive - but which we will use to the extent that is necessary and justified .
That line of credit will only be opened if we are certain of obtaining something in return .
I am thinking , for example , of the disciplines that will have to be put in place for other systems of support , in particular the US system whose harmful effect on trade is known to us .
I am also thinking of the protection of geographical names .
For all these things we will want something in return , there must be no mistake about that .
There is no question of unilateral disarmament , as my colleague Mr Fischler has rightly said .
In agriculture , we have done our duty .
It is now up to our partners to take initiatives , the US in particular , since in the last few years they have reintroduced a system that creates distortions .
The second point is market access for industrial products .
This is a major objective of the Doha programme .
The opening of trade must be as universal as possible so that these advantages benefit the largest number .
Our aim is to see that the developing countries get better access to our markets , that is , to those of the developed countries , but also to make possible a significant reduction in the trade barriers that might exist between developing countries .
We must not lose sight of the importance of the South-South dimension of market access .
Thirdly , the ' Singapore ' issues , namely competition , investment , facilitation of trade and transparency in public contracts .
We must determine the negotiating rules so that talks can be launched formally .
This objective remains one of the Union 's priorities .
These questions cannot be separated from the single commitment .
We will resist all temptation to drop one part or another , for to do so would jeopardise the round 's entire equilibrium .
We will therefore have to reach agreement on the rules .
Fourthly , the important questions for the developing countries , namely special and differential treatment and implementation .
We are trying to be more flexible towards the developing countries , moving in the direction they desire and wish for without creating a sort of two-speed WTO .
We are willing to make progress in this respect and to draw up a framework agreement or even a set of guiding principles for adoption in Cancun in order to ensure that greater attention is paid to these questions which - let me repeat - are important for the developing countries .
On trade and the environment , which are sensitive issues in this Assembly , at the Cancun conference we shall have to reach a decision on WTO observer status for multilateral environmental agreements and on the deepening of discussions on other environmental subjects .
You know our programme in this field : greater consistency between multilateral environmental agreements and the rules of international trade .
That is why , for example , we have asked that the secretariats of the multilateral agreements and the UNEP , which acts as secretariat for some types of multilateral agreements , should be given observer status at the special sessions of the Committee on Trade and Environment devoted to this question that are held in Geneva .
We also think that the Cancun ministerial conference ought to decide to deepen the discussions on voluntary labelling for environmental purposes .
There is a possibility of constructive dialogue in favour of trade in products that are kind to the environment , especially when they originate in developing countries .
I will end with a word about our working methods , by which I mean the relationship between your Parliament and the Commission in this field .
As always , we are working closely with Parliament to prepare for the Cancun conference .
We have in a way anticipated a number of favourable outcomes of the Convention in this field , since the text currently on the table proposes giving Parliament virtually the same rights as the Council in trade policy , namely codecision for the adoption of laws implementing trade policy , the right to be kept informed throughout the negotiation of international agreements and the right to give assent to the outcome of negotiations , which is the line those of you who have looked into this question were looking for .
I therefore believe that our joint efforts have paid off .
There are no doubt grounds for thinking that , in some respects , the text is still rather convoluted and could be improved .
I think there are still a few pockets of unanimity that a number of you have rightly continued to question .
Progress has nevertheless been real and European democracy will clearly be the winner if the Intergovernmental Conference does not water down the Convention text on this point .
It is therefore with this attitude that we are going to collaborate for the Cancun conference .
As you know , a delegation of Members of the European Parliament will be coming to Cancun with us , as they did to Seattle and Doha .
I am personally delighted about that .
Likewise , we are in favour of the idea of a WTO parliamentary conference , because the parliamentary contribution can only strengthen the negotiator 's legitimacy .
To achieve the outcomes I have just described which , as I said , are both ambitious and feasible , we will have to work hard between now and the Cancun conference .
We will do so with you .
This dialogue and these debates are necessary because we know that , without them , we will not have your support .
That is why we are waiting impatiently for the resolution on which , if I understood correctly , the vote will be taken tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats backs all Commissioner Lamy 's efforts to achieve a good result at Cancun , and we are obviously in total agreement with him that we need to get the text approved that has now been drafted in the Convention in the area of trade policy and also in the IGC , so you can rely on that .
A successful outcome for the Doha Development Round remains a key factor in promoting worldwide economic growth , in order to strengthen multilateralism and Global Governance .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats supports the general approach with regard to the negotiations as laid down in the Council 's mandate for the third ministerial WTO Conference in Seattle .
We would like to urge all WTO members to take the necessary enhancing decisions in Cancun in order to bring the Single Undertaking , the topics of that Round , to a successful close within the agreed deadlines .
The political will displayed by the Member States during the ministerial OECD meeting at the end of April and the G8 summit in Evian is said to be crucial when it comes to making a success of the conference in Cancun and the trade round .
What is important now is that we want to see action rather than words , and that the right negotiating climate should be created .
Over the past three months , we have not seen a great deal of progress in the WTO negotiations .
Many target dates for dealing with specific topics have not been met and are thus , unfortunately , on the agenda in Cancun , which is , in consequence , already threatening to become overloaded .
Needless to say , we welcome in this framework the agreement that the European Union reached in the Council last week concerning the reforms of its agricultural policy , a result on which we would particularly congratulate Commissioner Fischler .
We have good reason for endorsing what the Commissioner has said .
We now hope that the United States , in particular , will follow the EU in taking similar steps .
We should , however , note the fact that this is a fundamental breakthrough .
Important items on the agenda in Cancun also include , in our view , the so-called Singapore topics - investments , competition , trade procedures , transparency of public contracts - and we would call on the Commissioner to be very much involved in these topics .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats also requests the formal opening of negotiations in the area of competition policy .
We would emphasise the potential benefits of binding basic principles in the area of competition policy , such as transparency , non-discrimination , procedural honesty and international cooperation between competing authorities .
In the area of public contracts , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is in favour of a multilateral and legally binding agreement on public contracts , including goods and services contracts .
Needless to say , we totally agree that education , public health and the audiovisual sector are sectors that have to be treated separately , and we would like to keep it that way .
The European Union has always been one of the advocates of this WTO Round and as the world 's largest trade bloc , it owes it to itself to continue to work hard and make Cancun a runaway success .
Mr President , Commissioner , long before the summit in Doha , where the present trade talks have started , my group , that of the Party of European Socialists , emphasised the special nature of these negotiations and the special responsibility that they entail .
On the one hand , there are , of course , the regular agenda items about opening up the markets , which receives my group 's unqualified support .
After all , we are aware of trade 's capacity for bringing prosperity to our citizens and our trading partners .
On the other hand - as , in fact , the resolution emphasises - these negotiations are , above all , a test of the WTO 's capacity to correct a great imbalance in the trade system , to distribute the benefits of trade more evenly and to support sustainable development .
They are a test of our capacity for putting globalisation to work in the interest of all people .
This is why we put to you the following key questions : will the negotiations lead to a considerably fairer distribution of trade profits , particularly between north and south ?
Will the negotiations prove that the trade system serves our citizens ' desire for ecological and social progress rather than subjecting it to the same ?
Will the negotiations strengthen the WTO 's transparency and liability towards integration into the wider system of Global Governance ?
The mandate that we would like to give Commissioners Lamy and Fischler in Cancun is to ensure that the answer to these questions is affirmative .
My group has set the following four tests in this connection .
First of all , EU negotiators must move more in the direction of the developing countries ' requirements in the areas of industrial market access , implementation , special and differentiating treatment and , above all , the trade in agricultural products , but must also demand the same commitment from the United States and other developed countries .
The United Nations recently asked the industrialised countries to cut back considerably in trade-distorting agricultural subsidies and to phase them out eventually , without a quid pro quo from developing countries .
We support this request and would ask the EU negotiators to do likewise .
Secondly - and in Cancun , if not sooner - the WTO must at long last deliver on the Doha promise in order to widen the benefits of the TRIPS in public healthcare to countries with a modest , or no , pharmaceutical industry , which the United States has stood alone in blocking since December 2002 .
Thirdly , Cancun must convey the right message concerning relations between trade and non-trade affairs .
In the agricultural modalities , this means safeguarding the right of WTO members to determine food standards and to promote public goods , such as rural development , environmental protection and animal welfare .
This also means that clear progress must be made in the trade and environmental agenda of Doha .
Cancun must give the current TRIPS review new impetus and must focus more clearly on the interests of developing countries , and it must break through the impasse of the fundamental labour standards .
Finally , strengthening the WTO 's transparency and democratic liability , where Doha only made a tentative step , must be firmly placed on the negotiating agenda .
We want a strong EU initiative in line with the proposals that Parliament adopted by a large majority in October 2001 .
People across the world have two objections to the WTO as it stands now : a lack of honesty and a lack of democracy .
We should listen to our citizens ; we should make them our priorities .
Commissioner , we know that at the moment in West Africa , cotton is a specific example of proposals and negotiations where Europe could make a considerable difference .
If you could make a contribution to this in the next few months , this would be a useful leg up .
We would like to hear a concrete reaction from you on that score .
Mr President , the difficulties we are experiencing at this critical juncture in the negotiations leading up to Cancun do not augur well for an easy ministerial meeting in September .
These difficulties arise to a large extent from the current world trade system , with its liberalising tendencies and the consequent effects , so often negative , on the fragile economies of the less developed countries .
The North and the South have not benefited from this system in equal measure .
The most important questions raised by those countries must , therefore , be treated with the utmost respect . It is also essential to put a stop to that liberalising tendency , at least until a full assessment of its consequences is carried out .
The Development Agenda must not be a paper tiger . It should rather instil in us an unshakeable resolve and steady us on a firm course .
Over and above that , it is vital to give real and meaningful content to the clause granting special , privileged treatment to developing countries . The European Union should , moreover , establish a strategic alliance with those countries .
We are all aware of the central issues at stake .
I will confine myself to brief comments on three of them : medicines may become a key area , if they are not one already .
The United States has stood in the way of an agreement , and is even pressuring some countries to give up the right to import generic medicines .
It will be important to stress and emphasise the fact that the right to health must take precedence over all commercial interests .
As for the trade in agricultural products , another important area , market access may well be at the heart of the negotiations .
The spectacular increase in US farm subsidies does nothing to bring an agreement closer , but the European Union will be able to take an important step forward , particularly if it contributes to the phasing-out , in the long term , of all export subsidies .
Finally , as regards access to the industrial market , the textiles and clothing sector merits special attention , since it is particularly vulnerable and since concessions , above all bilateral ones , have already been made .
We can countenance a few measures in this sphere aimed exclusively at developing countries , but we must always take care to protect this important industry and its employment potential .
Mr President , there is a lot of uncertainty surrounding the Cancun conference and the preparatory talks are far from being completed , especially in the sectors thought to be favourable to the developing countries .
The fact that the dismantling of agricultural subsidies remains very limited shows the lack of enthusiasm on the part of the rich countries for giving up their privileges ; the US is the worst offender , despite having joined in the development round .
The European Union , obsessed by its own interests , has also revised CAP reform downwards .
Revising the TRIPS agreement to ban the patenting of living things ought to be a priority at Cancun .
If intellectual property rights are applied to all forms of life , they violate the sovereign rights of states and populations to protect their resources and skills and deny the very existence of public good .
Negotiators , if you want Cancun to be a success , then listen to the call from the Africa group and drop the Singapore issues .
The absence of solutions to the famous paragraph 6 of the Doha declaration on access to medicines proves that our governments are under pressure from the pharmaceuticals firms and are afraid to adopt a bold and truly humane stance .
Once again , there is a great risk that in the outcome a compromise solution will be vaunted that would have been considered unacceptable at the outset .
In Egypt last week , the US seemed to take a step forward by dropping a restrictive list of diseases .
There then remains the problem of which countries are eligible .
What is meant by sufficient manufacturing capacity ?
Rather than accept a second-rate compromise , should we not rather start again with a new basis for negotiations that will result in an economic and practical solution for the developing countries ?
Let us not forget the spirit of Doha .
Nothing must prevent countries from protecting their population 's health .
In particular , nothing must prevent any member from taking part in the WTO talks fairly and transparently .
We will be particularly vigilant about this when we are in Cancun .
Commissioner , I am asking you not to go back on our commitments .
The Doha round must be the round of the developing countries .
Nature and human beings are not commodities .
The environment and health are more important than the WTO rules .
Do not undermine the European Union 's credibility and good faith .
Work for sustainable and fair solutions in Cancun .
Commissioner , the ostensible reason for your reform of the Common Agricultural Policy was that this would give Europe room for manoeuvre in the WTO negotiations .
The compromise agreed in Luxembourg last week largely follows the Commission 's recommendations .
Let me ask you a few questions .
Can you tell me today what new horizons this reform opens in the negotiations ?
Can you explain to me what agriculture will gain despite a reform that will have very harmful consequences for our farmers ?
European consumers are making ever-tougher demands about food safety , product quality and production conditions .
These are resulting in ever-tighter constraints on farmers regarding environmental protection and animal welfare .
Do you think you can meet their expectations by requiring that only products that meet the same standards can enter the European market ?
If not , that would distort competition on our own markets and penalise our own products .
In the matter of public health , the Union has opted for a ban on meat treated with hormones .
Will you firmly defend that position , since we do not want it called into question on any pretext ?
Our agriculture also produces very high quality produce that is recognised by designations of origin that are often the spearhead of the regional economy .
How do you intend to get our WTO partners to accept them ?
Finally , we support the Union 's moratorium on GMOs against the complaint filed by the United States .
We are looking to you , Commissioner , to maintain an offensive and unyielding stance in defence of European agriculture and consumer demands and to refuse to make any concessions in the matter of opening markets .
Yielding everything to liberalism would be the end of European agriculture .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too hope that the Cancun event will discuss development , but it must focus first and foremost on the development of international trade , the further liberalisation of trade .
We Europeans must take care not to weigh the agenda down with issues which are unrelated to the liberalisation of trade , or we will end up handicapping the talks .
Commissioner , you said that we have done what was necessary with regard to the CAP .
I believe that we have done the absolute minimum needed to stop the definitive failure of the negotiations but we have done nothing more , we have done too little too late .
The Community agricultural policy system is still highly , firmly protectionist .
Mr Clegg has already spoken about this .
Taking the example of sugar , how can we say that the Community agricultural policy is not protectionist where sugar is concerned , for example ?
What has sugar got to do with rural development ?
What has sugar got to do with environmental or social clauses ?
We continue to pursue a hard and fast protectionist approach with regard to sugar , to the detriment of the farming community of Mozambique , for example .
The case of sugar - protectionism pure and simple - is only one example .
On this basis , Commissioner , Europe will find that it is still in very serious difficulties at Cancun .
Mr President , Commissioner Lamy , the WTO round of talks at Doha were being called the Development Round already at that summit : its end result would be that the developing countries in particular would be able to benefit more from the advantages of globalisation .
This must also be the objective at Cancun in September .
In this respect it will be important to ensure that the developing countries receive the technical and financial assistance they need to help them develop their capacity in terms of administration , industry , commerce and exports .
At the same time , however , it will also be necessary to emphasise the importance of good administration , good-neighbourliness , internal harmony and the fight against corruption as these countries strive to attain the standards of the developed countries .
The alarming prevalence of AIDS , though not just that but many other epidemics too , means that , prior to the Cancun Summit , we should break down the barriers that have been preventing access to reasonably priced medicines everywhere .
The problem is a tough one politically and industrio-politically , but it can be solved .
A certain superpower , in terms of its resources and potential commercial might , Russia , is still outside the WTO .
The Cancun agenda does not and cannot include discussion of Russia 's internal legislation or its properly organised administration , or how its WTO membership negotiations could be sped up .
It is nevertheless very much in the interests of the EU in particular that Russia should join the WTO as quickly as possible .
It is by no means just Russia that is suffering from the situation as it is now : the present state of affairs is essentially weakening reciprocal economic relations between the EU and Russia with regard to investment and trade between them .
As with the less developed countries - or should I say as with the other less developed countries ? - Russia too should be given support to develop its administration , customs systems , taxation and payments , and other such matters , so that they reach the reliable level that WTO membership requires .
The Commission will have a tough job regarding this in the future .
Commissioner Lamy is used to hard and productive work , but this particular field of activity will also bring economic benefits for the EU .
We are all convinced that fighting for multilateralism is a good thing .
With multilateralism under threat , we must do all we can to make Cancun a success .
But it is a bit like squaring the circle .
On the one hand the Americans are defending their interests by every means , while cultivating the myth of total free trade and , on the other , many countries of the South are unable to take their place in the world economy , questioning the present trade rules and demanding positive discrimination .
How can the EU play its part as a bridge-builder and point the US in the right direction ?
While noting the positive efforts that have been made , I do wonder about a number of points in the policy on Cancun because we , too , are not without contradictions between our interests and our intentions .
Firstly , how can we make a better defence of special and differential treatment ?
The developing countries are not the only ones at fault ; we are not clear on this point either .
The scope for such treatment is excessively broad , depriving the concept of differentiation of any real relevance .
And the question of the rules is very much a grey area .
Can we look at them again for TRIPS and for regional areas , not forgetting the question of technology transfer ?
Secondly , I support those who do not want to drop the aim of preparing questions about ' Singapore ' - I differ from Mrs McNally slightly here - because it involves key aspects of the link between trade and development .
But does the EU have to stick to its initial line ?
I agree with the bottom up approach , but would it not be better to support the restrictions , especially pre-establishment , involved in the claim for a political area ?
Moreover , there is an urgent need for the Cancun talks to be underpinned by powerful parallel initiatives for the redistribution of direct investments , guaranteeing their sustainability .
Thirdly , so far as agriculture is concerned , we are defending a strong position regarding internal support and the calculation of tariff reductions .
But will the most vulnerable countries of the South , which only produce one thing and are net importers , benefit in any way from it ?
Should we not increase market access and abolish export subsidies on products that are strategic for those countries and adopt a framework initiative in favour of fair trade ?
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for reminding us of Cancun 's common theme - the integration of the developing countries .
Thank you , too , for matching words with deeds in one or other area where the WTO ought to act differently .
If we want to show solidarity with the South and with the most fragile populations of our own area , we cannot treat health , education , water , energy or the necessary progress in sanitation systems as mere commodities .
People in all countries must have the benefit of reasonable prices for what are really public services to humanity .
The negotiations on GATS need to change course .
The right to healthy food in sufficient quantity is also a common good of humanity .
Farmers of the North and the South must be able to support a perspective of true multifunctionality .
Rural development , the very symbol of the non-market sector , and which will be as crucial an issue tomorrow as it is today , is in fact part of the reorientation of the CAP as just adopted by the Council .
It reinforces the adjustments that are a positive signal for our small farmers and for those of the countries of the South .
But if you can rely on the start of the decoupling affecting cereals products or meat , then export subsidies must be less obvious and must continue to be less obvious .
The distinctive nature of European farmers must be protected .
But if solidarity with the small farmers of the South is to be clear , they must be allowed to benefit from support systems similar to the CAP , which still protects European farmers .
The prime task of both of them is to feed their fellow citizens by freely producing the appropriate food .
They must be helped to do so in the face of the two or three agro-industrial monopolies .
Mr President , since the WTO was set up in 1995 , the gap between rich and poor countries has become greater .
The Doha Development Round was not worthy of its name .
Now , the Doha deadlines are to be maintained .
Mrs McNally is quite right in saying that this is not the time for adding new topics to the agenda that take account neither of the developing countries nor of the environment .
This would derail the debate on those topics concerned with promoting the objective of sustainable development .
This is an objective that , together with free and fair trade and the eradication of poverty , is incorporated into the EU 's new draft Constitution . The EU now has a unique opportunity to demonstrate that the Constitution is not just a paper tiger .
What the EU should focus upon is ensuring that every country has its say in the negotiations and not only , as is usually the case , the rich and privileged countries that will take care of their own interests .
Cancun must result in practical progress for the developing countries and show that there is a real willingness on the part of the rich countries to prioritise the fight against poverty .
Finally , it must at long last be ensured that governments do not have a monopoly on negotiating and implementing WTO agreements , but that a democratically elected assembly is set up .
Mr President , if negotiations are properly conducted , there is give and take .
If Europe receives the measure with which it has already given , it ought therefore to get a lot in Cancun .
Was not the avowed aim of the CAP reform to improve the Union 's negotiating position in the Doha round and not to define the agricultural policy the Europeans need ?
My question is therefore this . What substantial concessions is the Union asking from its partners in return for the cascade of unilateral concessions it has made since the end of the Uruguay round ?
I will mention a few : the ' Everything But Arms ' initiative , the unilateral abolition of import duties on cereals from the Black Sea , the granting of tariff quotas , the decoupling of compensatory aid and the associated dismantling of our common organisation of agricultural markets .
I hope that the Union is at least going to put the unfortunate Blair House Agreement back on the negotiating table , since it prevents us from pursuing a consistent policy for oilseed development and is causing our output to stagnate at a derisory million tonnes while world production is increasing by 5 % a year and now exceeds 300 million tonnes .
I also hope that the Commission will get the principle accepted that nations have a right to feed themselves , since this is a basic principle of food security in both quality and quantity terms .
We must not in fact allow countries that are structural exporters to force us to give them a so-called right of access to the Community market for products in which the European Union has a production surplus or for products , Mr President , that we want strictly controlled , like GMOs .
Commissioner , a few days before the last European Union / United States summit , you expressed your satisfaction that there were , and I quote , ' solid commercial relations between the Union and the United States that enable us to work together on the Doha programme . '
However , just before Cancun , it is vital that there is a European commitment that is not afraid of being different from the American positions in several areas .
This is what I think is expected by those , such as the trade ministers of the LDCs very recently , who are criticising the WTO 's inability to respect the Doha timetable , to complete the negotiations on decisions in favour of development , on access to medicines , special and differential treatment or trade in agricultural products .
So far , no progress has been made .
I would like to reiterate my fear of this ' dimension ' of development disappearing due to a policy that gives priority only to commercial trade and has been dogmatic in choosing to liberalise it .
While the gulf between rich and poor countries is widening , it is difficult to accept this desire to include new subjects such as investment , competition or public markets .
For its part , GATS threatens public services and State missions when there has not yet been any evaluation of what effect liberalisation may have .
Under these circumstances , there should be a moratorium .
The right to health , education , food safety , and energy should prevail above commercial interests .
The European Union should , on the contrary , work towards the democratisation of the international trade system and cooperate closely with developing countries so that the development objectives prevail .
Mr President , Commissioner , to ensure that significant progress is made in Cancun on the realisation of the development agenda is not going to be easy , bearing in mind the need to reflect the interests of all the members of the WTO , to take up the concerns of the least-developed countries and in view of the great number of issues to be negotiated .
All of these issues are essential to ensuring that multilateral trade relations lead to economic growth , if we want this growth to be equitable and its benefits also to reach the least-developed countries .
Hence the need to make progress on all fronts in the development agenda and if possible within the time periods laid down , in line with the support you are providing on behalf of the European Union .
In view of the brevity with which I am obliged to speak , I will restrict myself to access to the industrial product markets , in particular , naturally , the textiles and clothing sectors and to respect for the rules which govern international trade .
In this regard , I would ask you , Commissioner , to ensure that there is no reduction in the European Union 's tariffs while other countries have not reached the tariff levels laid down in the Union .
Secondly , that you pay special attention , within the framework of the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ( TRIPS ) Agreement , to the issue of designs and the international exhaustion of the registered trademark and to actions to combat counterfeiting and pirating .
Finally , I would ask you to promote simplification of the commercial defence mechanisms in order to make them quicker and more effective , because the persistence of tariff barriers , tariff peaks and non-tariff barriers is incompatible with the process of liberalising the markets .
Because the rules of the WTO are binding on all members and therefore compliance with them must be guaranteed .
But also , because the future of the European textiles and clothing industry depends on it , as the Commissioner is well aware .
Mr President , Commissioner , after the reform of the CAP we now have to deal with Cancun .
It is quite clear that in this context it has to be said that our European trade objectives do not demonstrate our will to reduce the gaps in development between North and South , between developed countries and the rest of the world .
In this sense , in terms of agriculture , we of course need to agree to increase the special and differential treatment for LDCs that are already included in the Marrakesh Treaty .
We also need to confirm the results of Doha with regard to the substantial reduction of our export refunds , and at the same time , to ensure that this measure is extended to all forms of export subsidies because we are aware that it is not only the Union that is involved .
At the same time , it is clear that the Union should condemn the recent American farm bill , which protects American producers against the ups and downs of the market , and which therefore threatens to generate an excess in supply and a fall in prices on international markets .
As well as this , Commissioner , the Union must defend the right of each Member State of the WTO to set its production and food safety standards and to apply them to the products that come on to their markets .
European producers have a right to this guarantee on imports , as well as international recognition of geographical indications in order to increase the value of their regions and traditional know-how .
All in all , Commissioner , Cancun must benefit the developing world , but without being detrimental to the large majority of small and medium-scale European farmers .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Cancun Conference is not looking good .
There is the feeling that the European Union is going to make it even more complicated with its negotiation strategy .
That Cancun is not looking good is due to the frustrations that have built up among developing countries since the end of the Uruguay round , frustrations which have already led to the failure of the Seattle Conference .
Once again , their confidence is being tested , as many of the significant commitments made in Doha were not honoured and the deadlines not respected .
This is true of such issues as access to medication , but also of special and differential treatment , the issues surrounding implementation , and of reform of the regulations on dispute settlement .
This is about what Europe is going to achieve during these negotiations by using its considerable clout .
Is it going to use it in order to provide answers that restore developing countries ' confidence , or will it go no further than a narrow vision of its commercial interests ?
Let us look at the Singapore subjects .
Why is there this insistence on imposing a multilateral agreement on investments on the developing countries at all costs , when they do not want it ?
They cannot see why the rules and conditions for foreign investment in their countries should be governed by the WTO .
However , you insist on making it one of the European Union 's conditions for an agreement in Cancun .
Do you not feel that this is an extra burden that serves no purpose ?
You are entering into a wrestling match between the European Union and the developing countries .
Rather than that , we would prefer an alliance between the European Union and the countries of the South .
You have also heard many different speakers from different groups in this House asking you to concentrate on the essentials .
Use your clout , the European Union 's considerable influence , to improve special and differentiated treatment , to make progress towards access to the markets , to bring about reform of dispute settlement , to ensure that the environment is taken into account , to promote access to medication , and not to serve an agreement on investments , public markets or competition , which should not be the responsibility of the WTO .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make two points about the strategy we should pursue at Cancun in September .
My first point is that the Doha Declaration is very clear on the need to ensure the best possible balance between commercial and non-commercial aspects of trade .
In this connection , key issues include the precautionary principle , food safety , basic rules governing GMOs and also respect for designations of origin and geographical descriptions .
We will have to make it clear that the use by various third countries of our geographical descriptions and designations of origin , which are linked to a culture , a region and a history , as generic and semi-generic products is completely unacceptable .
For Australian , Canadian and New Zealand producers to sell products labelled as ' port ' , ' Madeira ' , ' champagne ' , ' Parma ham ' , ' Manchego cheese ' , and so on , is unacceptable because it demonstrates an improper appropriation of a commercial advantage to which those producers are not entitled .
My second point is to remind you that the recent reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) fully permits us to assume a more assertive stance in the negotiations . Rather than pour all our energy into the issue of protecting geographical descriptions and non-commercial concerns , we can also attempt to impose a wide range of regulations , in particular toughening legislation on export credits , state-owned enterprises and the abuse of food aid and the de minimis clause .
We can convince all rich countries to grant the 49 poorest countries in the world the same conditions granted by the EU through the ' Everything but Arms ' initiative . We can force a clear distinction to be drawn between developing countries and the poorest countries in the world , since it is unrealistic to put countries such as India , Malaysia , Indonesia and various South American States in the same class as Mozambique , Chad , Burkina Faso and most of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) States .
Apart from agriculture , this is also an issue in , for example , the textile and clothing sector , where the complete opening up of the Community market to products from the former group of countries would destroy hundreds of thousands of jobs in the European Union , especially in the poorest countries and those lagging furthest behind , such as Portugal , Greece , Spain and the new Member States in Eastern Europe .
It is to be hoped , then , that a fundamental balance between all these concerns can be reached at Cancun . If it is not , globalisation will be rejected by our societies .
Mr President , as the speeches have shown , multilateral trade negotiations in the twenty-first century have many facets and are a mixture of interests and values , one that is , in any case for us Europeans , to some extent indissoluble .
They also raise , as we have realised from listening to you , issues around the overall balances on the international stage , between North and South , North and North and South and South .
I would briefly like to respond to a few of your speeches , grouping them into three themes , first of all access to the market , then the rules of international trade , and finally , several other issues that are not necessarily directly linked to the first two but are worthy of clarification .
First of all , on access to the market , concerning the industrial sector , I agree with what has been said .
We must move towards what some of the developing countries want .
It is in their interest and also in our interest .
However , let us remember that there is also a South-South interest in the liberalisation of trade for manufactured products .
Trade in manufactured products still represents 80 % of world trade .
Here we have all the dimensions that I mentioned , and Mrs Ferrer is right in saying that in these matters , we should not stop at tariff issues , but also look at non-tariff barriers .
You have all spoken a great deal about agriculture , which is quite normal due to the current circumstances .
It is true that the reform of the common agricultural policy that was adopted last week gives more impressive results in terms of discipline - the issue of budgetary support for our farmers - than in terms of promises of broader access to the markets in the future .
However , we have not yet agreed to confirm in some way at WTO level , the disciplines that we decided between us .
We are free to confirm them or not at international level and we will do so if others do .
We are therefore looking for something in return , which is what we are going to work on for now , as the support compensates for some handicaps and takes into account some concerns among European consumers and citizens .
As Mrs Auroi and Mr Bernier said , with our support we are compensating for this type of handicap or additional constraint .
Mr Clegg asked whether there was still room for manoeuvre in the negotiations in terms of access to the market .
I am sure he will allow me , and Mr Fischler , to remain discreet as regards how much we have in our pocket .
Mr Clegg will be aware that it is not good to negotiate with transparent pockets , so our pockets will not be transparent in a public sitting such as today 's .
However , he is right , as is Mr Della Vedova .
There is no doubt that the forthcoming reform of the sugar market , which Mr Fischler and the Commission have announced for the autumn , is probably more promising from this point of view for a product that holds great interest for developing countries .
I would like to point out , in response to Mr Souchet , that this reform of the common agricultural policy was made with European considerations in mind , by Europeans and for Europeans .
It is all the better if it improves our position in international negotiations , but that was not our original motivation .
Our motivation , as established at the Berlin European Council , was to carry out a mid-term review of some organisations of the market and of the functioning of our support for agriculture .
With regard to the rules , some of you have mentioned access to medication .
I will not repeat what I said in my initial speech .
The European Union 's position on this is clear : we support the commitment made in December and we expect the Americans to adhere to it , otherwise there will be a major problem in Cancun .
Regarding non-commercial concerns , to which Mr van den Berg made particular reference , they are indeed on the table , including for agriculture : animal welfare , the environment and food safety .
There are also subjects concerned with the regulation of international trade , such as the geographical indications cited by Mr Garot and Mr Cunha .
You are right .
We cannot tell our farmers that the time has come to think less about quantity and more about quality without keeping to the agenda that we have , which consists of improving and making more operational and more easy what the WTO texts are already establishing in terms of protection : geographical indications .
The last delicate subject is the so-called Singapore subjects , and in particular investment .
Our starting point has always been that it is better to have a good multilateral international platform than a bad jungle of bilateral agreements .
You rightly said that some developing countries are not enthusiastic , but not all of them !
Some others are entirely in favour of starting negotiations on these subjects , particularly investment .
Fundamentally , what developing countries are saying is a little like what I have heard here this afternoon : some are very much in favour , and some are very much against , some are ' maybe ' for , and others are against ' unless ' .
That is the situation we are in and in answer to Mr Désir , in the choice between the bilateral jungle and multilateral order , I have often heard him say things that are more multilateralist than what he has said this afternoon .
What path should we take ?
We must stay firm on the need to deal with these issues , while responding to the justified and repeated concerns of a number of developing countries , to the fear that they have that by committing to multilateral agreements on these subjects , they would be reducing the area of autonomy of their economic policies .
We must find ways of responding to this concern .
In any case , in general , I am still persuaded that multilateral is better than bilateral in these fields .
Regarding special and differential treatment and issues of implementation , I think that I indicated in my initial speech that the European Union was open and that it was more a case of convincing other partners in the North , the United States , Japan , Canada , to demonstrate a little more flexibility .
We are working on this .
I will deal with two or three more questions .
Regarding cotton , Mr Van den Berg , it is not the Union , for once , that is being accused by the developing countries .
We do not export any cotton .
We import a huge amount of cotton and what we do produce in no way supports exportation .
We must produce 2 % to 3 % of the cotton produced in the world .
It is therefore the United States that is being challenged on this point .
Mrs McNally and Mr van den Berg talked about fundamental working standards .
Unfortunately , this subject is not on the programme for Cancun , because it was not put on the programme for the cycle of negotiations launched in Doha .
Some , but not all of the subjects launched in Doha are on the programme for Cancun .
Having said that , we cannot add new subjects to the Doha programme .
You know our position : we regret not having managed to better link fundamental work standards and the rules of the World Trade Organization .
To some extent , we made do with our bilateral policies in order to achieve this .
Therefore we cannot , unfortunately , expect good news from Cancun on this point .
We need to wait for another cycle of negotiations to put the subject back on the table .
On the question of what the Commission thinks of Parliament being involved at the end of the negotiations , I have no objection at all , on behalf of the Commission , to the results of the cycle ending with a vote in the European Parliament , unless of course the Council of Ministers disagrees .
In any case , the Commission 's position is what I have just told you , in response to Mrs Mann and Mr Clegg .
As regards Russia 's accession to the WTO , I can tell Mr Suominen that we are working on it .
I am spending my day here today , with my colleague German Gref , who is the Russian Minister for the Economy and Finance and the negotiator appointed by Mr Putin .
This is probably our sixth negotiating session and , thanks to the debate this afternoon , you have given him the opportunity to look around this lovely town of Strasbourg , and I am sure that he will be very grateful to you .
I can tell Mrs Auroi and Mrs Boudjenah that we debated GATS only a few weeks ago .
Parliament took a position on it , so I am not going to come back to the subject .
Finally , regarding the good news that Mrs Mann gave us on the joint demonstration in Cancun by the European Parliament and the International Parliamentary Union , and the work that she , Mr Schwaiger , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and many others have done to associate the national parliaments more with the work of the WTO , for the Commission this is good news .
You know that we support your efforts in this area .
Thank you Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the International Criminal Court .
. ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner Lamy , ladies and gentlemen , it is both a great honour and a great responsibility for the Italian Presidency to take the floor before the European Parliament on the issue of the International Criminal Court .
It is certainly an honour since Italy has , from the very beginning , been among the Court 's major supporters and has given its name to the Rome Statute .
It is , at the same time , however , a great responsibility for the Italian Presidency to continue to support , with the same determination as our predecessors , the efforts of the international community to give life to an international jurisdiction that puts an end to impunity for those guilty of committing the most heinous crimes .
The Court is proving to be a great success : to date , 90 countries have joined the Rome Statute .
The Court held its inaugural session this year and , with the election of its President , judges , Prosecutor and Registrar , has become a fully functioning element in international relations .
The European Union can be proud of having made a decisive contribution to these developments .
The Italian Presidency has an important heritage to defend , and it intends to defend it .
Only a few days ago , on 16 June , the Council confirmed its commitment to the Court through the adoption of a common position that has the political significance of confirming the European Union 's unconditional support for the institution .
On the basis of the common position , the May 2002 Action Plan will be updated .
Action in support of the Court will remain an essential component of the Union 's foreign policy measures .
As you all know , in the pursuit of this action , the European Union will find itself facing some sensitive and complex issues , but this will certainly not lessen our commitment in any way .
Our initiative will take various forms .
Firstly , Italy will represent the European Union at the Second Assembly of States Parties in September .
We are diligently preparing for this engagement and we will do everything in our power to resolve all the issues which are still outstanding with regard to the institution and the way it functions .
Secondly , to ensure the Court 's efficient functioning and guarantee its independence , the European Union will continue to encourage the States to transfer swiftly and fully their contributions , determined according to the decisions made by the Assembly , and to respect the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the Court .
Thirdly , the European Union will continue to urge those States that have not yet done so , to become party to the Statute , because we believe that the broadest possible participation is both desirable and necessary .
In accordance with the provisions of the common position , a large-scale awareness campaign has already been launched in this regard , particularly in the context of political dialogue with non-Member States .
Fourthly , the European Union will continue to uphold the integrity of the Rome Statute , including in our relations with our friend , the United States of America .
As you can imagine , this is a frequent item on the agenda in transatlantic discussions and it was raised just last week at the European Union / United States Summit in Washington .
Ladies and gentlemen , our aim is to pursue broad dialogue on all aspects of the issue with the United States .
We and the United States share the same fundamental values and place the same importance - great importance - on the objective of putting an end to impunity for the most serious crimes and identifying the people responsible for committing them .
However , objectively speaking , we have to admit that our views differ on what the Court 's role should be .
The United States , with its massive presence on a global scale , is concerned about the possibility of politically-motivated accusations against its citizens .
The European Union believes that the Court 's Statute provides sufficient guarantees of impartiality and authoritativeness , such as the high calibre of the judges and the principle of complementarity of the Court 's work , to lessen , or even allay the fears of possible exploitation of the institution 's activities .
My predecessors have updated Parliament on developments in these ongoing discussions between the European Union and the United States of America and on the initiatives developed by both parties .
I will not repeat what everyone already knows , but I would like to point out how , as far as Italy is concerned , we intend to proceed during this Presidency .
The United States fears , inter alia , that the Court could constitute a threat , albeit an indirect one , to the conduct and implementation of United Nations ' peacekeeping operations .
The European Union considers that the Court is an important safeguard for the protection of peace forces too . In this context , the UN Security Council has examined the United States ' proposals to exclude peace forces from the Court 's jurisdiction for two consecutive years .
The European Union was able to express its firm support for the Court during Security Council meetings open to non-Member States in both years .
This year , the Union also publicly came out in favour of convening the Security Council meeting which took place on 12 June .
During this meeting , all the members of the Security Council were asked to strive to find a solution which would preserve both the integrity of the Rome Statute and the smooth operation of peace missions : two factors which are clearly not incompatible .
The United States , as you know , is seeking to conclude a series of bilateral agreements to exempt its citizens from the Court 's jurisdiction .
We heard yesterday that US military assistance has been withdrawn from some countries , including five which are about to join the European Union , which have declared that they are not amenable to such agreements .
The Union regrets this measure .
We do , of course , intend to analyse the matter in depth with a view to further talks with Washington .
I would remind you that , last September , the Council adopted Conclusions with certain guidelines to follow in concluding exemption agreements in order to preserve the integrity of the Rome Statute .
The conclusions and guidelines were first and foremost intended for Member States and candidate countries , but they are clearly relevant to all States Parties to the Rome Statute .
These documents have been disseminated in a large number of non-Member States with the intention of informing them of the basic position that the European Union has already taken over this issue .
The European Union is firmly convinced that the International Criminal Court will make the world a safer place , or rather , it will help make the world a safer , fairer and more peaceful place .
The simple fact of establishing the Court in practice will be a deterrent to committing the most serious crimes .
By putting an end to impunity , the Court will strengthen the supremacy of the law and make a fundamental contribution to peace .
In conclusion , the Court will very soon prove to be a genuinely independent , effective institution .
It will do so by working on actual cases and those who distrust it will be able to see - I repeat , from the Court 's actual work - that the Rome Statute guarantees the highest criteria of justice and does not lend itself - or , at least , we must endeavour to ensure that it never lends itself - to political manipulation .
This will , of course , be one of our tasks in the frank , friendly dialogue between the Presidency and the United States of America .
Mr Moreno Campo , recently appointed Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court , said when he was sworn in , ' An International Criminal Court that is totally independent and impartial brings hope , but at the same time raises reasonable fears and misunderstandings ' .
This Court brings the hope of a new era for international justice ; it provides an effective tool for fighting impunity , and is therefore a deterrent factor - as the President of the Council has just said - to those who are tempted to carry out serious criminal acts that the Court has the authority to try .
But it also , if we look at the position of the United States , raises fears and misunderstandings .
It is the Americans ' fear of their people being pursued for political reasons which has led them to make efforts all over the world to obtain bilateral immunity agreements for their nationals , and which also led to the renewal of Security Council Resolution 1422 .
In order to secure these agreements , the United States have not hesitated to use the threat of refusing to give military help to countries that do not sign them .
What does this position mean ?
As they did not sign up to the Rome Statute , the United States consider themselves free to conclude immunity agreements , particularly in view of the considerable number of American soldiers deployed in the four corners of the globe .
Whatever the value of this argument , there is no doubt that the significant contribution from the United States to peacekeeping cannot be ignored .
It is also clear that countries that have signed the Rome Statute cannot use some sort of hidden door to escape their obligations to the International Criminal Court .
The guiding principles , adopted by the Union in September 2002 , and to which the Presidency of the Council referred , are a little clearer on this point : we do not think that these agreements are necessary , but we accept them as long as they satisfy certain well-defined criteria .
The agreements that the United States are trying to make do not match our conditions and are clearly aiming to undermine the Rome Statute insofar as they do not have any clear provisions to prevent impunity and they understand impunity as applying to those other than American nationals in a country for certain military or strictly administrative reasons .
So how can we put forward our position ?
We did this with the common position on 16 June , which unambiguously indicates that the guiding principles are not just some sort of internal scheming , but must be applied to justify the protection of the integrity of the Rome Statute in our relations with third countries .
This position was the result of reasoning and dialogue .
My colleagues Mr Patten and Mr Verheugen have joined forces with the Greek Presidency in sending joint letters to the Foreign Ministers of Member States , candidate countries and the Balkan States .
They stress the need to take into account the Union 's position .
We have given instructions to our heads of delegation in third countries to stress the importance of this issue .
In countries that have already signed an immunity agreement , our heads of delegation have been invited to look more closely at the probability of ratifying those agreements .
These diplomatic efforts are backed up by the considerable support that we have given to the NGOs campaigning for an effective International Criminal Court through the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights .
Also , very recently , the Thessaloniki European Council confirmed that the Union unreservedly supports the International Criminal Court .
What are the results ?
Having recalled our principles and the action we are taking , let us have a clear view of this .
The results are rather mixed .
Even leaving aside the agreement signed hastily by Romania in August 2002 , and even though the Member States and candidate countries resisted American pressure in order to come into line with the Union 's position of 16 June , it is clear that the situation in the Balkans remains vague : Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina and very recently the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia signed such agreements , none of which comply with the conditions defined in the Union 's guiding principles .
We have not concealed our disappointment and we have expressed it to those countries .
Regarding the renewal of Security Council Resolution 1422 , there is no doubt in our minds that the legality of this measure is , at best , questionable .
We allowed an open debate in the Security Council where the concerns as to the legality of this proposition could be expressed .
In a remarkable speech , the Secretary-General of the United Nations , Mr Kofi Annan , not only raised doubts about whether the Security Council Resolution should be based on Article 16 of the Rome Statute but he also questioned the need for it .
In fact United Nations peacekeeping forces remain under the jurisdiction of the State of which they are nationals and they would be immediately repatriated if they had committed a serious crime .
As long as their country of origin dealt with the matter correctly , the additional jurisdiction of the Criminal Court would not enter into play .
Finally , on behalf of the Union , the Greek Presidency unequivocally stated that there was no question of accepting automatic renewal of this resolution in the years to come , allowing this conduct - because that is what it is - to continue unchallenged .
Finally , I would like to mention the considerable aid provided by the Union since 1995 for the International Criminal Court through the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights , in the shape of EUR 13 million , which is a significant sum , along with our efforts to raise awareness among parliamentarians , civil servants , civil society , those working in the legal system and even military personnel , for example , in the new independent States .
Hand in hand with this goes our work in training defence lawyers in order to make this Court a tangible and immediate reality .
Thinking also about what form our support will take in the next few years , we are listening to NGOs and several MEPs who will speak at a seminar organised by the Commission on 14 July to hear various points of view on this issue .
I feel that I have defended and presented a position that is entirely in line with what the Presidency of the Council has just said .
No one will be surprised at this .
There is no doubt that the International Criminal Court presents a challenge in terms of transatlantic relations .
When the eminent team made up of 18 judges and prosecutors begins its work , we are convinced , as Europeans , that the International Criminal Court will prove worthy of our support and confidence .
It will also dispel the concerns that remain here and in the minds of our American friends .
Mr President , I do not wish to repeat what Commissioner Lamy has already said , that although the International Criminal Court is not a political instrument , it is starting life in a particularly difficult political context , and that , since 2002 , the United States have been clearly trying to forcibly short circuit the Court , both in the UN and by signing bilateral agreements with a considerable number of countries .
I would like to say how shocked I am as a parliamentarian by the methods that are being used to put pressure on certain countries - and I am thinking in particular of the pressure that Colombia is under , threatened with the suspension of American aid for combating drug traffickers , and the pressure put on the Baltic countries or other NATO candidate countries - but also the extent to which the whole of Europe is currently dependent on the European Union ; and there is a very particular symbolic significance in all of us , the Council , Parliament and the Commission being in agreement .
It is absolutely essential that the Italian Presidency should be aware that this International Criminal Court is more than an instrument for fighting the Americans and their unilateralism ; it is a way of us ensuring that we restore European coherence in both international policy and international law .
We will therefore watch very closely what happens in the Court .
Mr President , the International Criminal Court , which celebrated its first birthday yesterday , received a new poisoned gift from its Evil Fairy Godmother when the United States of America started to carry out its threat to impose sanctions on those countries that have not yielded to its pressure on them to sign bilateral immunity agreements .
In the struggle between sovereignty and law regarding the new world order the United States has in this way chosen ever more obviously to maximise its own sovereignty at the expense of international law .
As our ultimate purpose is to safeguard the rule of law and take a stand against war crimes and other international crimes going unpunished , it is more important than ever that we should strengthen cooperation amongst ourselves to bring about universal administration of justice , so that those guilty of these serious crimes are made to answer for their deeds properly and without exception .
That means supporting the ICC in every way possible and getting rid of the giant loopholes that still exist in judicial practice , for example by increasing EU Member States ' legislative capacity for dealing with international crimes .
Everybody must be equal before the law .
Any retrograde steps in this area would mean a reversion to barbarism .
I would like to say just one word , Mr President , in answer to a point that many speakers have mentioned , which is the announcement by the United States that they are suspending their military assistance to countries that refuse to enter into agreements exempting Americans from the provisions of the agreement on the International Criminal Court .
That this news does not surprise us does not mean that we do not regret it and even - as the Presidency of the Council said just now - condemn it .
However , we are also pleased to see that many countries have been able to resist the pressure that they have been under .
I think that the courage shown by those countries in working towards the success of the agreement on the International Criminal Court deserves both our respect and our admiration .
I will finish by saying that once again , the pressure that those countries are under is all the more inappropriate , all the more incomprehensible , inappropriate because it is incomprehensible , given that the Statute of the Court provides a means to respond to the American concerns , which , in certain respects , we can understand just as many of you do .
Why , when solutions exist are they relentlessly trying to go further ?
This attitude can only leave us all with doubts .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office and Commissioner Lamy .
I am sure that Parliament will support all the efforts made so that the Commission and the Council Presidency , in their relations with the United States Government , reach a positive outcome .
I must say that , also from personal experience , it would be desirable for their words to fall on more receptive ears than those we encountered as a European Parliament delegation when we raised this matter with the President of the United States Congress Foreign Relations Committee : we were answered , shall we say , in not particularly diplomatic terms .
We have our courts and our Constitution and we will never allow a United States citizen to be tried and judged outside them .
I am sure that there will be more receptive ears within the United States administration and also the United States Parliament .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0098 / 2003 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
I would like to welcome the Minister , Mr Frattini , to this Question Time .
He will find that Parliament is willing to cooperate fully in this dialogue between itself and the Council .
Mr Carnero has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to express to the House our sadness at the news that a young Spanish aid worker , a 22-year-old from Toledo , Ana Isabel Sánchez Torralba , was killed last night in Equatorial Guinea .
According to the news , she has clearly been the victim of shots from soldiers of that regime who , in an unjustifiable and criminal action , opened fire on a civilian vehicle which had just crossed a military checkpoint .
Mr President , I believe we are looking at an action which demonstrates the behaviour of forces of law and order which are accustomed to maltreating and attacking citizens .
We will undoubtedly ask the corresponding questions , but I would like , as well as expressing our indignation , condemnation and condolences , to say that I believe the Council of the Union must take whatever measures are necessary to demand responsibilities , clarity and justice from this dictatorship which contains these elements capable of murdering this truly exceptional young woman .
Mr Carnero , as President of Parliament for this sitting I can only agree with your words and your intentions .
The Council will have taken good note and this issue , which is one on which all Members no doubt agree , will be acted upon and monitored by Parliament .
Question No 1 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0351 / 03 ) :
Subject : Prohibition on European nationals travelling to Europe from Palestine
European nationals who hold European passports and live in Palestinian areas experience significant difficulties in travelling to Europe because of obstacles put in place by the Israeli authorities .
These nationals , like Palestinians , are banned from travelling to Europe from an airport , the only possibility open to them being to travel via Jordan ; Jordan , however places various restrictions on travellers passing through ( quotas , requirement for an invitation from Jordanians , etc . ) .
What steps does the Council intend to take to convince Israel to allow European nationals to travel to Europe without hindrance ?
. ( IT ) The Council is well aware of the difficulties caused by the travel restrictions imposed by the Israeli authorities on European citizens living in the Palestinian Territories , a matter which Mr Alavanos referred to .
These restrictions cannot be justified on any account .
As in the past , the European Union , and now the Presidency of the Council , will use its frequent contact with the Israeli authorities in order to highlight the importance of the free movement of citizens of European countries , with European passports , who intend to travel to and from the occupied territories .
. ( IT ) I will answer both questions together , starting by saying that , clearly , the European Union firmly condemns , once again , the savage terrorist attacks carried out in Casablanca and in every other part of the world .
The attacks in Casablanca are a brutal confirmation that terrorism is a growing threat to democracy , peace and international security , from which no country can consider itself free or safe .
The struggle against terrorism calls for maximum determination from the international community and the strongest will to co-operate and initiate concerted action .
The European Union will continue - and I consider this to be an absolute priority for the Italian Presidency - to do its part to prevent and eliminate this threat .
The Union has adopted a global approach to the fight against terrorism which encompasses all the European Union 's policies .
It is based on an action plan which is being implemented according to plan and a regularly updated schedule .
An updated report by the Presidency on activities related to the fight against terrorism was , as you know , submitted to the Council during the June 2003 part-session .
Internally , the Union is using political , economic and legal instruments ; at the same time , the Union is taking steps to incorporate the fight against terrorism into all aspects of its foreign policy .
In political dialogue meetings with non-Member States - and clearly regarding the matter in question , Morocco - this issue is regularly included on the agenda .
Lastly , at the same time the European Union is continuing to foster dialogue and exchanges between cultures , religions and civilisations .
This is a considerable task , being carried out chiefly within the Barcelona Process framework to create a Euro-Mediterranean Foundation for the dialogue of cultures and civilisations , a measure which can help eliminate the causes of all forms of fundamentalist violence which may lead to terrorism .
Mr President , Minister , on the subject of suicide attacks , I am reminded of a recent book by the French sociologist and thinker Emmanuel Todd which is entitled After the Empire .
In it he discusses how societies , as their education improves , develop towards democracy to become a political system which guarantees freedoms and justice , and , in this process , the West appears to be the great promoter of democracy , progress and development of peoples , while at the same time being leader and arbitrator of conflicts .
In seeking and prioritising its own interests , however , the West does not behave with justice and equity in its international relations , but rather it generates a new form of anti-democratic autarchy which will end up bringing it into conflict with the rest of the world and will lead to its unsustainable decline .
In the light of these views of Mr Todd , I would like to ask you whether you do not believe that through unjust impositions and exploitations , through pre-emptive wars based on false evidence of weapons of mass destruction and risks to world security - as in the case of Iraq - what the invading governments have created , rather than peace and freedom , has been new despair and new hates whose only outlet seems to be terrorist attacks and self-destruction aimed at achieving a fairer world for those suffering from exploitation and aggression .
. ( IT ) Terrorism can never - I repeat , never - be justified when women , children and innocent people are killed and when civil life is affected .
Having said that , it is clear that the structural causes of terrorism must be tackled , and those causes may also be found in despair , poverty and in the difficulties of dialogue between cultures .
This is why the global European strategy must consist , on the one hand , of a no-holds-barred fight against all forms of terrorism and , on the other , of in-depth dialogue between civilisations and cultures .
We must address the structural reasons which may lead to - but I repeat , never justify - terrorist actions .
Believe me , Minister , I also vigorously condemn terrorist activities and the crimes committed , but I would like to point out that the American professor , John Esposito , an expert in Islam who heads the centre for understanding between Muslims and Christians , has stated that Washington has always based its relations with the Gulf countries on oil interests , and not on an understanding of their culture and their people .
He has stated that we must distinguish between extremists and the majority of citizens and that , in order to combat terrorism , without alienating Muslims and causing a genuine clash of civilisations , we need public diplomacy and we need to build bridges and tackle the roots of the problems , and that simply to use military and economic means is not sufficient .
So I would like to ask a question .
Does the Council believe that the decision to invade Iraq , adopted with the participation of European leaders such as Mr Aznar , Mr Blair , and also Mr Berlusconi , which has led to a great numbers of deaths , to destruction , immigration and desolation , is a better way to deal with the problem of world security than initiatives such as the Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland or the Roadmap for the Palestinian-Israeli conflict ?
Do you not believe that , as Professor Esposito points out , if we want democracy in the Middle East or in any part of the world , we cannot go about it by telling people in other countries what that democracy must consist of , how it must be organised and who must lead it ?
Question No 4 by Sarah Ludford ( H-0354 / 03 ) :
Subject : EU Member States and the terrorist attack in Morocco which claimed 41 lives
What does the Council think about the terrorist attacks in Casablanca which killed 41 people , including a number of Union citizens , and injured many others ?
Since the attacks took place after the war waged by the United States and its allies in Iraq , does it consider it significant that many of the dead and injured were in an establishment linked to a Member State ?
What political measures will the Council consider taking in order to avert or limit the danger of such terrorist acts ?
. ( IT ) The Council is not aware , it has not been informed of the launch of the pilot project concerning the matter referred to in Mrs Ludford 's question .
However , in the recitals and main body of the report on the development of terrorist profiles , mentioned by Mrs Ludford in her question , the obligation to respect fundamental rights and freedoms is stressed .
I repeat , I am not aware of the launch of a pilot project , but in any case , the reference to the obligation of absolute respect for fundamental rights and freedoms can neither be removed nor toned down .
. ( IT ) I believe I can assure Mrs Ludford that it is the Council 's present and future duty to take into account the outcome of today 's debate .
I will certainly provide the Council Secretariat with information in this respect so that it can take it into consideration should this intention exist and should this pilot project be prepared in the future , something which - I repeat - I do not believe to be the case at present .
Question No 5 by Patricia McKenna ( H-0361 / 03 ) :
Subject : Illegal occupation of Iraq
The United Kingdom , a member of the Council , is illegally occupying Iraq .
What is the Council 's view of one of its members illegally occupying another country , and what actions will the Council take to rectify this situation ?
. ( IT ) The Council has not discussed the legal nature of the war in Iraq and , as Mrs McKenna well knows , both the international community and the European Union Member States have held differing opinions on this issue .
The Council was extremely pleased to see an end to military action and the unanimous adoption of Security Council Resolution 1483 on post-war Iraq .
This is proof of a new spirit of cooperation in the international community , on which we must build the future .
The Resolution and the appointment of a Special Representative in Iraq has given the United Nations an important role in the reconstruction process in Iraq , in accordance with the European Union 's own recommendations .
The Union is committed to carrying out a major role precisely in the political and economic reconstruction of the country .
Humanitarian assistance is already underway : the Commission and Union Member States have contributed over EUR 700 million in appropriations for humanitarian aid .
In 2003 , the Commission and the Secretary General / High Representative , Javier Solana , are remaining in close contact with the United Nations Special Representative in order to explore possible further European Union action precisely for post-war Iraq , so that we can help at this stage , in whatever way and unconditionally , with the Iraqi people 's immediate needs .
. ( IT ) All I can say to Mrs McKenna is that the European Union has already addressed the issue on various occasions , including during meetings of Ministers for Foreign Affairs - as I believe it will and should continue to do - in order to examine in what other ways Europe can be involved in Iraq , first and foremost for the Iraqi people , what other contributions , what other initiatives Europe can arrange for Iraq .
We should pursue this current examination , clearly in close contact with the Anglo-American forces in Iraq .
Some States , as you know , have carried out humanitarian missions in Iraq at national level .
Italy is one of these countries , but it is important to establish a commitment by Europe per se to the Iraqi people , its needs and requirements .
Minister , you have not answered my question in relation to the involvement of Mr Aznar , Mr Blair and Mr Berlusconi in the war in Iraq .

You mentioned the Barcelona Council and the Euro-Mediterranean dialogue - that is all very well - and you have also said , in your reply to Mrs McKenna , that the Council had not dealt with the issue of the Iraq war .
I would like to ask you whether it is not true that the Greek Presidency was trying to bring the European Council together to deal with this issue of the war and Mr Blair , Mr Aznar and Mr Berlusconi were opposed to the issue being dealt with within the European Council ?


To be absolutely frank , I am not sure whether this is a supplementary question to Question No 5 , but the President-in-Office of the Council must decide this and reply if he sees fit .
. ( IT ) My reply will be especially brief because we , the States and peoples of the European Union which were all extremely pleased with , and fervently wished for the intervention of the United Nations with Resolution 1483 , must now look to the future .
Looking to the future means looking after the people suffering in Iraq and ensuring that conditions are created so that in the future , hopefully the not too distant future , the Iraqi people can again take control of their own destiny and then their own country .
Looking to the future means seeing how we can assist , how we can help the Iraqi people to once again run the State , the institutions and the public administration following the fall of a brutal dictatorship .
This is what looking to the future means ; this is what was intended by the Thessaloniki Council and the Greek Presidency , which managed the Iraq crisis excellently .
Question No 6 by John Joseph McCartin ( H-0363 / 03 ) :
Subject : Human rights in Russia
Is the Council aware of the extent of violence against women in Russia and , in particular , violence in the home which is estimated to result in the deaths of 14 000 women each year .
Is the Council aware that the Russian Government has not ratified the optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women which confers authority on CEDAW to examine complaints by individuals and groups ?
Finally , will the Council undertake to consider this problem and report back to Parliament ?
.
( IT ) The Council has not received any detailed information regarding the cases of violence against women referred to in Mr McCartin 's question , or regarding the reasons why the Russian State Duma has failed to ratify the Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women , a convention signed by Russia on 8 May 2001 .
The Council closely follows developments in human rights in the Russian Federation and regularly raises issues related to human rights and the rule of law in meetings with the Russian authorities .
The Council , I can assure you , will raise the matter of violence against women , as well as the failure to ratify the protocol , in an appropriate forum .
We must remember that there are Member States of the European Union which have not yet ratified the protocol .
Moreover , the European Union will also continue to express its general concern in this field - in order to promote the protection of human dignity without distinguishing between men and women , with particular reference to women 's rights - in international organisations , starting with the United Nations .
Question No 7 by Malcolm Harbour ( H-0372 / 03 ) :
Subject : Hallmarking of precious metals
Can the Presidency confirm that it intends to retable the proposal for a directive on the harmonisation of the marking and testing requirements for precious metals and , if so , the basis on which it intends to proceed with such a proposal ?
. ( IT ) The Italian Presidency will propose reopening the discussions , suspended in 1998 , on the proposal for a directive on the approximation of laws , regulations and administrative provisions on the control of weights and measures for precious metals , as presented by the European Commission on 22 April 1996 .
In light of the latest developments in certain Member States ' legislation , the Presidency considers it appropriate to reopen the debate to highlight possible compromise solutions .
In this regard , the Italian Presidency intends to seek solutions on issues which are still unresolved , such as increasing the level of consumer protection through the obligation to respect harmonised technical requirements for all products placed on the market , the position of marks with a higher information content with regard to identification , the responsibility of manufacturers and inspection bodies , and , lastly , the completion of the free movement of products in the internal market for this sector .
.
( IT ) I would like to thank Mr Harbour for pointing out these difficulties .
Clearly , the Presidency will take duly into consideration , before the dossier is actually opened , the difficulties which Mr Harbour referred to .
The continuous exchanges between Council and Parliament serve , precisely , also to hear misgivings and problems .
Question No 8 by Lennart Sacrédeus ( H-0377 / 03 ) :
Subject : Report on freedom of faith and religion in the world
The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom , USCIRF , performs an advisory function for the US Government on issues of religious freedom .
In its annual report , USCIRF expresses concern at the fact that the Saudi Arabian regime is investing money abroad in order to disseminate its extreme interpretation of Wahhabi Islam - thereby increasing religious intolerance in other countries .
Examples of this are the training of Sharia officials in the northern states of Nigeria , Saudi funding of the construction of Wahhabi mosques , missionary activity and the fact that extreme Wahhabi Muslims chose to travel to Afghanistan , Bosnia , Chechnya and Kashmir in order to wage ' holy war ' .
This has prompted USCIRF to recommend that Saudi Arabia be included on the list of ' countries of particular concern ' drawn up each year by the US Secretary of State .
How does the Council view the information in the USCIRF report on Saudi Arabia and violence and terrorism motivated by Wahhabi Islam ?
Is it prepared to step up the EU 's efforts to defend freedom of religion and faith around the world by introducing a similar annual report and analysis dealing with religious freedom together with a list of countries like that of the US Government ?
.
( IT ) The report which Mr Sacrédeus referred to has not been discussed by any groups associated with the Council .
The European Union Annual Report on Human Rights illustrates , inter alia , our clear position on freedom of religion and action taken on this basis .
The Union seizes , I believe , every opportunity to urge States to pursue laws and procedures which promote tolerance and mutual respect .
Concerns over the freedom of religion are regularly expressed to all the governments in question , both in bilateral and multilateral forums such as the annual meetings of the United Nations Human Rights Commission and the Third Committee of the General Assembly of the United Nations .
At the most recent session of the Commission on Human Rights the Union expressed , moreover , its deep concern over the implementation of basic international human rights standards in Saudi Arabia , including the continual restrictions on the freedom of religion and expression and systematic discrimination against women .
At the 59th Session of the Commission on Human Rights , as in previous years , the Union supported the Resolution , tabled by the Irish Government to be precise , on the Elimination of all Forms of Religious Intolerance , where States are urged to adopt the necessary actions to combat hate , intolerance , violence and duress on grounds of religious or spiritual beliefs .
I wish firstly to welcome Italy as the country holding the Presidency and to thank you very much for your answer .
I am aware that the Italian Government , especially its minister , Mr Buttiglione , has a strong commitment to issues concerning religious freedom and tolerance around the world .
I still want nonetheless to repeat my question as to how the Council views USCIRF 's report on Saudi Arabia and the Wahhabite Islamic - inspired violence and terrorism .
What can the EU do under Italy 's leadership to strengthen the EU 's positions on this issue ?
I also wish to ask a follow-up question .
Are you prepared to strengthen the EU 's efforts in this area ?
Could the EU prepare reports corresponding to the American annual reports on religious freedom ?
. ( IT ) I have no problem confirming what I said at the start : today the Council is not expressing an opinion on that report because it has not yet been discussed by the Council 's competent groups .
I acknowledge Mr Sacrédeus 's request and would say to him that I will give the Council Secretariat the chance to have it considered in order , naturally , and where appropriate , to express our opinion .
I can say right now , Mr Sacrédeus , that it is important to strengthen the principle of protection which you referred to in your question .
Question No 9 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0379 / 03 ) :
Subject : Ban on cloning
What is the Council Presidency 's view of the current stage reached in efforts to ban all forms of human cloning world-wide and in the European Union ?
.
( IT ) The Council Presidency thanks Mr Posselt for calling our attention to such an important issue .
Human cloning and its prohibition does not fall within the competences of the European Union , as we all know .
Nevertheless , in this respect the Presidency would remind you of the principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union : Article 1 lays down that human dignity is inviolable and must be respected and protected ; Article 3 lays down , moreover , that , in the fields of medicine and biology , the prohibition on , inter alia , eugenic practices must be respected , in particular those aiming at the selection of persons , the prohibition on making the human body and its parts a source of financial gain and the prohibition on the reproductive cloning of human beings .
I can answer that - apart from a deep-rooted value that I personally feel inside - the prohibition on the reproductive cloning of human beings is clearly laid down by Article 3 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Mr President , I am very grateful to the President-in-Office of the Council for that very good and clear reply .
I would like to put just two supplementary questions .
Firstly , the Charter of Fundamental Rights refers merely to ' reproductive ' rather than to ' therapeutic ' cloning , although the two are one and the same thing .
Germany , France and other countries are trying to get the United Nations to ban all types of cloning throughout the world .
I just wanted to ask if the Presidency of the Council might also take some action along these lines .
Secondly , you are right , with regard to this issue , to invoke the subsidiarity principle , but is there not the danger that , in such areas as that of embryo research , the European Union might modify or undermine many Member States ' more stringent provisions on the protection of embryos ?
.
( IT ) The request you have made today will be considered closely by the Council Presidency precisely with the aim of evaluating the German and French initiatives which you referred to , Mr Posselt , and precisely to avoid those dangers which could somehow affect such an important principle for the human conscience , that is , even more important than for the rule of law .
. ( IT ) I am certainly aware of this , within the confines I stated at the start ; that is , it is not within the competences of the European Union to adopt normative actions directly affecting this area .
Clearly , I will - as I told you , Mr Liese - following thorough examination , put forward a strong , political action for consideration by the Council .
I would thank you very much for your answer .
Through the Italian Prime Minister , the Italian Presidency has today emphasised the importance of close cooperation with the United States , constituting a North Atlantic alliance on a variety of global issues .
In what way can the European Union use the good relationship between the Italian Prime Minister , that is to say the new President of the European Union , and the US President to promote joint action by the United States and the European Union to bring about a ban on cloning within the UN system ?
The Council has taken note but is not going to reply to this question .
Question No 10 by Linda McAvan ( H-0381 / 03 ) :
Subject : Human rights workers in Indonesia
The recent abductions and murder of human rights workers in Aceh are a cause of great concern .
According to the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs , five of the six international NGOs and four UN agencies operating in Aceh have been advised by the Indonesian Government to cease their activities for their own safety .
It is the responsibility of the Indonesian Government to ensure the safety of its citizens and human rights workers on its territory .
What action is the Council prepared to take in light of this rapidly deteriorating situation ?
. ( IT ) The Council is following the human rights situation in Indonesia , particularly in Aceh , very closely .
Since the breakdown in peace talks and the subsequent declaration of martial law in this province in May 2003 , the Indonesian security forces have launched a significant joint operation against the Free Aceh Movement .
Military police operations are being carried out in this province on a vast scale which could effectively endanger the safety of personnel of international NGOs and UN agencies .
The European Union has urged the Indonesian Government on various occasions , both in public and in private , to protect civilians during the ongoing battles , to safeguard the human rights of the population of that province and to seek a peaceful , negotiated solution .
The Union would remind you of the recent Resolution on Human Rights Defenders , adopted by consensus at the 59th Commission on Human Rights in Geneva .
This resolution calls on all the States to adopt the necessary measures to protect human rights defenders and in this regard , I can assure you that the European Union will urge the Indonesian Government to allow Hina Hilani , Special Representative of the Secretary General of the United Nations on Human Rights Defenders , to visit that province .
Moreover , the Union will continue to closely follow developments there and to express its serious concerns , in an appropriate way , to the Indonesian Government .
. ( IT ) I can confirm , Mrs McAvan , that , not least in light of the events of recent days and weeks , our contact and position will remain steadfast , first and foremost to establish and then express what the European Parliament and the European Council are in agreement on regarding this issue .
Question No 11 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0308 / 03 ) :
Subject : Victims of the war in Iraq
With reference to the war in Iraq and on the basis of the data held by the Council , how many of the victims were civilians ?
How many were members of the military ?
How many were women ?
How many were children ?
How many were reporters ?
How many civilians were injured , and how many military personnel ?
How many reporters , woman and children were injured ?
What other data of this type should be compiled ?
Mr President , it is unacceptable that the President-in-Office of the Council is giving such emphatic , cautious , evasive , mean and insipid replies as this one .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , there are silences that speak volumes , which make themselves heard , and the complicity of which is horrifying .
This is shameful for an institution such as the Council of Ministers .
The European Union keeps meticulous accounts of molluscs and fish , chicks , poultry , cattle or goats ; it bureaucratically identifies animals and vegetables of every type of species , which it analyses exhaustively ; it analyses the chassis of motors , industrial parts and tools , the remoulding of tyres ... it is unacceptable that it cannot count the victims of a war of hardly three weeks ago .
Bearing in mind that we are talking about a war which violated international law and did not enjoy the multilateral support of the United Nations , I would ask you - and please reply , Mr President-in-Office of the Council - do you condemn the violation of the right to life which has been suffered by the victims of this illegal war ?
.
( IT ) I will certainly find out about what Mr Rübig has just asked me , and if it is acceptable , I will provide a written answer .
. ( IT ) I can answer the last question by confirming what I said earlier regarding the action of the preceding Greek Presidency , an action which will also be continued in the same way by the Italian Presidency .
We believe that we should look to the future , that we should , within the framework of the United Nations and Resolution 1483 , attend to humanitarian needs and the reconstruction and stabilisation of Iraq .
We should think , looking ahead , of a European Union commitment which is not restricted to humanitarian aid , which is currently the case .
Clearly looking to the future means looking ahead to the conditions which will enable the Iraqi people to again govern their own country following the fall of the dictatorship .
This is the path which we embarked on under the previous Presidency , and the Italian Presidency will continue in that direction .
Question No 12 by Seán Ó Neachtain ( H-0384 / 03 ) :
Subject : Objective 1 regions and the Structural and Cohesion Funds
Will the Italian Council Presidency indicate its current position on the future of the Structural and Cohesion Funds in Objective 1 regions ?
.
( IT ) Certainly more information in this regard could be provided by the Commission which , as I tried to explain , has not yet tabled its own report on this subject .
The Council Presidency will only be able to take action following the report .
I also said that , given the importance of the matter , the Italian Presidency will also address this issue and that the competent Italian minister will present the relevant information to Parliament 's competent committee .
These are the conclusions which can be reached today , in the absence of the Commission 's report .
Mr President , I have another question for Mr Frattini .
There has been a great deal of discussion about the unused monies in the Structural and Cohesion Funds , which are returned to the finance ministers every year .
There is now very intensive debate about whether this money would be better allocated to extending the trans-European networks .
Is this being discussed in the Council , and what timetable do you have in mind for these funds to be put to use , as soon as possible , for the benefit of the world 's most competitive region ?
.
( IT ) If I may , in relation to this question too , I would like to reserve the right to provide a written answer to Mr Rübig , be it positive or negative .
As this is a highly sensitive issue , I would like to avoid saying things which are not absolutely clear and accurate .
The next item is the joint debate on
the recommendation for second reading ( ? 5-0219 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the framework for the creation of the Single European Sky ( 15851 / 3 / 2002 - C5-0138 / 2003 - 2001 / 0060 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Fava ) , and
the recommendation for second reading ( ? 5-0225 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism ,
1. on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on the provision of air navigation services in the Single European Sky ( ' the service provision Regulation ' ) ( 15853 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0137 / 2003 - 2001 / 0235 ( COD ) ) ,
2. on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on the organisation and use of the airspace in the Single European Sky ( ' the airspace Regulation ' ) ( 15852 / 3 / 2002 - C5-0139 / 2003 - 2001 / 0236 ( COD ) ) ,
3. on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on the interoperability of the European Air Traffic Management network ( ' the interoperability Regulation ' ) ( 15854 / 3 / 2002 - C5-0140 / 2003 - 2001 / 0237 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs Sanders-ten Holte ) .
Mr President , we are on the home straight with a report , a Commission initiative which Parliament warmly welcomed and which we feel is one of the most important aspects of the work which the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has carried out in recent years : a single European sky , with efficiency , safety and cost containment as its objectives .
It is clear that the single sky is a practical combination of conduct and rules , certainly not a literary metaphor : rules and synergies which must be defined , applied and respected .
Mr President , the Commission proposal had the merit - we pay tribute to the Commissioner , Mrs De Palacio , for this - of courageously raising this issue with force and with urgency , and within the deadlines .
A year ago , Parliament commendably took up the Commission 's challenge at a difficult time , following 11 September , at a time when discussing safety in our skies required increased sensitivity , reasoning and attention .
Parliament met this challenge , and gave its support with a broad , firm consensus to this draft , which was adopted at first reading and which was subject to certain simple rules which we hope will be reconfirmed and applied .
The most basic rule is the necessary harmony , the necessary synergy between all the institutions , all the bodies , all the organisations which are involved in putting into practice the objectives of the single sky - efficiency , safety and keeping costs down - and , therefore , first and foremost , focus , punctuality and the definition of a clear relationship between Eurocontrol - the agency which has dealt with the technical expertise side of managing the European skies - and the Commission , the European Union .
In this regard we have managed to reach a very specific balance which confers on the Commission the task , the responsibility of the management , of the political regulation of our single European sky , and calls on Eurocontrol to make available its expertise , its experience and its technical know-how .
Another fundamental point is sanctions : a system of sanctions - which will , of course , be deferred until the various States have fully defined them - which can be used to punish the airlines and other parties concerned in the event that these rules are violated .
The word ' sanction ' is always an unpleasant word , a word which should always be spoken with great restraint and great care , but it is a necessary word in this case .
It has been since the time of Cesare Beccaria : if we do not have a system of sanctions , it will be hard to be sure that rules will be respected .
This is a system of rules which does not allow exceptions , apart from in certain very special cases ; it is a system of rules based on respect , for otherwise the concept of a single sky would not be fully realised .
The third point is cooperation between civil and military users .
Cooperation between civil and military authorities is the distinguishing point : to this end , a single sky committee is provided for , in which the military are also to participate ; there is also a safeguard clause which gives Member States the possibility of deferring certain single sky regulations should special situations or special emergencies arise , and this naturally lies first of all within the role and function of the armed forces and the military .
Well , with regard to all these points , the common position may well have been affected by a climate which , following 11 September , is giving much greater consideration to national sovereignty and national security .
It is , in any case , a position which we consider to be quite conservative .
Cooperation between civil and military users is essentially pushed aside . The single sky is losing one of its major distinguishing characteristics .
We feel that , in this respect , there may have been a certain naive short-sightedness .
Cooperation between civil and military authorities should be considered not as a restriction on Member States ' sovereignty but as a great opportunity , an opportunity which , moreover , is guaranteed by an extended safeguard clause , which we have only prevented being extended to cover simple training too for otherwise the very concept of a single European sky would be undermined .
Mr President , I do not have anything else to add .
I have briefly summarised the basic developments of the political and institutional background to this report .
I hope that , in the coming weeks and months , in a balanced trialogue with the other institutions , Parliament will be able to contribute to the swift definition of a set of regulations which will be a credit to the work of the Commission , the Council and , of course , Parliament , so that we will , at last , be able to provide the European citizens with a single , safe sky .
. ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I firstly wish to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , for the work they have done over all this time .
I would also like to thank them for their particular dedication to an issue which is very complex from a technical and institutional point of view .
I believe - and I say this as a preface to the issues I am going to explain later - that , on certain aspects , the honourable Members may possibly have wanted more and , in particular , much clearer definitions , but the consideration that I wish to communicate to you is that , in this particular case , we are opening up totally new fields .
In the air sector we are entering into fields which so far had been kept completely outside of any type of regulation or agreement at European Union level .
I would therefore like to thank the two rapporteurs and all the Members , who I know have participated very actively throughout the discussions in committee , and to remind them of something that we all know : until 2000 this sector has developed systematically , in the intergovernmental field , by means of Eurocontrol or the International Civil Aviation Authority .
As Mrs Sanders-ten Holte said a moment ago , however , we all know that the demands of the citizens go further , that they are asking us to resolve urgent problems and there is a possibility of significantly improving the capacity and safety of our airspace and the efficiency of its management , if we are capable , in this respect as well , of introducing an integration at European level .
The objective is therefore to make the organisation and the management of the air space coherent with mobility in the skies , to create a single sky before the end of 2004 .
And the honourable Members know that this is one of the emblematic initiatives of this Prodi Commission .
I would also like to say that , in the meantime , events have taken place , which certain Members have referred to , such as the crisis in the aviation sector relating to certain factors , 11 September , the war in Iraq , the Uberlingen accident , which have undoubtedly affected our work , but that , in no case have they undermined either the importance of the initiative or the urgency of implementing it .
I would like to point out that , regrettably , it does not appear that your reactions to the Council 's common position are going to allow an agreement to be reached at second reading .
The questions the honourable Members are asking appear to me to be legitimate and they deserve to be discussed in Council , but we must be aware , when dealing with this initiative , that - and I insist - we are entering new territory for the first time , and it involves several delicate aspects , and we must therefore make progress gradually and the work we are doing is very delicate , that the Council has to accept this step forward and that we must be pragmatic and realistic , and achieve operative texts which promote the immediate achievement of concrete results .
I am aware that you believe that the final proposal in the Council 's common position is not sufficient and that you are calling for greater action at Community level .
I would like to say to the honourable Members that of course I share your concern , but that there are legal institutional obstacles which prevent us from accepting some of the amendments you have presented , such as , for example , in the case of the report by Mr Fava , Amendments Nos 1 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 13 and 14 and , in the case of the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , Amendments Nos 13 , 16 , 25 , 29 and 33 .
With regard to the other amendments , either in principle , in part or with a modification to the wording , we will be able to incorporate them , when the time comes , partially , if not in their entirety .
I would like to point out that we still oppose certain amendments which could affect or prejudice the institutional operative reality .
The amendments which I have said are not acceptable include , specifically , Amendment No 14 , on the consultation of the interested parties within Eurocontrol , as well as the amendments in the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , Nos 13 , 16 , 25 and 29 , the second part of Amendment No 15 and Amendment No 33 , which has become obsolete as a result of technological progress .
I will raise two issues which will take centre stage in the coming discussions between the institutions within the framework of the conciliation and which the honourable Members have referred to : civil / military cooperation and the creation of functional blocks , the first of which is taken up in both reports and the second in Amendment No 26 by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte .
The civil / military issue is a key element for the success of the single sky , as the honourable Members rightly say , but you must also remember what the competences are at Community level , and this is the restriction we are faced with in relation to the whole of this issue .
The discussions in the Council have demonstrated that balancing the needs of the transport policy and the demands of defence policy require coordination mechanisms which go beyond the possibilities offered in the first pillar .
In order to support the creation of the single sky , despite this obstacle , the States of the Union have committed themselves , in a declaration , to developing military cooperation as a complement to the initiative in the context of the first pillar .
I believe we must take advantage of this opportunity and proceed pragmatically in this field .
Amendment No 29 of the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte establishes that transport policy has primacy in the use of the single sky , and this does not sufficiently reflect the legitimate needs and concerns of the Member States from the point of view of defence .
With regard to the second aspect , the functional blocks , Amendment No 26 of the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte , the Commission shares Parliament 's point of view , but believes that an acceptable solution would be to strengthen the role of the Commission in combination with the ' single sky committee ' and with the technical support of Eurocontrol , with a view to coherently assessing all of these blocks , maintaining the Member States ' right to initiative and decision-making .
The creation of these blocks affects the military aspects , which I referred to in the first part of my speech .
We therefore accept Amendment No 26 of the report by Mrs Sanders-ten Holte in principle , but we will have to change the wording .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would remind you that the proposals we are discussing today are the result of one year 's work by a high-level group , made up of civilian and military representatives from the Member States of the Union , and of a social group consisting of the various agents in the civil aviation sector and also with participation at all levels of this field .
In September 2002 you issued your opinion at first reading and at that time I thanked you for your support and the effort you dedicated to this initiative .
We agree in many respects , but I would insist that what we need is a realistic position which allows us to move forward .
I thank you for your support , and in particular the work of the two rapporteurs , and I hope that in the conciliation stage we can rapidly achieve a positive result which allows us to create the famous Single European Sky before the end of 2004 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me start by expressing thanks to the rapporteurs , who - not only at first reading stage but also at the second - had , in essence , to start their work all over again after the Council was so eccentric as to reformulate the Common Position in such a way that it was impossible to tell which of Parliament 's amendments had been taken up and which had not .
One may well wonder whether this is just a haughtily offhand attitude , or whether there is a system at work here .
I believe it to be the latter , because the Member States are simply unwilling to accept these undoubtedly forward-looking rules , but I will also make it abundantly clear that Parliament champions the cause of the Single Sky , one that will guarantee greater safety and also greater efficiency .
I would like to list four points that I believe should be regarded as essentials .
Firstly , the military cannot be allowed to continue to dominate European airspace .
This is about bringing about proper coordination , in which civil and military air operators are partners with equal rights , and with the certainty that they are able to cooperate with each other .
Secondly , in the air , too , the European patchwork must be done away with once and for all .
Nobody , after all , can grasp how it is that we still have almost forty blocks of airspace in the skies above fifteen Member States long after land borders have been abolished .
The issue of whose decision this should be is of the utmost importance , as the Member States have had enough time over the past decades to take the decision to create cross-border airspace blocks .
They failed to do so , and so , I believe , the decision passes to the European level - to the Commission .
My third point is that we want air safety services to be cautiously opened up to the market .
My fourth is that we want mandatory harmonisation of both technology and of the training of air traffic controllers , as a means to making both technology and human resources mutually compatible .
Today marks the first anniversary of the terrible air disaster on Lake Constance .
Whilst that has no direct connection with this regulation , it does indicate the potential dangers inherent in a multiplicity of airspace blocks , in which the airlines constantly have to announce their entry and exit , with all the potential for misunderstanding that is involved .
What this means is that we have the responsibility of ensuring safety and efficiency .
If my judgment is correct , I can only say that my group will not be held responsible for regulations that do not end up giving real competence to the European level , along with the power to implement it .
I want to make an urgent appeal to the Commission .
Commissioner , I am somewhat surprised ; you have narrowed the scope to some extent , and your staff were even more cautious , but , otherwise , on many aspects , you have demanded much more , and , if I may mention open skies , where you want all powers granted to you at once , you have suddenly started to hold back on this important issue .
I ask you to consider on which side you are fighting .
Join forces with Parliament , so that we may have a common European sky , in the interests of the people in the countries from which we come .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schmitt is indeed right to say that today marks the first anniversary of the calamity at Überlingen , when two aircraft collided , resulting in many deaths .
The public see the Single Sky project as the European response to the situation in the skies above Europe , which is , to say the least , unsatisfactory .
So how do matters stand ?
We have three times as many control centres as an area of comparable size in the USA , with a patchwork carpet - a product of the Sixties - in the skies above us .
If you fly from Brussels to Rome , you have to pass through nine different control sectors ; during a flight from Brussels to Geneva , the radio frequency has to be changed five times .
With the number of journeys by air continuing to mount over the coming years , the whole thing is more and more a safety hazard , and , at the same time , highly inefficient ; one in every four flights is delayed , and 350 000 flying hours are wasted every year .
All that costs the airlines some two thousand million euros per annum .
The Commission , with its regulatory package , and Parliament , at first reading stage , faced up to this challenge , but the Member States ' Common Position does not do it justice in terms of what is expected and required .
Why is this so ?
The first reason for this is that , at the heart of the single sky , there are the functional airspace blocks .
How are these to become reality ?
What is the added value of a regulation if its implementation is to continue to be dependent on the whims of the Member States ?
They can already set up airspace blocks on a bilateral basis .
We take the view that nothing will change here unless we get a normative proposal from Eurocontrol and the Commission .
My second point is that , in the Common Position , we have made hardly any real progress away from the status quo in terms of civil / military cooperation either .
I know this is a highly sensitive issue , but we cannot wait a few decades more for people to be able to fly within Europe by a direct route from A to B.
Thirdly , it is a cause of anguish that there has been no European response to the desperate lack of air traffic controllers .
This must be included in the regulatory package and - not least for safety reasons - should be tackled as soon as possible .
My group endorses the reintroduction of the amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading stage .
No doubt we will have to have frank discussions with the Council in the Conciliation Committee .
Thanks are due not least to the rapporteurs for their good and cooperative approach to our work together .
Mr President , the legislative package being discussed to create a Single European Sky is a very challenging one .
I would like at this stage to thank the rapporteurs for their excellent cooperation and in taking this matter forward .
The problem with European airspace is congestion .
There is an enormous volume of air traffic in Central Europe .
Ensuring that it flows well demands cooperation between the Member States , and this has already been achieved .
Nevertheless , in sparsely populated Member States , such as Finland , there are not very many problems of this sort .
The country 's domestic air traffic , in particular , can be managed very flexibly alone .
The objectives in the report are ambitious .
It has a number of far-reaching proposals .
One of them concerns the division of airspace .
Dividing up the airspace into sectors could be brought about if necessary through qualified majority decisions .
One might wonder whether this is necessary to achieve the objectives or whether cooperation between the Member States would suffice .
It may well be that closer integration in the heart of the EU is essential , but there is probably no need for it in the peripheral regions , given their special circumstances .
A problem , too , is charges .
If air traffic control services were charged based on average values it might well mean that charges would clearly rise in some areas .
A more delicate problem is the integration of military aviation and air defence with the European system .
Traditionally , military matters and questions of defence do not fall within the scope of the codecision procedure , involving the Council and Parliament , in the EU , and there is no justification for that now either .
Consequently , in this regard too we should tread carefully and respect agreed principles .
Even taking these difficulties into consideration , however , the reports are extremely valuable and the objectives they have set their sights on are excellent .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after the first reading in Parliament , the Council 's common position is , in my opinion , an important stage in the construction of a Community policy for air navigation .
Although the approach that prevailed in the Council bears the stamp of realism in a number of areas , I regret that it did not attack certain provisions more .
I will come back to this .
The requirement for a separation of functions between service providers and the national monitoring authorities is , like the requirement for certification of service providers , a structuring measure .
If it is about affirming the desire to distinguish the role of the operator and that of the regulator and increase transparency , the requirement should take into account the real situations that show that different concepts can also work .
In any case , I think it is reasonable for each Member State to retain the choice of how things operate in their countries .
I regret that it has not been clearly recognised that the management of air navigation security was part of a chain of actions and services that needed an overall , rather than a divided approach .
I am even more convinced of this approach after spending two days last week at the annual conference of the ' air navigation ' group of the ETF unions .
I am happy to talk about dividing up , but I think that we also need to talk about the human factor .
We can always reduce the staff in control centres , but it is not acceptable for one section of airspace to be managed by only one or two controllers : there are also human limits .
At the same time , in terms of airspace , progress has been made in that a single European flight information area in the upper airspace has been created and in that the Commission has produced a common publication on aeronautical information in that area ; these are established facts .
Harmonisation would also be ensured for pricing of services .
Regarding the organisation of airspace and service provision , everyone agrees that safety requires anticipation , research and agreement between States and the service providers concerned .
The changes made to the initial text particularly concern recognising the sovereignty of the States over the airspace above them and pointing out the responsibilities of those States towards the ICAO .
The Council thus reached the conclusion that the functional blocks of airspace , which have been the subject of many debates , will be established by the States concerned .
Is this good or bad ?
I think that it is a process .
It is also a question of recognising the fact that air control requires that prerogatives of the public powers be exercised and that it should not be of an economic nature justifying the application of the competition rules in the Treaty .
In this way , it is the States that decide whether or not to give financial incentives to their service providers or users through taxes ; this is the approach that I , personally , prefer .
What matters , then , is that we recognise the central role that Eurocontrol must play in preparing measures delegated to the Commission , which are part of the responsibilities of that organisation ; in my opinion , this is a step forward .
Finally there is the recognition of the exclusive competence of the States in determining their defence operations , including processing them , which , I agree with you Commissioner , is not desirable .
I would lean more towards putting civil before military in peacetime , which is undoubtedly the situation today .
Having said this , the common position incorporates a large proportion of the amendments proposed by Parliament at first reading .
I regret , nevertheless that the Council , like Parliament at first reading stage , was cautious about certain demands that I regard as sensible .
I thus find it regrettable that my group 's proposal to double the control apparatus to ensure that operations continue if there is any failure , and the proposal to evaluate the correct implementation of the Directive , were not retained .
I have met with the operators and worked a great deal with the unions on this matter .
There are those employed in the sector who are already working in the European and world airspace and are determined to move Europe forward , and I think that we should listen to them .
Hearing them means really involving them and not only consulting them .
Europe will be made using people from different sectors and will require their active participation ; I do not think that there is any future without them .
To conclude , I regret nevertheless that the approach remains focused , on the whole , on the ideological premise that liberalisation brings efficiency , including in terms of safety , something that remains to be seen .
Mr President , obviously the technical issues relating to this specific matter have been adequately analysed ; consequently , I shall focus on the political aspect of the matter and say that the question of the Single European Sky is inspired by two different and somewhat contradictory philosophies .
The first philosophy considers that delayed flights , which are a very extensive phenomenon in Europe , are a serious blow to the airline companies , the passengers themselves , the environment and the economy as a whole .
One of the most basic reasons to which this situation is ascribed is the constant increase in air traffic and , more importantly , the lack of a common system for managing the airspace of the European countries .
The other philosophy reflects the concern of certain Member States who would like to secure their airspace rights , mainly in relation to their defence obligations and needs , and the corresponding facility to carry out military exercises in that space .
These concerns are more acute where there are problems connected with these issues , in countries such as my own .
The European Parliament has espoused the first philosophy .
As in numerous other sectors of European policy , the choice of a real Community policy and uniform regulation have been judged more efficient .
This was the philosophy at first reading .
The Council , unfortunately , relied solely on the second philosophy .
The concerns and doubts prevailed .
The Council set particular store by issues of public order , security and defence .
In this way , it essentially deadened the Commission 's proposal and , of course , its position bears no relation to the position of the European Parliament at first reading .
If the Council agreed with the objective of the Single European Sky , it should have adopted a different strategy .
Otherwise , it should have said honestly that it disagreed with the endeavour .
It is obvious that we are being drawn into a conciliation procedure .
In this procedure , the Council must demonstrate flexibility .
I firmly believe that there are ways for us to take essential steps as far as the Single European Sky is concerned , without touching on national sensitivities and vital interests .
Where there is a will , there is always a way .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that the reason why we have before us today a Council common position differing considerably from the initial Commission proposal and from what Parliament worked out is because , as we all know , this matter has arisen from a misunderstanding between the desire , on the one hand , to substitute the Commission for Eurocontrol , and on the other hand , to give the air traffic controllers too much responsibility for delays , particularly in 1999 , which was marked by exceptional military constraints .
I think that , since then , we have done a lot of work and we are not very far from reaching a balance point .
We have recognised that air navigation services are of general and security interest .
We have left it up to the Member States to appoint their services .
We have brought Eurocontrol into the picture , which I think was absolutely necessary .
At present , there are still some points to deal with .
Although I am aware of the legal constraints that they imply , I approve of and encourage the efforts that the Commission is making so that the military authorities at least agree to have a discussion .
We are aware that there is an obstacle there , and quite a considerable one , which concerns capacity and is undoubtedly much more significant than others that are too often pointed out .
Secondly , the question of arbitration on international airspace blocks has not yet been decided upon .
I think that it would be enough for all the parties present to agree to re-establish taking into account Eurocontrol 's assessment ; the Commission , as is normal practice , needs to give the final ruling on that assessment .
Finally , I am of the opinion that we need to implement Recital 16 and Article 7 of Mrs Sanders-ten Holte 's report , which are aimed at involving staff as closely as possible , as they are an integral part of the safety chain .
The air navigation profession is not simply about the market - and I think that the Commission can take pride in having finally recognised it - it is first of all about ' policing ' airspace , airspace which will become increasingly overloaded and in which we must at all costs preserve know-how and excellence , avoiding introducing too much competition into the sky ' policing ' services .
Mr President , before I go any further , I would also like to reiterate my complete readiness to implement all proposals genuinely geared towards improving cooperation and ensuring the best possible use of our airspace , while guaranteeing higher safety levels .
As Mrs De Palacio in particular has already emphasised , however , this is a delicate matter in technical , institutional and political terms , and it demands a high degree of realism and common sense .
In the speech I delivered here last September , during the debate at first reading on the organisation of the Single European Sky , I had occasion to mention the aspects of the Commission proposals , and also those adopted by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , which concerned me most .
I can only emphasise that my concerns , especially those linked to the functional blocks , evaporated to a large extent when the Council adopted its fairly balanced common position .
For the same reason , I feel bound to distance myself once more from some of the amendments adopted for a second time by the Committee on Transport , since they are totally at odds with the consensus reached in the Council , and also with the Commission 's newly reconsidered position , which , of course , I commend .
In fact , I find the insistence on the proposal to create functional blocks , to be imposed regardless of the wishes of the Member States , particularly hard to justify : it does not fall within the Community 's competence to manage airspace , or any other aspect of the EU 's territory . It falls within the Community 's competence least of all when military matters are involved , as in the present case .
Besides , no intractable conflicts over the definition of blocks of crossborder airspace are known to have arisen between Member States up to now , and none are predicted .
Such conflicts are even less likely now that the Member States have adopted a statement guaranteeing the degree of cooperation required between civilian and military organisations in order fully to implement the flexible use of airspace concept .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen , if I disregard the opinions of certain individuals , such as certain French Members of this House , it appears to me that this House is of one mind where these two reports are concerned .
Our standpoint is still that which we took at first reading , and I do not therefore want to respond to the small minority of radicals that has just spoken , but I would like to address the Commissioner in the words of a great German poet : more courage , Commissioner , more courage !
I believe , Commissioner , we should remind ourselves of how , in the summer of 1999 , when discussing your presentation of what you were going to do in office , we made the observation that the question of a unitary system of air traffic control was one example of an effective European policy that produced demonstrable added value .
It is because that was the position you took in 1999 , and because your proposals were in line with that , that we , like Mr Schmitt , are rather sad that your final comment on the Common Position was that , if that was everything that the Council was going to concede to us , then you were satisfied .
So , more courage , Commissioner ; we want the second reading to take us down the road your proposals indicated ; we want functional airspace blocks !
To Mr Miranda , who spoke just now , and to a number of others who have spoken before me , I have to say that the Member States , and Eurocontrol too , have had forty years in which to carve out the airspace blocks in ways that make sound business sense , and they have never done anything about it .
It is for that reason that we - Parliament and the Commission together - must do it by means of well thought-out legislation .
So , Commissioner , as we come to the reports ' second reading , let us , who are the majority in Parliament , and the Commission , be more courageous if we are to have a European added value in the skies above Europe !
Mr President , the European Parliament rapporteurs would like to make us think that creating the Single European Sky would be a noble cause and a big step forward that Europeans should welcome .
The Council , however , has no need to embellish reality , which is why there are differences in formulation .
The differences in formulation , however , hide the reality more than highlighting it .
The European Union is an association dominated by rival States that hold on to their borders , even in the sky .
What they call their sovereignty is only the civil and military defence of their egotistical interests and those of their wealthy classes .
Although the sky is single by nature , it is not yet single for human society , and the European institutions are clearly not managing to put an end to this aberration .
The expression ' single sky ' , however , is being used to cover up an operation aimed at making further inroads into the public service of air traffic control for the benefit of operators , suppliers and private service providers .
That is what it is about .
The European authorities have already authorised the privatisation of the British body responsible for air traffic control .
Some of the Eurocontrol rules have also been modified to enable private companies to make profits in the air traffic control sector .
Air traffic control unions in Europe are rightly condemning this rampant privatisation and its consequences both for the safety of flights and for the staff 's working conditions .
A year ago , at the time of the Lake Constance air disaster , we saw what tragedies could result from the introduction of the law of profit into this field , even if only to a limited extent .
Despite that , and while hypocritically defending themselves , the European authorities are persisting and signing .
They are pushing even further towards dismantling this public service , towards the race for profits and cutting the sky up into sectors that can be allocated to private operators .
The airlines will undoubtedly do well out of it , but the air traffic control staff and passenger safety will not .
We are therefore once again expressing our opposition to this increased privatisation of the sky , which is damaging both to users and to air transport employees in the broad sense , and to the people in the flight path .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking the rapporteurs and their shadows for all their hard work in dealing with this very technical report .
Although my delegation will be supporting a number of the amendments when we vote tomorrow , we will not be supporting those that reopen the debate concerning military operations .
Unlike many colleagues , we consider it essential to retain the common position in this area , which now excludes the military dimension and which I understand is supported by the Commission .
We will therefore oppose Amendments Nos 6 and 10 and , in addition , Amendment No 18 from the Fava report , which suggests the removal of military training from the text .
Military training is not covered under the term ' military operations ' .
It is essential that this be excluded from the scope of the regulation .
In addition , in Mrs Sanders-ten Holte 's report , we also oppose Amendment No 25 , due to its requirement that all air traffic in the EUIR should be known to air traffic service providers on military grounds .
With regard to Amendments Nos 29 and 30 , the Council 's position on the flexible use of airspace , which has been practised in the UK for many years , in my view offered important benefits and greater effectiveness across Europe .
On other matters , Amendment No 3 - which refers to the establishment of a reserve - is questionable on the issue of charges as this could create a provision for Member States ' subsidies and would not , therefore , be a legitimate measure under Community law .
Concerning Amendments Nos 24 and 31 , which concern the automatic move towards a single lower airspace flight information region : placing an automatic requirement on states to put one in place within five years is , quite frankly , premature and unrealistic .
With regard to Amendment No 21 on functional blocks of airspace , which proposes a centrally-planned top-to-bottom approach : I believe this overlooks local requirements .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are evaluating today , at second reading , a package of measures designed to create a Single European Sky .
Although I agree entirely with the aims of the proposals under discussion , I do have some concerns about their content , which I feel bound to share with this House .
They stem , firstly , from the lack of a legal basis in the common transport policy for legislating in certain areas , especially those involving the military . Furthermore , they are rooted in the excessive and unnecessary curtailing of Member States ' sovereignty over their own airspace .
Allow me to mention three points which I believe are fundamental in this connection .
The first relates to what I view as the Commission 's attempt to communitise the Member States ' airspace through the immediate creation of a single European flight region , on the basis of which the so-called ' functional blocks ' will be established .
I give my full support on this point to the Council 's common position , according to which the delineation of the functional blocks falls within the exclusive competence of the Member States and cannot be changed by the European Union .
Secondly , moving on to military matters , the Commission proposals allow for the possibility of subjecting military activities to rules for airspace management and use .
Once again , I agree with the Council 's common position , which seems much more suitable and balanced , since it recognises that more efficient use of our airspace does indeed depend on closer cooperation between civilian and military organisations . In other words , the concept known as the ' flexible use of airspace ' should be uniformly applied throughout the Single European Sky .
This objective should always be pursued with due regard for national competences .
Finally , I would like to refer to the question of airspace management , and express my total disagreement with any approach seeking to make airspace management out to be just another economic service comparable to the liberalised telecommunications or transport markets supervised by a European regulatory body .
I would argue , therefore , that each Member State should be completely free to designate the service provider for its own airspace , under the supervision of national regulatory authorities and without being answerable to any other organisations whatsoever .
. ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank you very warmly for all your comments and speeches demonstrating the importance the honourable Members attach to this initiative , one of the most ambitious of the Prodi Commission .
I would like to remind you that in the field of aviation we have been taking giant steps over recent years in terms of creating common areas amongst the Member States of the Union , which until now were the exclusive competence of those States .
For example , in the field of air safety , through the European Air Safety Agency , which will allow us for the first time to provide a common certification of aircraft in Europe and which will allow us , amongst other things , to be able to certify the Airbus 380 .
For example , when we propose new safety standards in the fight against terrorism and other types of attack , which are shared and common for all the States of the Union , with reviews and controls which guarantee that these common standards are applied by everybody .
And , for example , when we finally achieve a mandate for negotiation with the United States with regard to a common aviation zone between the United States and the European Union .
The latest great initiative is precisely the Single European Sky , which facilitates all the actions I referred to earlier , particularly the negotiation with the United States , and also in the field of safety and the European Air Safety Agency , but which furthermore is going to allow us to ensure in the future that this time Europe is not left behind on this issue ; I am referring to the issue of the new definitions and new concepts for the management of air traffic for 2020 , where clearly the possibility of having a single sky , within which we will have integrated , harmonised and common systems , means that Europe will have a critical mass with which to negotiate adequately with the United States , which by means of an equivalent initiative is carrying out work in this sector .
The STAR 21 initiative is a key initiative for the future .
It is key to European air safety and technology , technological development and European industry .
Ladies and gentlemen , reference has been made to Eurocontrol .
Eurocontrol is taken into account and is going to participate - we have said this since the outset .
It has participated in all the meetings we have held on the Single European Sky in the high-level groups and throughout all this time , as a source of knowledge , in its capacity as a group of experts .
The Commission does not intend to create an alternative system to Eurocontrol .
That is not our job .
But we cannot allow the Commission to legislate on the basis of decisions by a body like Eurocontrol , which is in no way a Community body , but which is an intergovernmental body which includes a series of countries which do not belong to the European Union .
The honourable Members must understand that there is a fundamental institutional problem which we cannot avoid when it comes to accepting certain types of amendment .
It is one thing to employ , contract and even reach agreements with Eurocontrol , so that it may act as an expert to which we refer and which provides us with certain types of information , documents and even proposals , but it is quite another to commit ourselves to legislate or act on the basis of what is said by an intergovernmental organisation containing third countries .
We simply cannot do that , ladies and gentlemen .
The next issue is Amendment No 4 by Mrs Sanders ? ten Holte , with regard to licences for air traffic controllers ; of course I have taken it up again .
We accept it - I have said this before - for the simple reason that it was in our initial proposal .
It was the Council that withdrew it from its common position and the Commission is pleased to reincorporate it because we believe we have to provide common training and qualifications for all air traffic controllers at European level , although there must then be specialisation in the specific area in which they have to operate and work .
With regard to liberalisation , ladies and gentlemen , I do not know how to say this , because I have said it so many times ...
We are not liberalising anything here .
Where do we say that this field is going to be dealt with like telecommunications ?
If you can show me where we say it , I am prepared to correct it , for the simple reason that we have not said it anywhere .
If we had , I would be worried , just as the honourable Members are .
As one of the speakers said quite rightly a moment ago , there are competences here which belong to the public sector , to police activity , and there clearly cannot be more than two operators because that would create an undesirable situation .
There will therefore be neither liberalisation nor competition .
It is different when it comes to using certain services such as , for example , weather forecasts , when it will be possible to refer to the national meteorological centre of the country in question or the meteorological centre of another State or whoever provides the most suitable data .
That is another issue .
But when it comes to traffic and air control , none of this is being proposed : neither liberalisation , which makes no sense , nor privatisation .
By the way , it is true that one State has carried out privatisation unilaterally , in a very particular manner .
I will end by referring to the two problems which I believe will be the crux of the debate in conciliation .
Mr Jarzembowski asked me to be courageous and some people have said that in the end we in the Commission have been timid .
Well , ladies and gentlemen , you are well aware that this issue has been promoted from the outset with all the necessary courage , strength and rigour on the part of the Commission .
But we are talking about a question of possibilities , realities and urgent issues in a complicated area in relation to which we are all aware that the first pillar is one thing and that defence aspects are quite another , since we have no capacity to intervene in them .
I believe that the Council 's compromise - and some of the honourable Members have said this - with regard to flexibility in terms of civil and military use , is a very acceptable compromise .
It is very possible that in the future this compromise and this formulation will evolve .
I am sure of this , ladies and gentlemen , but this is the first step .
Let us remember that we are moving forward , that this is the first step and that a change is taking place which I would go as far as to say is almost revolutionary .
I would therefore ask the honourable Members not to approve the amendments which mean changing the Council 's compromise on the civil and military use of airspace .
It is a very delicate compromise and to break it would create serious problems , as Mr Watts said a moment ago .
With regard to the functional blocks , I understand what the honourable Members are saying .
I believe that the two problems can be combined here : the guarantee to the States that they will preserve their competences and capacities , with the concern for the coherence of the whole global concept .
I believe that if the Council shows itself to be flexible there is a margin within which we could work .
It is clearly the States which must reach agreement , but by means of the group which is working with the Commission , coherence will be given to the whole issue and all the blocks proposed .
In this regard , some of your amendments perhaps facilitate this approach and I hope that in this way we can move forward .
In any event , I would like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Fava and Mrs Sanders ? ten Holte , once again for their work , and all the honourable Members for their speeches , and to ask you , in terms of flexibility , not to go further than the Council 's compromise , because I know that there is no room for manoeuvre there .
That would endanger the whole agreement , which is very fragile , as the honourable Members are well aware , on an initiative which is absolutely necessary and urgent .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
. ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have reached an important point in this complex discussion at which the European Parliament is going to give its opinion on the Council 's common position .
You will probably support the recommendation to approve at second reading the amendments approved at first reading , with a view to quickly beginning the conciliation procedure , as pointed out by Mr van Dam , who is replacing Mr Caveri .
I would like to thank Mr Caveri and Mr van Dam , and the whole committee , for the work they have done on this difficult issue .
As you know , the objective of reaching conciliation quickly has the full support of the Commission , since the current system ends on 31 December 2003 .
However , the different parties will have to make an effort to find a compromise solution and , furthermore , the Austrian authorities will have to display a degree of flexibility .
Otherwise , it will be impossible to find a solution before the end of the year , with all the consequences that could entail .
Let us remember , for example , the prohibitions imposed by the region of Tyrol at the moment and the procedures the Commission has initiated in that regard .
In this situation , the Commission must act in accordance with the commitment made on 31 December 2002 , and confirmed on 28 March 2003 , and must therefore reject the majority of the amendments presented by the European Parliament .
I would like to assure the honourable Members , however , that the Commission is prepared to adopt an open attitude towards amendments such as the geographical scope of the system , the methods for applying it to candidate countries and others and , in any event , we will show the flexibility necessary to achieve the agreement we all want to see within the context of the conciliation and we will work to try to achieve it , although this would appear to be very difficult , since the differences between Parliament and the Council are very significant .
Mr President , at first reading the European Parliament adopted a proposal regulating the matter in , I believe , a satisfactory manner , without ignoring legitimate Austrian sensitivities on the matter .
The paradox is that the Council proceeded to the common position as if Parliament did not exist .
With an attitude that is reminiscent of old times , it has proceeded to adopt a common position , despite the recommendations made by the Commissioner , Mrs de Palacio , to the Council to take account of the first reading of Parliament , and it has ignored the European Parliament , which of course now , at second reading , is obliged , following this unacceptable Council position , to confirm its position at first reading .
Thus , of necessity , things are moving towards the conciliation procedure .
I hope that the Council has got Parliament 's message and is prepared to enter into a substantive discussion during the conciliation procedure .
What do we want from the conciliation procedure ?
Obviously , we do not want to isolate Austria because we have very good cooperation with our Austrian colleagues and because it is not good for us to isolate countries .
As I said in committee , and I repeat here too , if the bell tolls for someone today , we must not forget that it may be us that it tolls for tomorrow .
Consequently , we must be moderate in our position .
Nonetheless , we must not ignore the interests of the other countries .
There are countries which have particularly vital interests in this particular issue : Germany , Italy , my country , Greece .
Mainly , we must not ignore the fact that this Union is based on a certain specific philosophy and on a certain specific Treaty .
And this Treaty talks about the free movement of persons , capital and goods .
We have a single market , the principles of which must be respected .
And they must also be respected in this instance .
Of course , we are prepared to discuss a transitional arrangement .
However , any transitional arrangement must be inspired by the spirit and tend towards this objective , the objective of serving the principles of the single market .
This is the position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Mr President , we would like to highlight just a few points .
Firstly , on behalf of our group , I would like to say that we support the proposal which Mr Caveri has already put forward to the Commission and which he is laying before plenary , which picks up what Parliament had already specified at first reading .
There are just a few points to highlight : the first reminds us of the thorny question , the contradiction that we are considering today .
This is a derogation scheme - and is therefore exceptional and temporary - which we are being asked to extend for the second time .
This second extension demonstrates the flexibility and willingness , the good political sense of Parliament , of the entire Parliament .
As for my second point , Mr President , I would like to stress that there have been attempts in this debate to establish , often surreptitiously , a false distinction between those who defend nature and those who pollute .
This is a false distinction .
There is a large majority which is mindful of the interests and needs of each Member State , but it is a large majority which acknowledges the need to gradually dismantle , over the coming years , this derogation scheme , the ecopoints system , and try to meet this objective by encouraging the use of increasingly less polluting vehicles , but which also knows that we cannot expect all European hauliers to radically modify their motor vehicles in a few months .
Another important point is that we considered it necessary to prevent a further derogation for particularly tolerant treatment being offered to certain countries - Greece and Portugal - in this case on the proposal of the Council .
I will not add anything else , Mr President , apart from the fact that this lengthy debate , these lengthy discussions , where we have often been forced to repeat and go back over concepts , reasoning and even inflexible positions which were always the same , has been an important test , more for each of us than for Parliament : a difficult test because it involved - something which is not uncommon but , in this case , may have been more marked - casting off our civil clothing , that of the citizen of one Member State , which is a uniform but which , in Parliament , is often constricting , in order to put on the highly dignified and decorous attire of a Member of the European Parliament who must act , respond and intervene on behalf of the whole Parliament .
In this regard , the Caveri report is a perfect response to this request for dignity which Parliament made of its rapporteur , in that it is a report that serves , first and foremost , the interests of Europeans .
Mr President , I would like to start by contradicting what has just been said by Mr Fava , who was of the opinion that we are engaging in mock combat .
I do not believe that to be the case ; this was meant to be a debate .
How are we to take the Alpine Convention as the basis for solving a problem that affects not only Austria ?
For some time , now , we have been holding a debate between little Austria and the European Union , and , although I do not , right now , want to apportion blame , we have been playing this out for long enough .
Austrian governments have made mistakes , as has the European Union .
I will not be able to persuade or convince you - it seems to be too late for that - but I would , all the same , like to give you a few more facts to consider before we take a decision tomorrow , taking as I do the view that we MEPs should come to our decisions on the basis of verifiable facts .
In 1996 , we observed that our air quality measurements showed no reduction in the elements indicating high levels of nitrous oxide pollution , even though the threshold values prescribed for vehicles had become more stringent , and the emissions models had led us to expect a reduction of some 45 % .
These high levels of emissions , from heavy commercial vehicles in particular , aroused suspicions that this sector could be the source of the higher levels of emissions .
A study was therefore carried out by the Technical University at Graz , which , it might be mentioned , also does work for the Commission as part of the Artemis programme .
The results , which were markedly more exact than before , were published as part of an international study involving the best measurement laboratories in Europe .
Let me quote from the study 's final report : ' It has been established that emissions from heavy commercial vehicles , especially of pollutants belonging to the NOx group , have hitherto been significantly underestimated .
This applies to vehicles fitted with engines in European categories Euro 2 and Euro 3 .
When operating in actual traffic , these vehicles produce higher levels of emissions than the categories allocated to them would appear to indicate .
An explanation of this is to be sought in the way in which the vehicle 's engine is deliberately programmed to function .
The vehicles are engineered in such a way that they demonstrate lower emission levels at the points measured in the course of the test cycles for their type prescribed by law .
At those operating points that are not tested in the test cycle for their type , but which are very definitely significant in actual driving , the vehicles produce the same emissions as , or even higher levels of them than , older engines ' .
The reduction of NOx emissions is , of course , what the ecopoint systems ' rules - which I have never claimed to be exactly brilliant - are intended to do .
What this study now shows us is that it can be established that there is no scientific basis for the reduction of the number of ecopoints logged per transit journey for Euro 2 and Euro 3 as against Euro 1 .

When I asked Mr Caveri to include these facts , he referred me to his Amendment No 17 , which simply says , ' shall ensure that it is done correctly ' , and , at the same time , explained that there was nothing he could do if the engines of HGVs were tweaked - and , if he is accusing Italian hauliers of doing that , now really has to be the time for him to explain himself .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think Parliament has done its homework very well , in that it has done everything it can to get through second reading as quickly as possible .
One reason why this is important is that the Council has taken such a stubborn attitude , essentially concentrating on the compromises it agreed at New Year without responding to any of Parliament 's suggestions .
This means that only a conciliation procedure can resolve the problem , so , in the committee , we prepared the second reading and presented it to plenary in what really was record time , so that we would have enough time to conduct the negotiations , on a serious basis , before the year is over .
I would not want to miss this opportunity to extend thanks to the Commission for now having commenced Treaty infringement proceedings against Austria in respect of the unilateral steps taken by the province of Tyrol , and I hope that this will yield results before 1 August , when these rules enter into force .
I would also like to express my gratitude to the Commission for having , at its meeting this week , decided not to have recourse to the 108 % rule .
That , too , sends a clear signal that we are a community founded on the rule of law , where it is not open to all to do as they please , but in which all share in drafting and enacting the law , which must therefore also be obeyed by all .
Quite simply , then , my plea to all the Members of this House - and also to the Council - is that we should all make good use of the summer recess and consider how we can each move closer to the other 's position .
Here there is plenty of room for manoeuvre in the course of negotiations .
Let us take the autumn negotiations seriously and complete them with a third reading by the end of this year .
We will then be on the right track when it comes to bringing together , in the right way , the interests of the environment , the interests of the transport sector and the economic interests of the European Union as a whole .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the impression is constantly given that Austria is at odds with the rest of the European Union .
Thank God that is not the case , Mr Jarzembowski , for , after considering the facts , you too must concede - you who know what you are talking about and cannot plead ignorance - that these rules have played a substantial part , over past years , in improving the environmental situation across the length and breadth of Europe .
It was the transit arrangement with Austria that led to the HGV fleet being modernised and made more environmentally friendly and played a substantial part in this coming about .
Therefore , as has already been mentioned , this is not about standing up for pettifogging local interests .
Of course , the people of the Tyrol will defend their interests , and your opposition to them , Mr Ferber - your opposition to your Tyrolean neighbours - is something that you and they will just have to sort out together .
In the past , though , this rule really was used to ensure that improvements were made to the environment in our vulnerable regions - not just in the Tyrol , for there are enough vulnerable regions in Europe .
This is now about finding a temporary solution until the transport infrastructure costs directive comes into being , so that we can take another step towards making Europe 's fleets of HGVs more environmentally friendly .
Mr Simpson and I have therefore tabled an amendment on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists ; it is identical with Amendment No 19 , to which reference has already been made .
Our amendment makes provision for vehicles in category 3 to be included as well , as , if they are not , there will be the perverse consequence that someone trading in his category 2 vehicle - that is to say , a really bad HGV - for one in category 3 - and this is where the study already referred to is relevant - will in practice be no better off in a category 3 vehicle than he was in one classed as category 2 , and , in certain cases , even worse off .
It would be a positive aspect of our decision if we , despite all the other points of criticism , could include category 3 as well .
Let me reiterate that this is about nothing more or less than the question of where our priorities lie - with the environment , health , and quality of life or with the unrestricted free movement of goods .
Both sides of this equation have to be considered .
I am not saying that the free movement of goods does not matter .
I simply think that what must surely count in the eyes of our electorate as a whole - and certainly in the eyes of those in Bavaria - is that priority should be given to health and to the environment .
Let me observe , by way of winding up my speech , that there will indeed be a conciliation procedure .
I am grateful to all those who have helped to make it possible for us to move swiftly on to the conciliation procedure .
What now really counts is that we act quickly and work out a compromise .
Although I do not want to revisit all the details of this morning 's debate right now , everything we have seen and heard , and the Italian transport minister 's almost daily statements , indicate that Italy is not at present ready to really work towards a compromise .
I believe that the Italian Presidency has to recognise that it must , in these six months , act on Europe 's behalf and not just on Italy 's , and so I hope that it too will realise the great value of the environment , including the environment in Italy , and that we need a sensible temporary compromise until such time as the transport infrastructure costs directive can enter into force .
( Applause )
Mr President , I must say that , listening to them , I increasingly admire our Austrian fellow Members of all political persuasions .
I admire their tenacity , and their rhetorical ability in presenting the unpresentable , alas . I refer to a battle - the reasons for which I understand - which is entirely national , and has nothing to do with Europe , which on the other hand , a battle for the protection of the environment , for the protection of Europe does .
Mr Swoboda , you asked what we should make a priority .
I think we should give priority to the credibility of the European Union , to the fact that , when we go to our countries and talk to our citizens , perhaps asking them for sacrifices in various sectors , we need to be able to say that we are asking for these sacrifices because there is a higher common good , called Europe , called a community of rights , called freedom of movement , freedom of trade and the whole series of common values that we are putting in place .
If , however , we cannot go with this peace of mind and must then tell our fellow citizens that in Europe some are in Division One , and some are in Division Two , then it all gets difficult and it is the credibility of the European institution which will collapse .
The problem of living in a healthy , compatible environment is shared by all the citizens of Europe , not just Austrian citizens .
I too regret that the level of emissions is unacceptable , but I do not understand why it should be excellent for Austrian citizens , when the problem appears to be completely irrelevant for other citizens .
So , my friends , Mrs De Palacio , I do not want there to be any misunderstandings over one point : we have been fast at second reading not just because we want to go to conciliation quickly - although this was one reason too , of course - but because Parliament and the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism are happy with the first reading : we have nothing to change ; that is our proposal - which is already a compromise proposal - and the sooner the Council realises this , the sooner we will , perhaps , manage to reach a practicable result .
Nobody is labouring under the illusion that we can move a long way from that proposal : we cannot move away from it at all .
It must be clear that the scheme will end , that the derogations will end , that the rule of law will be restored , after which we will seek for the whole Alpine region , for both sides of the Alps , to establish the precautions which will take us to 2006 by cutting emissions , because this is what we all want , but no one must be under the illusion that we can make anything other than a very few changes .
I wanted to say this , not because the Commission , from this point of view , is not well aware of all this , but because it seems that at times the Council was not .
I therefore hope that conciliation will offer us deadlines for a rapid end to an affair which we all , I repeat , want to bring to a close , but in accordance with Community law .
Mr President , attitudes close to Mr Berlusconi 's lurk all over the place , including - as these developments show - in HGV transport , which is such an important sector .
Moreover , leading Members of this House are intriguing and putting about false assertions , even attempting to prevent opinions that they find disagreeable from featuring in plenary debates , and the people who advance them from being heard from the floor .
Having been promised adequate speaking time , it is thus that I am left with just one minute .
That , though , is enough for me to appeal to the citizens of Europe , who are getting a really rough deal from the EU - this time as regards the damage transport is doing to the Alps .
Instead of decisively reducing the emission of pollutants , as had always been promised before , the issue is put right to the bottom of the list in terms of its priority and of the time available for it .
In none of the major parties is there any serious support for this , and the long-overdue truth about transport costs is now scarcely mentioned , even when people get up on their soapboxes .
As I see it , we can expect nothing more from the conciliation procedure that is about to get underway .
Now , then , is the time for non-violent demonstrations ; roads belong to the public , and not to the hauliers who destroy the environment and to their lobbyists !
Mr President , the European Court of Justice is rightly seen as the guardian of Community law , but also , and especially , as safeguarding and furthering the four traditional fundamental freedoms - of goods , persons , services and capital - all of which are relevant to the matter under discussion .
It was not all that long ago that the European Court of Justice had to weigh in the balance the fundamental freedoms on the one hand and , on the other , the protests by people for whom the effects of the transit routes through Austria have all become too much .
They sat down in the road and said , ' it can not go on like this ' .
Like many of those who have already spoken here today , the defenders of European freedoms talked up the supreme importance of their position .
The Court of Justice saw these things differently , adducing the remarkable argument that the freedoms , though important , are not everything .
Of equal value to them , it said , were the basic rights of citizens , in this specific case the freedom to express opinions and to demonstrate , and - as can be read in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which we hope is shortly to be given added weight as Part II of the European Constitution - so was the requirement that the environment be protected in general and in what are termed vulnerable regions in particular .
This obligation is to be protected , being of equal importance to European freedoms and on a level with them .
It is unfortunate that Parliament , at first reading stage , did not see it as really important that the right to free transport should be balanced against the rights of people and of the environment on transit routes .
Nearly all the Members from the fourteen Member States that are not affected insisted on their rights , aiming to do away with the transit arrangement , and the law of the jungle prevailed .
I hope , indeed I ask , that at least some of you will , when you vote tomorrow , also listen to the other side and consider their rights too .
To these Members , we Austrians have made an offer in the form of Amendments Nos 18 and 19 , to which reference has already been made , in the hope that they will vote for them .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , I do not believe that Mr Rack , or other Austrian Members can claim the moral high ground .
That is simply false .
If you argue along those lines , we will one day organise demonstrations to blockade Austria , preventing you from getting out and infringing our rights .
The same laws must apply to all in the Community , and it is not acceptable that the Austrians should claim privileges .
Let me give you a simple example . If you travel through Austria - to Hungary via Linz and Vienna - in terms of the topography involved , that is exactly the same as when Swedes and Danes travel to Rotterdam via Hamburg .
Do those who live in the lower-lying parts of Austria have more of an entitlement to special rules than do those in other countries through which transit routes pass ?
Never could you justify such a thing !
We are all in favour of vulnerable parts of the Alps being protected , but are you entitled to have the vulnerable parts of the Austrian Alps enjoy protection different to that enjoyed by those in France or Italy ?
If we are to introduce special rules for vulnerable areas , they must apply to all of them .
There is , however , no privilege for Austria on the grounds of its citizens being of more value than the citizens of Italy or France .
In moral terms , Austrians have no greater entitlement .
Mr Swoboda was right to point out that we are trying to improve the environment for everyone .
That is why , with reference to the changed charges for road use , Parliament has demanded that the burdens be more widely spread , dependent on the emission level .
The Council has not gone along with our idea of this broader spread , so now we are going through the same rigmarole with them all over again . In December , it came up with this wretched compromise - which I will call a sham solution rather than a compromise - and , after ignoring our arguments at first reading stage , re-adopted the nonsense from December .
So it is the Council that obstructs every sensible solution !
I hope , Madam Vice-President , that you will shortly put before us a revised version of the rules on the charges for road use and that we will make distinctions along ecological lines as well .
That , though , is how rules work ; we have to set uniform standards for all parts of the European Union without laying down special rules for Austria .
I therefore ask our Austrian fellow-Members to be a little more reflective .
Austria cannot get on its moral high horse when no work has been done on building the Brenner tunnel since the 1996 decision on the trans-European networks was taken .
It is just not on !
The Dutch transport minister , Mrs Karla Peijs , has recently tried to achieve a consensus with the Council - and what have we heard ?
The Austrians reject anything of the sort .
Whenever there have been discussions , the Austrian transport minister has waited two days before coming out with the same old nonsense .
Along with most of the Members of this House , my plea is that we should seek the sensible compromise for which we are all ready .
Mr President , we have been arguing over this subject for ten years , and I would not miss a round , even if I had to buy a ticket to enter the House , not least in order to be able to bear witness that we are still at the same point .
The positions are identical to those of ten years ago .
It was inevitable , therefore , that we should turn to conciliation as a solution ; in the meantime , however , we again find ourselves having to say ' no ' to a Council proposal , which is identical to the previous one , above all because , in this proposal , not the slightest account has been taken of what has happened in Parliament , that is of the broad consensus which , at first reading , rejected any possibility of extending the ecopoints system beyond the normal expiry date fixed for 31 December this year .
On that occasion , the European Parliament once again condemned the infringement of the basic principle of the free movement of goods , while specifying not unreasonable procedures for guaranteeing transit and providing adequate protection for the environment .
We are familiar with all the technical proposals .
However , while we are here trying to reach a difficult agreement on ecopoints , what is the Governor of North Tyrol planning ?
He is inventing a rule on the basis of which he will ban the transit of lorries of over seven and a half tonnes for a vast range of goods , practically all those in the construction sector , with effect from 1 August on the section between the municipalities of Kundl and Ampass : almost a joke in the debate we are having .
Fortunately , the Commission , this time , at least - congratulations , Commissioner ! - took timely action : it immediately instituted an infringement procedure on 24 June , and we are now waiting to see whether there will be a judgment by the Court of Justice or whether the Tyrol will reconsider and withdraw this measure , which is directly in conflict with Article 38 of the Treaty on the free movement of goods .
However , it is important to act quickly because it is necessary to avoid another type of damage in addition to environmental damage : economic loss , which is detrimental to the interests of all haulage contractors , many of which have actually gone bankrupt in the meantime .
I live in the region immediately on the other side of the Brenner Pass , and we always wonder how on earth the Austrians can presume to command this enormous respect .
Why is it , seeing as we suffer just as much damage , that it has never occurred to any of us to invent ecopoints or strange things of that nature ?
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Jarzembowski , we may not hold the higher moral ground , but we do have higher mountains .
We Austrians are not asking for a solution for the coming decades ...
... but we are , quite simply , asking for a very brief transitional period until such time as the Europe-wide solution is in place , one which will , once and for all , cover the Alps as a whole .
This is not about Austria ; this is about the Alps .
As an Austrian , I can say that we are very proud of what we have achieved where the environment is concerned .
We have a high level of awareness where the protection of the environment is concerned , and , with the possible exception of Switzerland , no other country in Europe lives in and with mountains to such a degree .
To quote our national anthem , we are ' a land of mountains , a land of valleys ' .
We live with mountains ; they are part of our soul , and we cannot live without them .
Please do not make life hell for the people who have lived on their farms in the mountain valleys for centuries .
Do not rob these people of their homeland !
The Alps belong to us all , so stop thinking only of your own countries , and think , instead , in European terms .
Remember that the Alps are our common possession , and that we want to protect them for the benefit of all .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for thinking in pan-European terms , and I implore my fellow-Members of this House to do as the Council has done ; only a short space of time is involved .
And , Mr Jarzembowski , all our mountains are topped by crosses , and , although I am seventy years old , I still keep going up them , and the next time I do I will say the Our Father for you , in the hope that the Holy Ghost will enlighten you .
( Vigorous applause )
. ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to say to the Austrian Members that we all understand their problem .
It is a political problem , a real problem and the proof is that we are discussing this initiative , which is an initiative specifically designed for Austria .
It represents an Austrian exception .
Secondly , I regret that Mrs Echerer has left , since she was talking about objective data ...
I would like to give a figure so that there is no mistake : emissions due to lorries which are subject to the ecopoints restriction have been reduced by 60 % .
It is not relevant that the measurements of the emissions , which do not just relate to these lorries , but also to lorries from third countries outside the European Union and private cars and Austrian cars and lorries circulating within Austria , give a different result .
In any case , emissions from lorries subject to the ecopoints restriction have been reduced by 60 % .
This is the reality and we cannot allow a situation where European Union lorries are unable to travel because third-country lorries with very high emissions are travelling and they , nevertheless , travel through Austria .
The commitment in relation to European lorries has been fulfilled .
Thirdly , we have seen once again how difficult it is to reach a consensus .
In my opinion , we must achieve one whatever the cost .
The Commission is prepared to demonstrate all the necessary flexibility and will continue trying to reach a consensus in relation to the various elements on the table , which are the interservice discussion and the modification of the ' Eurovignette ' Directive which will perhaps contribute to resolving this problem .
Mr President , I just wanted to clarify something for Mr Jarzembowski 's information .
The Austrian Government does not reject the proposals elaborated by Mrs Peijs ; I can say that , even though I am not close to the Minister .
I just wanted to clarify that .
That is all .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be at 12 noon tomorrow .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0221 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the common position of the Council with a view to adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to air passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights ( 15855 / 1 / 2002 - C5-0136 / 2003 - 2001 / 0305 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Giorgio Lisi ) .
.
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to congratulate Mr Lisi , the rapporteur , on his excellent work and , in particular , on the very constructive compromise amendments he has proposed on some of the most controversial issues , which I hope will allow us to achieve a positive result in the conciliation procedure .
I am delighted that Parliament largely accepts the Council 's common position , since it is a balanced text which has the objective of protecting passengers without , as a result , forgetting the interests of the industry , an industry which we know is not experiencing the best of times .
The Commission therefore supported the common position , although we would have preferred higher compensation sums , as the honourable Members are well aware .
Fortunately , Parliament is not proposing a reduction of this compensation since we believe they are at the minimum level necessary to provide air companies with the incentive to seek volunteers rather than directly preventing passengers from boarding against their will .
I would like to inform you that the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 8 , 10 and 11 , relating to cancellations and delays , which simplify the text and eliminate possible application problems while at the same time offering passengers a global level of protection similar to that contained in the common position .
Will also accept Amendments Nos 12 and 14 , which contribute to increasing the clarity and coherence of the text by harmonising the kilometre bands , as well as No 13 in part , and Nos 16 , 19 and 20 .
We cannot , however , accept Amendments Nos 1 to 7 , 9 , 15 , 17 , 18 and 21 .
Specifically , I would like to say that Amendment No 1 and Amendment No 9 would mean excluding passengers on package tours from the scope of the regulation .
The directive on package tourism does not offer this level of protection and to exclude package tours would lead to two different levels of protection for passengers who are facing the same difficulties and who might well be sitting next to each other .
It would be difficult to explain this to the citizens and to consumers .
In summary , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that , apart from the issue of package tours , Parliament and the Council largely share the same points of view .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Lisi for the work he has done and for having achieved these compromise amendments , which I believe will mean that this conciliation can be completed quickly .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all aware that overbookings , cancellations and delays are particularly frequent occurrences in the summer months that lie before us , and so the news we convey will be understood by all .
It is that , in future , passengers will have greater legal certainty .
When these things happen , they will get substantially better assistance and twice as much by way of compensation , not only on regular services but also on charter flights and in respect of various services offered by travel operators .
It is , unfortunately , only next summer that this good news for passengers will be for real .
While this is , on the one hand , attributable to the difficult situation in which airlines currently find themselves , it also represents an opportunity - an opportunity to supply all passengers , in good time , with comprehensive information , comparable , for example , to the charter of passengers ' rights displayed at all airports .
Perhaps the airlines will get together and set up a desk at each airport , one that would be readily recognisable and at which passengers could make claims .
After all , the best laws are of no use if they are not known about and if they cannot be implemented in a consumer-friendly way .
We are grateful to the rapporteur for the work he has done .
He has always sought compromise , and has worked well with all the political groups .
We nonetheless have two points of disagreement with him .
One has to do with package flights , where it is not quite clear what he really wants .
We are convinced that they do not belong in the regulation , as they are covered by their own directive .
The second has to do with how compensation for cancellations is to be handled , where we will endorse the Council 's approach , which is more consumer-friendly than what the rapporteur has proposed .
The amount paid by way of compensation should depend on the time of notification and on the extent to which the alternative flights offered differ from the original travel contract .
What might the side-effects of the regulation be ?
The best thing would of course be if the cases described were to be drastically reduced in future .
If they are caused by unforeseen circumstances , additional competition between airlines might help to make them more user-friendly .
This might also mean that , in addition to the areas already referred to , indicators could also show the reliability of baggage handling and the subjective perceptions of the quality of the service that the airlines provide .
For that reason , there is a need in Europe for a ranking of user-friendliness , such as exists in the USA .
As a number of Members have said , it is indeed the case that we could do with comparable rules for all carriers , but the fact that we have not yet been able to come up with rules for other carriers is not a reason for dispensing with them in air travel .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , better passenger protection is an issue particularly close to my heart .
Nevertheless , I have had considerable reservations about this proposal for a long time now .
I have endeavoured to translate these into amendments , both now and at first reading .
It does indeed signify a great improvement for the European air passenger , but this is not the whole story .
I do not think that it wins any prizes as a model for clear legislation .
The thing that causes me great concern is that the whole aviation sector is being lumped together .
No account is taken of the differences and the business practices of the various aviation niches in the European market .
Line carriers , regional airlines , tour operators and low-cost airlines are all boxed together .
In addition , I find it particularly regrettable that the European Commission has not carried out any serious feasibility study into the implications of the measures to be introduced .
This is very strange given that the administrative burden will be enormous .
As a Liberal , I am very much in favour of liberalisation of the internal market .
Most of the companies participating in this are low-cost carriers , and it is precisely these that this regime will probably hit the hardest .
Passengers do not deserve that - as it is they that will ultimately foot the bill .
The sum of compensation ought to be proportional to the final amount paid for the ticket .
Compensation must be paid where flights are cancelled .
The extent seems to me to be particularly limited : only 10 % of cancelled fights are eligible for compensation in actual fact .
I hope that we will be able to give consumers crystal-clear information , so that they know who is responsible for which compensation .
In the event of flight cancellations , passengers have the right to know when they are entitled to compensation and when they are not .
That is my main objection at the moment .
Anyone who has been paying attention in the House this week will be aware that MEPs are gradually joining the ranks of those with expertise on flight cancellations , long delays , overbooking etc. on the basis of first-hand experience .
Many passengers find themselves in confrontation with the system , and that is what is making them fed up .
Each year , in Europe alone , 250 000 people are victims of overbooking .
That is no longer acceptable , however .
In future , the loss will be subject to compensation not only in the event of denied boarding , but also in the case of cancellation and long delays , and we think that this is a very good thing .
It is even more important , however , that passengers can feel assured of their flight , and the contributions must therefore be sufficiently high to act as an incentive for companies to opt for good service instead of compensation .
We want all of this to apply not only to scheduled flights , but also to ' non-scheduled ' flights .
Compensation does not apply in the case of force majeure .
Unfortunately , we find this a very vague concept .
We would have liked to link it to a definition , for example by the Court of Justice of the European Communities , so as to give it more concrete substance .
Invoking force majeure must not , after all , be a convenient way of abandoning passengers to their fate without compensation .
Of course , passengers would often consider it more important that a solution be found than compensation be paid .
In fact , similar rules should apply to all providers of transport services , then we would see a great deal fewer dissatisfied passengers on public transport .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , whilst I would very much like to express thanks to our rapporteur , Mr Lisi , for the report that he has presented , there are two problem areas that I do not want to neglect to mention .

Firstly , I thank God that the passengers are not going to have to bear the brunt of the great disputes that I can foresee , on the basis of the current rules , when it comes to defining whether an airline should or should not bear responsibility for a delay .
Early this evening , we discussed the Single European Sky .
If there are problems with the infrastructure , we are going to have disputes between the airlines , the air traffic controllers and also the companies that manage airports .
I hope that we will come up with some workable solutions .
Thank God this is not the passengers ' problem , but what I can see coming is that it will be a major problem for us .
Secondly , I would like to mention package tours and tour operators .
Ever since 1990 , these have been covered by a relevant directive , which offers consumers comprehensive protection , and the question arises of whether or not somebody who has booked not merely a flight , but also , and at the same time , a holiday trip , overnight stays or rooms in a hotel , needs additional protection .
I take the view that they do not need it , and I am glad that there is support for this position in this House .
Having tidied up the rules thirteen years ago , we do not need to add to them now .
Let me urge you , Commissioner , to take our experience of this lawmaking process as the basis for getting to grips with the international agreement on delays on railways , which is a disaster in terms of its practical application and is also appallingly badly transposed in the Member States , and to propose European rules for compensation payments when trains are delayed .
This is where action is urgently needed !
Mr President , this new regulation is - as has been said - very important for passengers .
It is very much awaited too , as the fierce competition between companies means the quality of services is still , it has to be said , a cause for considerable criticism .
I understand that this is not about over-regulating , but providing a clear framework for dealing with claims and compensation , because passengers are generally ill-informed of their rights in relation to powerful and influential companies , and I support the many speakers who have expressed that point of view .
I also know that those same companies are going through a difficult period , particularly since 11 September 2001 .
However , I would like to ask one or two questions on the problem of refusing boarding .
Overbooking is a more correct term , even if it is not very French , because it describes the actual cause , or even the strategy of the companies in some cases , and not just the consequence .
But that is a semantic aside .
During the plenary debate at first reading , the Commission stated that this overbooking was a marginal phenomenon compared with the general flow of air passengers .
I would like to know whether we are really certain of that .
The Commission says it has figures close to 250 000 passengers refused in 1999 , that is , 1.1 per thousand .
I am simply wondering about the reliability of these statistics as they are , I suppose , provided by the companies themselves .
The reason I am asking these questions is that I had a problem less than a month ago on a Nice to Brussels flight with SN Brussels Airlines .
Without going into details , as this is not the place , there were six of us on the flight - a regular flight - who were overbooked , while my husband and my 7-year old son , who had the same tickets and booked at the same time with the same agency , boarded the plane .
One case among 250 000 others , I imagine .
That this is a company strategy - and , of course , it is not the only company to do this - was confirmed to me by the ground staff at the airport and by many consumer associations .
I am therefore not so certain that this phenomenon is as marginal as that and I can only welcome , like other speakers before me , the increase , in this new regulation , in the protection of passengers ' rights .
The regulation under consideration aims to protect air passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights .
The proposal we are debating , however , does not fully comply with that objective , and the amendments tabled weaken the Council common position , which was already , in some ways , a retrograde step in relation to the Commission 's proposal .
We are aware of the transitory problems currently being experienced by air carriers , and for that reason we feel we must find a balanced solution .
We do not feel , however , that those problems justify excluding passengers on package tours from the scope of the protection provided by this regulation , or reducing the protection offered them in the event of cancellation of flights , or removing the opportunity for passengers to exercise their right to reimbursement or re-routing in the event of long delay of flights .
We realise that there are ' extraordinary circumstances ' under which one may be led to conclude that air carriers are not always responsible for delayed or cancelled flights .
Such ' circumstances ' , however , should be specifically limited to meteorological or safety problems , so as to prevent passengers ' interests being harmed for purely economic or commercial reasons .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0220 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the Council common position with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation on the granting of Community financial assistance to improve the environmental performance of the freight transport system ( ' Marco Polo Programme ' ) ( 5327 / 1 / 2003 - C5-0225 / 2003 - 2002 / 0038 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Philip Charles Bradbourn ) .
.
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to express my gratitude for the work of the rapporteur , Mr Bradbourn , and for the speech by Mr Dover , who is replacing the rapporteur for this presentation to plenary .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like , in general , to thank Parliament for its constructive attitude , which , thanks to a tripartite and informal meeting which took place last November , has allowed us to reach an agreement which will mean that we can implement the Marco Polo programme quickly with a contribution of EUR 75 million in four years .
This project must facilitate the development of intermodality within the European Union .
Intermodality is absolutely essential if we want to make our transport systems more effective and efficient .
Intermodality consists of overcoming the unimodal approach to transport and taking account of all the different systems and modes in order to optimise the resources and possibilities we have within the European Union in order to achieve efficient transport .
Thanks to this programme we will be able to finance , amongst other things , the first sea motorway projects , which are already under way with agreements between Italy , France and Spain in the western Mediterranean area , and other projects of this nature in the Atlantic area , together with other projects relating to the combination of inland waterways and rail transport and , finally , also of sea and road transport of course .
I would like once again to express my thanks for the work done .
I believe it is a good text , that we have achieved a reasonable and balanced result and what we now need to do is to promote , through this and all the other measures , a competitive and efficient transport system which is at the service of economic efficiency and the development of growth .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is time for support under the Marco Polo instrument to be made available to European actors in the field of freight transport ; the sense of urgency with which this is awaited is demonstrated by the large number of applications submitted in response to what was a small-scale announcement .
By precisely targeting specific objects of assistance , the support programme aims to bring about the transfer of goods from the roads to more environmentally friendly means of transport .
As part of this project to transfer traffic , for example , it was possible to give support to a barge service taking cargo to the Czech Republic from Magdeburg or from Hamburg .
The catalyst actions call for particularly creative responses to structural obstacles .
In my view , they should trigger huge demand , above all in rail transport , where - as is well known - the obstacles are numerous .
This means that Marco Polo is a good addition to the railway packages that we have introduced .
In view of the urgent need for cross-border consultation on common priorities for the removal of obstacles , I could well imagine the third area for support - common learning actions - including the corridor conferences that Parliament has been demanding for so long .
The fact that there is demand from so many quarters shows , of course , that the money will not be sufficient , and nor are we likely to achieve the objective of stabilising the 1998 modal split .
It is fortunate that our request , that projects from the future Member States be included already , has been complied with .
One does not have to be a prophet to be able to foresee the re-emergence of the issues of environmental compatibility and sustainability on the transport policy agenda at the time of the forthcoming elections .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Bradbourn , on behalf of my group , for drafting this report so excellently and with such resolve .
There is a vital need to reduce congestion and improve the freight transport system , especially from the point of view of the environment , as the volume of traffic grows .
EU enlargement will also bring new challenges , when transportation routes get longer .
Our group supports the Marco Polo programme and is satisfied with the Council 's common position .
The EU can bring added value by supporting innovative and new technology projects .
The aim must be to switch from the forms of transport that cause the most pollution to the other most environmentally friendly forms .
No form of transport , however , should be excluded from the programme .
A diverse range of transport should also be involved , and that could include road transport too .
In my opinion , it is important that , along with the new actions , we are able to support the improvement of existing work .
Improvements may often be achieved here through a more efficient cost-benefit ratio rather than by embarking on an entirely new project .
By concentrating on just new projects the danger of competition distortions in relation to the old measures is an obvious one .
It has been agreed in the common position that minimum thresholds should be halved regarding all categories of action .
That would also enable the realisation of innovative projects jointly undertaken by smaller companies , such as SMEs .
The programme 's budget is quite modest and the objective very ambitious .
I think it is important , however , that the regulation is now approved and that the first projects are got under way by the autumn .
In the longer term it is to be hoped that Marco Polo will prove worthwhile and acquire additional financing .
In addition we have to explore opportunities to increase financing for important projects that supplement the trans-European transport network .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are dealing today with the Marco Polo programme , aimed at reducing traffic congestion and contributing to a more effective and sustainable transport system .
We are going to vote in favour of the text proposed by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , but we cannot say that we are completely satisfied with it .
Firstly , because the economic contribution we requested has been reduced by the Council of Ministers from EUR 115 million to EUR 75 million , a reduction which we believe is going to prevent us from achieving the objective of transferring the expected total annual increase in international goods transport by road to other alternative modes of transport , and this increase is expected to be in the order of 50 % up until 2010 .
To this end , and according to the data in the White Paper on transport , the railways and ships should absorb an extra 39 % in terms of tonnes of goods per kilometre than it currently does , which when added to its own trend of increase , which is now 29 % , would mean a 68 % total increase in its capacity for traffic , which I do not believe can be financed with the reduced budget .
If , as the Commission points out , with one euro of subsidy 500 tonnes could be transferred , with the EUR 75 million allowed by the Council , 37 500 tonnes per kilometre could be transferred , rather than the 52 250 million tonnes per year by which road transport is expected to increase .
In other words , the objectives of the Marco Polo programme could not be achieved .
Neither are we pleased about the fact that the possibility of funding actions for the reduction and prevention of goods transport by road , without necessarily implying transfer to other modes , has not been included .
We believe it is possible to act during the stages prior to the loading of lorries , for example , by promoting a more compact form of packaging of goods so that they take up less space and require fewer lorries .
And finally , although this may be the subject of a different proposal , we believe that it is also necessary to consider reflecting on the current model of production and distribution of goods .
If we truly incorporate , without a single exception , all the external costs of transport , perhaps we will reach the conclusion that we should reconsider our theory of economy of scale in production and of the benefits of its concentration .
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be at 12 noon tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , not always does the Commission make use of its opportunities to comply with the demands of the overwhelming majority in the European Parliament to such an extent as it has done with this framework directive .
For this I wish to express my gratitude to the Commission , but also to the rapporteur , Mr Vermeer , for his report , which helps to clarify the substance of the matter .
If we who sit in this Parliament want people to carry on believing in us and trusting us , then we should stand by the demands we made with reference to the commitment made by the European , Japanese and Korean motor industries and not make new ones over and above them .
Now that we have the framework directive that we demanded at that time , we have the legal certainty that we called for , and we will continue to have an influence on any further significant development , while , at the same time giving the motor industry the time and technical resources that it needs to get things done .
We are , moreover , allowing it some leeway when it comes to researching innovative measures of active and passive safety that can be even more effective and efficient .
At the end of the day , this is about protecting people and not just reducing the consequences of accidents , but preventing them , and this is not just about using certain technologies and procedures - expensive and developed with the best of intentions though these may be .
We will thereby be being particularly responsive to the public interest .
Right up to the last moment , there was dispute about whether the EEVC 's four test procedures should be prescribed by law as the sole solution .
There is no doubt that , even by today 's standards , these tests appear to be the most effective and the most cost-efficient , as well as to be the only ones available , but this is where criticism has to start .
It would seem that a development has been missed out on , as these tests concern themselves more with the protection of vehicles ' occupants than with that of road users put at risk by the vehicles .
Even consumers have a one-sided awareness of these things .
They are increasing willing to pay for their safety as vehicle users , but demonstrably less willing to spend more on protecting pedestrians and the users of bicycles , wheelchairs and skateboards .
This has to be the starting-point for a rethink , and one might well be sparked off , and accompanied , by a European campaign .
We in this House must neither stand in the way of the EEVC tests being further developed on the basis of practice , nor fundamentally reject the development of alternative procedures that offer at least as much protection .
For example , in other , very sensitive , areas such as air and space travel , methods of virtual simulation came in a long time ago .
Why , in future , should not such testing methods , and others like them - for we are talking about the post-2010 period - not bring even more safety ?
Let us , by an overwhelming majority , secure the speedy implementation of the directive and thereby save human lives !
Mr President , I am pleased that my turn to speak has come before midnight this time - yesterday it was quarter past midnight .
This directive relates to the protection of vulnerable road users in the event of a collision with a motor vehicle .
It brings to a conclusion many years ' debate regarding the necessity and usefulness of legal provisions on passive protection .
Although the result is unremarkable for balance between the benefits to society and industry , it is probably the best that can be hoped for at this moment in time .
From that point of view , we support this proposal .
It is now important to see to it that the agreements enter into force as soon as possible .
That is not my last word on the matter .
The development of systems that promote safety does not stand still .
We will also need to indicate a direction for the future .
In that context , I wish to make three remarks .
Firstly , the proposal applies to a limited part of motor-vehicle categories M1 and N1 .
If the effect is to be maximised , the scope needs to be extended .
The Commission should examine the conditions under which the scope can be extended to all the vehicles in categories M1 and N1 .
Secondly , during discussions on this proposal , attention shifted from purely passive measures to both passive and active measures .
We support this approach , but we are of the opinion that it is necessary to impose quality requirements on active systems , too .
It should not be the case that passive systems meeting more stringent requirements are supplanted by active systems which are not subject to a single European quality requirement .
Thirdly , the attention to active measures must not delay the entry into force of the requirements for passive measures .
As has already been said , the results regarding passive safety were hard-won .
Society will benefit from the quickest possible implementation of these , therefore .
Holding a debate on active systems would not be conducive to this .
Finally , our thanks to Mr Vermeer for the energy and commitment with which he has launched himself into this dossier .
You can tell your constituents that you started speaking on Wednesday and were so keen that you did not finish until Thursday !
The debate is closed .
The vote will be at 12 noon tomorrow .
( The sitting closed at midnight )
. ( FR ) The common position is satisfactory with regard to the listing of the ingredients present in foodstuffs , with one exception .
Where processing aids are concerned , it needs to be revised .
The common position is , in effect , completely disproportionate in requiring all the substances used in the manufacturing process to be displayed on the labels .
Especially where no traces of these substances are left in the finished product .
This is the case of renowned beverages on which entire regions depend for their livelihood , such as beer and wine , which could thus be labelled as containing egg and fish derivatives .
It is enough to ruin the reputation of high-quality beverages which have been consumed for centuries without any risk of harmful effects .
The amendments tabled , which are along the same lines as those we tabled for the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , require these processing aids to be subject to specific scientific tests providing evidence of their allergenic effects .
For the time being , nothing has been proven - it is all conjecture .
We must therefore wait for the first results before making the labelling of processing aids mandatory .
We are in favour of transparency to inform consumers of the ingredients in products , but we are opposed to over-labelling , which would be disastrous for the agrifood chains which are vital for France and many other countries .
Thank you Mr Staes .
I would like to express our full sympathy for Dr Erkel 's father .
ECB 2002 annual report
The next item is the report ( A5-0237 / 2003 ) by Hans Blokland , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the 2002 Annual Report of the European Central Bank ( I5-0012 / 2003 C5-0238 / 2003 2003 / 2102 ( INI ) ) .
It is particularly appropriate that we welcome to the House this morning Mr Duisenberg , President of the European Central Bank .
He is the first President of the European Central Bank , and it may well be his last visit to Parliament in that capacity .
So , President , you are particularly welcome .
Many thanks , Mr President .
Mr President of the European Central Bank , ladies and gentlemen .
Mr Duisenberg , I have been reading your biography in recent weeks and have found it very enjoyable and interesting .
The book begins with a beautifully written preface describing the tough negotiations that preceded your appointment as the first President of the Central Bank .
They were difficult negotiations that were to lay the foundations of a stringent policy aimed at stabilising the euro .
If one thing became clear , however , it was that you set your very own course for the European Central Bank , in which political views did not play a role .
It is an ironic twist of fate , then , that the very country that found it hard to accept your nomination for longer than four years , asked a few months ago whether you would like to stay on a little longer .
Mr Duisenberg , your last annual report has come out in a period in which the growth of the European economy has stagnated .
The last quarter saw zero growth .
Some Member States are thus officially in recession , and that means that the economy has contracted for the second consecutive quarter .
This puts the European Union in a worrying situation .
The measures taken by the Union and the Member States have thus proved unable to turn the economic tide in the short term , and it is in this very period that we are discussing the fifth annual report of the European Central Bank .
It is an annual report about a very eventful year ; a year in which citizens had their first chance to show their confidence in the euro ; and a year which was preceded by higher expectations as regards economic recovery following the September 11 attacks .
Many of those expectations were not realised .
New threats slowed down the pace of recovery , and the euro is yet to inspire great confidence in citizens .
The fact that 300 million inhabitants of the euro zone are making full use of the new currency does not prove anything except that they have no real alternative : they have to use it , and no further political conclusions can be drawn from this .
In a climate of uncertainty such as this , it is not surprising that the ECB has its work cut out if it is to fulfil the objective of stability .
It is not only the responsibility of the ECB , however , but also of the Member States ; after all , it is their budgetary policy that lays the foundations for a stable euro .
I should like to devote attention to a few further points in this debate .
First of all , it is important that we make our position known succinctly in the form of a resolution .
Now is not the time to reveal all of our political desires for change .
The most important thing , in this economically less prosperous time , is that Parliament make clear that it supports a policy that has stability as its aim .
Stability of the currency , and hopefully a return to economic growth in the short term , are necessary in order to restore the confidence of manufacturers and consumers and revive the economy .
The number of new political desires contained in the resolution is therefore limited .
In addition , it would be ill-advised to start tampering with the ECB 's objectives already .
The resolution emphasises - incidentally following on from earlier resolutions - that price stability is , and must remain , the chief objective of the ECB .
New objectives , such as the promotion of economic growth and other tasks , are subordinate to this .
An important argument for this relates to the short history of the Bank .
To date , the Bank has not been confronted with a Europe-wide recession ; it has , however , met with repeated criticism of its policy .
For example , in times of economic prosperity , there was a great deal of criticism when the exchange rate of the euro depreciated , and also now , when it is rising - even though the exchange rate of the euro against the dollar is not an aim in itself .
What is important is monetary stability within the euro zone itself , and this is the ECB 's responsibility .
In brief , a real acid test is yet to come .
The Bank has yet to prove its ability to fulfil the objective of price stability in times of recession , too , using the existing instruments .
In addition to this , inflation has been relatively high up to now , and real wages are increasing sharply despite the increase in unemployment , which indicates continuing structural rigidities in the labour markets .
I should like to emphasise that it is important for precisely that price stability - to which consumer confidence is inextricably linked - that the ECB be allowed to continue to do its work independently of politics .
Parliament therefore bears some of the responsibility for creating the political preconditions for this by means of a resolution .
Finally , Mr Duisenberg , on the back cover of your biography there is a photograph of you evidently enjoying your hobby , fishing .
I wish you a good catch , and I also wish you good health and enjoyment of the finer things in life in the years to come .
I am sure we all agree with your remarks , Mr Blokland .
.
( ES ) Mr President , first of all , I wish to thank Mr Blokland for his report , which addresses all aspects of the European Central Bank 's annual report .
The Commission is pleased to see Parliament undertaking this activity , which contributes to our joint efforts to improve the framework of macroeconomic policy in the Union and , especially , in the Eurozone .
The report clearly pursues the approach adopted in previous years and contains numerous aspects with which the Commission fully agrees .
There is no doubt that the euro has been an enormous success and we must all thank the European Central Bank for the hard work it has carried out to achieve this .
The Commission also considers that the Central Bank has done an excellent job in recent years with regard to its basic task , which is to ensure price stability , and we also share the concerns at the inadequate structural reforms and at the fiscal consolidation that is taking place in Europe .
Nevertheless , my position is rather more circumspect on some points .
Firstly , with regard to the Central Bank 's mandate , the Treaty makes this mandate quite clear : to maintain price stability .
It is true that the Bank is also asked to support the general policies of the Community , but this must be done without undermining the aim of stability .
Mr Blokland 's report appears to suggest a rather different interpretation of the mandate , and this aspect was highlighted by the Commission last month , when the report was debated in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Secondly , the report calls for the Central Bank to take action in other areas for which we do not believe it has a mandate .
It calls on the Bank , for example , to back the denomination of energy supplies and commodities in euros .
On this point , the Commission 's position is the same as the Bank 's in that it should be neutral with regard to the international use of the euro .
Lastly , Mr Blokland 's report assesses the European Central Bank 's management of its budget .
From the formal point of view and without having access to the latest audit report covering 2001 , this assessment might , in our opinion , be somewhat premature .
In any event , I wish to thank him for his comments and say that I am particularly pleased to be here in Parliament , particularly on such a special day , with Mr Duisenberg present .
. Mr President , thank you for your kind words of introduction .
I would also like to thank Mr Blokland for the kind words with which he introduced the resolution which is before you today .
It is indeed a pleasure today despite the fact that it is in all likelihood the last time that I shall be here to introduce the ECB 's Annual Report for 2002 , a year that was marked despite all the incidents you may have found overwhelming in your minds by significant progress on our path towards a more integrated Europe .
In particular , 2002 saw the successful introduction of the euro in its tangible form , as euro banknotes and coins have been swiftly accepted and embraced by the citizens of the euro area .
Moreover , the Heads of State or Government , at their summit meeting in December last year , took the historic decision to invite ten countries to join the European Union as of 1 May 2004 .
At the same time , the environment in which monetary policy was conducted in 2002 was one of considerable uncertainty .
Following the slowdown in economic activity in 2001 , a moderate recovery of real GDP growth in the euro area was recorded at the beginning of 2002 .
However , as the year progressed , the recovery lost momentum , affected by renewed turbulence in financial markets and geopolitical tensions , which had consequences for oil prices and confidence .
Overall , annual real GDP growth in the euro area is estimated to have been only 0.8 % in 2002 , compared with 1.4 % in 2001 .
Despite the subdued pace of real economic growth , inflation remained at 2.3 % on average in 2002 , unchanged from 2001 , and slightly above the European Central Bank 's definition of price stability .
This was partly due to a number of temporary or one-off factors , including higher oil prices , indirect tax increases and adverse weather conditions .
On top of this , there is no denying that there were some effects from the cash changeover .
While the overall impact of the cash changeover on inflation was small , its perceived impact was much greater than its actual impact , probably due to comparatively strong price increases in some specific sectors .
Of greater concern for the medium-term outlook for price stability was the fact that nominal wage growth remained relatively strong despite the weakening of economic activity and a rise in unemployment , while productivity growth remained low .
This development points to persistent structural rigidities in the labour markets of the euro area .
Monetary growth was strong in 2002 .
While this development was partly the result of high volatility in financial markets , which heightened investors ' preference for short-term liquid and less risky financial assets , it also reflected the relatively low interest rates in the euro area in 2002 .
Overall , however , the excess liquidity was not seen to indicate risks to price stability in an environment of subdued economic activity and moderate credit growth .
While some factors pointed to possible upward inflationary pressures at the beginning of the year , later in the year the worsening outlook for economic activity and the sizeable and protracted appreciation of the euro increasingly pointed towards lower inflationary pressures over the medium term .
Against this background , the Governing Council decided to reduce the key ECB interest rates by 50 basis points in December 2002 .
This move was followed in March 2003 by a reduction of 25 basis points and by a further 50 basis point reduction last month , in June 2003 .
These rate cuts provided some counterweight to the various factors having an adverse effect on economic activity and thereby improved the prospects for price stability over the medium term .
With these decisions , the minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations reached 2 % in June 2003 .
Interest rates in the euro area are now at record low levels by historical standards , both in nominal and real terms .
As regards the current outlook for price stability , Eurostat 's flash estimate of annual inflation in the euro area was 2 % for June 2003 .
The appreciation of the euro , which has brought exchange rates to levels close to long-term averages and more in line with economic fundamentals , should contribute to keeping inflationary pressures low .
In addition , in a context of moderate economic recovery , wage growth is expected to remain compatible with the maintenance of price stability .
The strong monetary growth also should not , for the time being , adversely affect the outlook for price stability .
While the outlook for price stability has remained broadly unchanged since our last decision on 5 June 2003 , the Governing Council will continue to monitor carefully all factors which are relevant to its assessment .
Although the outlook for price stability is favourable , having allowed interest rates to fall to historically low levels , monetary policy cannot by itself generate lasting and sustainable growth and employment in the euro area .
Other policy-makers also have to take up their responsibilities .
Part of the weakness in economic growth in the euro area can be linked to a lack of ambition in the areas of both fiscal and structural reforms to further improve the conditions for investment and employment .
I probably cannot emphasise sufficiently the need to speed up the pace of structural reforms in the labour and product markets , given their positive impact on the euro area 's ability to better withstand external shocks , as well as to increase its growth potential .
Fiscal policies should also strive to establish a well-designed consolidation strategy in those countries struggling with increasing fiscal imbalances .
A medium-term , stability-oriented approach for economic policies would eliminate a great deal of the uncertainty currently overshadowing long-term planning and perspectives , which would also have positive effects over the shorter term .
In fact , at present , the situation of subdued economic growth and the stronger external value of the euro make the structural reforms even more necessary .
Let me now turn to some other issues raised in the draft resolution on the ECB 's Annual Report .
I have noted and I welcome that in several important aspects the views expressed in the draft resolution are very similar to those held by the ECB , for instance as regards the need for Member States to respect the Stability and Growth Pact and the importance of honouring their commitments under the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines , in particular , again , with respect to structural reforms .
I also appreciate the fact that your draft resolution welcomes the clarifications of the ECB 's monetary policy strategy which we made public in May of this year .
These clarifications , while reflecting the overall successful experience with the ECB 's monetary policy strategy since its inception , will further foster understanding of the monetary policy of the ECB .
While the European Parliament and the ECB hold similar views on many important issues , some differences in views remain , such as regarding the draft resolution 's suggestion that the ECB should publish the summary minutes and the balance of votes of Governing Council meetings .
For a number of reasons , which I have pointed out on previous occasions before Parliament , we believe that the tools chosen by the ECB to communicate and explain its decisions ensure transparency , are more readily available and better reflect the institutional environment in which the ECB operates .
You will also not be surprised that I cannot share the view that the ECB 's decision-making process might have been delayed by the fact that most Governing Council decisions have so far been taken by consensus .
Indeed , the Governing Council has taken its decisions in a timely manner , responding appropriately to changing economic conditions whenever required .
The draft resolution also refers to the Beige Book of the Federal Reserve System as being a benchmark for country-by-country reviews to be conducted by the Eurosystem .
Let me point out that the national central banks within the Eurosystem regularly monitor and analyse macroeconomic , fiscal as well as structural developments in their respective countries , publishing their findings in their monthly , quarterly or annual reports .
These analyses clearly enhance our understanding of euro area developments .
However , given its euro area focus , it is natural for the European Central Bank to pay greater attention to the euro area perspective in its explanations of the single monetary policy .
As mentioned at the beginning of my remarks , we are currently experiencing truly historic developments .
The dream of a united Europe stretching beyond former post-war rifts is about to become reality .
Although major challenges lie ahead , as many of the acceding countries are still developing into fully-fledged market economies , I believe that the signing of the Accession Treaty at the Athens summit in April testified to our joint belief in an integrated Europe .
The clear endorsement of the Treaty in the national referenda that have already taken place in a number of acceding countries provides evidence of this commitment .
It goes without saying that an enlarged European Union will require a number of adaptations in the working procedures and the internal functioning of European institutions and bodies , including a reform of the voting modalities of the Governing Council of the ECB .
I am well aware of the views that the European Parliament has expressed in this regard , but let me again point out that the Nice Treaty set clear conditions and limits within which our reform proposal had to be formulated .
While the adopted changes in the voting modalities are , admittedly , complex , the tried-and-tested principles of the Eurosystem constitution , in particular the ad personam participation of governors and the ' one member , one vote ' principle for the members exercising a voting right , have been kept fully intact .
This will ensure that , also in a significantly enlarged euro area in the future , the Governing Council will maintain its capacity for timely and efficient decision-making .
Upon accession , the new Member States will join Economic and Monetary Union with the status of ' countries with a derogation ' , and their central banks will immediately become part of the European System of Central Banks .
At a later stage , these central banks will become part of the Eurosystem , once their respective countries have fulfilled the convergence criteria for adopting the euro .
A key priority of the European Central Bank is to have in place the necessary technical and institutional infrastructure to ensure an orderly enlargement of the European System of Central Banks and , later on , of the Eurosystem .
An interesting foretaste of the new , larger ESCB was provided by the General Council meeting last week where , for the first time , the governors of the acceding countries ' central banks participated as observers in a meeting of the General Council of the ECB .
With this look towards the future , I should like to conclude my statement .
This , indeed , will be the last time that I have the opportunity to present to you the Annual Report of the European Central Bank , which I have had the honour and the privilege to preside over for the last five years .
Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and its chairman , Mrs Randzio-Plath , for the cooperation and cordial relations that we have maintained .
Mr Duisenberg , I am sure I speak for every Member in the House in wishing you all the best for the future .
We can all recognise the fact that you are passing on a new but highly respected institution , a situation largely due to the contribution that you personally have made to the foundation of the European Central Bank .
We thank you very much for your presence today and for all the work you have done on behalf of all of us in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like , if I may , to wish Mr Duisenberg success in the future that is on a par with all that he has managed to achieve in the European Central Bank .
I will not wish you good luck in your fishing , Mr Duisenberg , because , as an Italian from the south of Italy , I am afraid that it might bring you bad luck .
I would also like to congratulate Mr Blokland , whose report focuses on the responsibilities of the European Central Bank in Europe and the responsibilities that it will have to take on with a view to the imminent entry of the ten new countries into the Union .
According to the terms of the Treaties , the primary goal of the European Central Bank is to define monetary policy in Europe and to ensure price stability through monetary policy .
Personally , I am convinced that , irrespective of this principal responsibility , the European Central Bank must play a more effective role in the economy , using moral suasion methods , not least , which have yielded surprisingly successful results in the field of bank supervision .
I tabled an amendment , which was not accepted in committee , which sought to provide a more detailed , comprehensive definition of the Pact .
It would have read as follows : a uniform interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact must be achieved in order to avoid undermining the credibility of the euro area and thus the effectiveness of its monetary policy ; considers that the European Central Bank must confirm to the Commission that the Pact is being implemented with sufficient flexibility as to promote growth .
Indeed , the Pact was created not just with a view to achieving stability but also in order to boost growth to acceptable levels .
Growth as a key objective of the Pact can also be achieved through investment in large-scale work and financial undertakings in the field of research , outside public spending .
Of course , this option must not become an excuse for abandoning the rigour of public finances and must be supported by a totally sustainable fiscal policy , as implemented so successfully in the United Kingdom .
The recently approved draft Constitution includes provisions governing the European monetary institutions , or rather , the role of the ECB and the national central banks and their sensitive relationship .
Over this period , some national central banks have feared radical resizing with subsequent centralisation of power in Frankfurt .
They did not want the European Central Bank to become a fully-fledged institution on the grounds that this would jeopardise the independence of the monetary institution , but I am sure this was just an excuse .
This deadlock between the European Central Bank and the national central banks has caused confusion , and it is only in Article 29 ( 3 ) that we have a comprehensive definition : the European Central Bank shall have legal personality .
Looking at the other decisions made in this field , it has to be said that , in Europe and Parliament , as elsewhere , the compromise approach has taken root which often , far from bringing about convergence of differing positions , generates , in many cases , uncertainty and confusion regarding the matter in question .
As a result of these compromises , a complicated method of voting has been decided on for the members of the Bank 's Governing Council , the printing of banknotes has been split willy-nilly between the different monetary institutions , and , above all , a decentralised system has been preserved which will become overcomplicated and ineffective with eastward enlargement .
To sum up , over and above the Convention 's decisions , we need to ask ourselves whether , in order to take into due account the guiding role of the European Central Bank and the interests of the individual national central banks , we should not be taking the path of dividing up the responsibilities between centre and periphery , with consequent specialisation of the national central banks , which would have to supervise minor financial institutions too .
I hope that many of these points will be clarified at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , Mr Duisenberg , the annual debate in this House on the Annual Report of the European Central Bank , just like the quarterly Monetary Dialogue , always provides us with an opportunity not only to take stock but also to examine the outlook .
Against this background it is therefore especially pleasing to note that no one disputes the successes achieved in establishing the issuing bank , introducing the notes and coins , and also in combating inflation .
I would also like to thank you very sincerely for your cooperation and for the contribution you have made .
The fact that 75 % of Europe 's citizens are now in favour of the euro must certainly be due in part to your work and your actions .
We will of course do everything we can to win over the remaining 25 % , and we hope that the three Member States still outside the euro area will soon be part of European monetary union .
Although interest rate levels are at an historically low level in Europe , I find myself wondering , when I consider the European Central Bank 's monetary policy , about the appropriateness of those rates , given our failure to achieve our growth potential and the price stability guaranteed for the foreseeable future .
That is why I ask myself if our monetary policy strategy is the optimum one .
The bank itself has of course investigated to what extent it can be satisfied with its own monetary policy strategy , and I do indeed see that as being very helpful .
However , we as politicians also need to consider at all times whether this monetary policy strategy is optimal not only in terms of monetary policy , but also as regards those aspects of macroeconomic policy that relate to the Lisbon objectives - growth , employment and social cohesion .
I know that does not make your job particularly easy , because there is also room for improvement in the coordination of economic , employment and finance policies .
Nevertheless , I wonder what scope there is for making a further contribution .
The definition of price stability now agreed upon , with a medium-term inflation rate target of under 2 % , if only just , will help here .
But I still believe that our bank of issue has a more rigid definition of price stability than other internationally important central banks .
That is why we need constantly to reflect upon whether a certain change of course would not be appropriate .
I also believe that it is important for us consistently to consider inflation , deflation and how they are defined , especially in view of the risk of deflation .
Even during times of strong economic growth a symmetrical target of 2 % with a range of plus or minus 1 % should certainly be considered .
The ECB must not underestimate the importance of a strategy for low growth and increased employment in the euro area .
Although this is , of course the secondary rather than the primary objective , we still do not as yet have a clear definition .
It is apparent in the current economic situation that incentives for growth are urgently needed and I wish to specifically welcome new investment initiatives and also the support of the European Investment Bank .
I view this initiative very much in the context of structural and fiscal reforms , but such reforms alone will not enable us to achieve the Lisbon objectives .
That is why I believe this to be so important .
You will not be surprised if I refer once again to transparency of monetary policy , because this House has made its views on this very clear over the years .
I still cannot see how it would jeopardise the effectiveness of the bank if summary minutes were to be published .
Nor do I see how it would put the ECB or its independence at risk if the result of weighted votes were to be published without naming names .
To my way of thinking , it would result in greater clarity , more information and it would avoid false reporting .
I have in mind your last press conference and the way it was reported in the British press , which led to much speculation and aggravation on the markets .
We could do something to change that .
Greater transparency prevents inaccurate assessments , which in turn lead to bad investments - something we all wish to avoid .
That is why I think it is important to do still more in this area .
There is also scope for gaining greater public acceptance for the euro , for example by abolishing the 500-euro note or by printing a 1-euro note .
After all , there is a 1-dollar note !
( Applause )

Mr President , President Duisenberg , Commissioner , rapporteur - I congratulate you on a good report - I would like to use this minute and a half to make a few brief points about President Duisenberg 's management of the European Central Bank .
I believe the Bank has been distinguished not so much by the successful operation of introducing the euro as by the line he established on monetary policy .
Over the past few years , he has played a courageous , effective part in safeguarding the independence of monetary policy as a whole as well as that of the Central Bank against repeated attempts on the part of governments and many sections of public opinion to bend monetary policy to the short-term needs of a policy which has been unable to create the necessary conditions for success and economic growth in Europe .
This morning , President Duisenberg said : ' I probably cannot emphasise sufficiently the need to speed up the pace of structural reforms ' .
I hope that , despite the fact that they will be taking over in a climate and a situation in which we would prefer the procedures to be clearer and more transparent , his successor too will be able to focus consistently on the need for structural reform , on the need to safeguard the Stability Pact : this is the way to protect the future generations of Europeans , citizens and taxpayers .
Lastly , President Duisenberg , best wishes for your birthday in a few days ' time .
For the sake of all of us in Parliament , all of us European citizens , I hope that President Duisenberg 's successor will be able to do as good a job as he has .
Mr President , the good name that the European Central Bank ( ECB ) ' s mandate under Mr Duisenberg 's Presidency has earned itself is widely acknowledged , and the conviction with which this institution defends its monetary policy is admirable : it considers that policy to be best suited to revitalising the European economy in the short term .
The recent changes to the Bank 's monetary strategy are , furthermore , uniformly described as very positive . They are believed to constitute real progress .
Indisputably , however , there is no sign of a European economic recovery in the immediate future . Moreover , all the political changes undertaken have been anticipated by the markets and diverted towards uses and balances which can contribute little towards that recovery in the short term .
In fact , it is predicted that Europe 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) growth will reach around 0.7 % in 2003 , and that Europe 's GDP will increase by only 1.6 % in 2004 .
At a stroke , in other words , the ECB is cutting a slice out of its growth predictions equivalent to about 0.9 % of GDP in 2003 , and 0.8 % in 2004 .
Faced with the false dilemma of ' growth or stability ' , the ECB cannot be content with its primary institutional strategy , price stability , and disregard the weaknesses and contradictions of those of its policies directed at other targets , such as economic growth and employment .
Furthermore , national governments , the Commission and the Council cannot , for their part , be satisfied with the low initial level of coordination between their economic policies , or with the merely advisory nature of their general economic policy guidelines .
To return to the Bank , there are also good reasons for believing that mistakes were made in setting the point of departure for monetary policy levels ( an inflation rate of 2 % ) and that these are not in line with the potential growth of the European economy .
The European Central Bank must , therefore , help to find answers and solutions for the following fundamental questions : have the structural reforms carried out in most European economies been sufficient ?
If not , what additional contribution can monetary and fiscal policies make to the fight against the current situation of economic stagnation ?
Are the current monetary policy restrictions and the financial constraints imposed by the Stability and Growth Pact , which the ECB has supported , compatible with the much-needed reform of the European social model , without calling into question its essence and the distinctive role it plays in the context of European development policy ?
Is the current appreciation of the euro entirely in step with the foundations of the European economy ? Is it , moreover , a proactive aid to economic recovery , or could it , on the contrary , set off a severe deflationary trend ?
What contribution can the ECB make to overcome the lack of structural reforms necessary in order to attain the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy ?
Can those objectives be attained within the time limits initially set , given the monetary and fiscal policies which have been developed and the apparent preference of Member States for a minimal level of economic coordination ?
Faced with this economic crisis , the level of responsibility taken by the ECB and the active cooperation needed to weather the storm depend on finding a balance between the various options , and on the effectiveness of the solutions found for the problems that I have just described .
Whilst acknowledging the positive balance-sheet of the Bank 's activities , which the rapporteur , Mr Blokland , does , the European Parliament should , in line with its duties and competences , draw attention to those problems that do exist and urge all the institutions to overcome them .
) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Duisenberg , I would , as coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , like to thank you very sincerely for your work as the first President of the European Central Bank .
On behalf of my group I would like to say that you were the right man at the right time .
You have not only shaped the image of the European Central Bank through your appearance ; you have also shaped it by the sheer force of your personality .
I myself have a three-year-old son and I therefore know how important , how eventful and how demanding the almost daily surprises of the early years of a child 's life are .
The early years of the European Central Bank 's life have been successful ones and you have shouldered your specific responsibilities to our full satisfaction during those first few years .
The introduction of the euro and the introduction of the euro notes and coins went smoothly .
The ECB has made its mark as an independent European international bank .
With a steady hand , you calmly steered our monetary policy on a successful course on the basis of the ECB Statute , building up confidence without being swayed by short-term populism , opportunism and carping .
You demonstrated that for you the long haul was more important than short-term image building .
You also once again sounded a note of warning today when assessing the report .
Those who deliver such warnings need credibility and integrity , and you possess both those qualities .
You have reminded us again today that despite the successes of the European Central Bank , a great many tasks have been agreed as regards the economic policies of the Member States , and as regards our own work , which have not yet been completed .
You also reminded us that structural reforms need to be given high priority in Europe 's economic policy , because they underpin stability and growth ; that fiscal policy needs to provide a stimulus and must be pursued ; and that the Stability and Growth Pact should not be constantly called into question but must flank the ECB Statute by providing the necessary basis for a successful policy of stability and growth .
You have once again reminded us that monetary policy can be no substitute for economic and cyclical policy and a corresponding structure , and our priorities must be adjusted accordingly .
Through your work and that of your colleagues in the ECB , you have averted a number of monetary crises - we only have to think of 11 September and of the Asian and Russian crises .
You have made an excellent job of preparing Europe and the ECB for enlargement , and we have also moved closer together , although there were often times when a little more communication and transparency would have been welcome . Nevertheless , our relationship has become a more open one .
I would like to conclude by saying that as far as I am concerned , I would have been pleased to see you stay for the entire period of office !
Many thanks for your work .

Mr President , Mr Duisenberg , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to add my own thanks to those already expressed to Mr Duisenberg , because , with the support of your colleagues and your committees , he has , over the last few years , managed the introduction of the euro in a way that has won growing support from the public .
My sincere thanks to you for that , Mr Duisenberg .
I have always admired the open and fair way in which you have discussed matters with us here in Parliament .
The arguments we have heard in several speeches today are the same ones that have cropped up again and again in recent years .
I have in mind in particular Mrs Randzio-Plath , who asserted once again today that monetary policy can solve Europe 's problems .
She is mistaken .
Structural and fiscal reforms alone cannot achieve the Lisbon objectives .
In fact , the reverse is true .
Even with a good monetary policy , the Lisbon objectives will not be achievable without structural reforms in the EU Member States .
Mrs Randzio-Plath , we have two responsible experts in monetary policy with us today ; Mr Duisenberg , for whom I have the highest esteem , and Mr Solbes Mira , whom I also regard very highly .
Both of them have their roots in social democracy and are not prepared to accept your proposals .
I would also like to express my sincere thanks for the consistent and reliable monetary policy that has prevailed over the last few years .
That is , however , not the only subject we should mention in relation to the annual report , which is presumably the last one for which Mr Duisenberg will be responsible .
The latest annual report - of which you can be proud , Mr Duisenberg - refers to the euro 's position on the world stage , which it has earned .
The euro has now returned to its previous strength ; we have overcome the crises involving the euro .
We have not put a foot wrong over the last few years .
We have also once again heard that old story about the need for us to have immediate information about the internal decision-making processes of the ECB 's committees . I think that is a mistake too .
It is precisely this cautious assessment process that has guaranteed the internal stability of the euro in recent years while at the same time enhancing its external stability .
That is why it is also my belief that Mr Duisenberg 's well-earned retirement and the appointment of his successor should not involve an arbitrary change in the European Central Bank 's strategy .
You have already changed the inflation range .
It was the right decision not just to aim for the lowest possible inflation target , but to bunch it around 2 % .
We have heard bellyaching from the left of this House that there is a risk of inflation .
That is pure nonsense !
The totally normal adjustment of prices and of competitiveness in the euro area has led to varying inflation rates . The same applies to growth rates as well , of course .
That is the responsibility of the Member States and that is how things should remain in future .
That is why I am pleased that you have adopted this strategy in this way .
It is not the European Central Bank that is responsible for growth in Europe - in any case there are not many further options available in terms of monetary policy .
It is the leaders of the governments , of the majority parties , in the three major Member States : Germany , France and Italy .
Chancellor Schröder , Prime Minister Raffarin and Prime Minister Berlusconi need to carry out structural reforms .
That needs to be our starting point , regardless of the basic political direction .
In the long run , it is only by consistently adhering to the Stability and Growth Pact that we will be able to keep the euro internally and externally stable .
On that note , Mr Duisenberg , I would like to thank you for your excellent cooperation , which has been based on trust , and for your successful period of office , and to wish you all the very best for the future .
. Mr President , first of all let me thank all the Members that have spoken for their good wishes and in particular for their encouragement to the ECB to strictly adhere to the Stability and Growth Pact .
One has to realise that the Stability and Growth Pact is a very welcome additional element in forging our monetary policy .
However , the ECB is not the guardian of the Stablility and Growth Pact ; that is the European Commission .
I can assure you , however , that the ECB has been and always will be squarely behind the European Commission in its endeavours to live up to the conditions of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Mr Andria has referred to the position of the ECB and the ESCB as mentioned in Article 29 of the draft Constitution of the Convention , which will be under discussion in the Intergovernmental Conference as from the middle of October .
May I add one remark ?
In general the ECB welcomes the draft Constitution in so far as its position is concerned .
However , we have one overriding wish for change , concerning the fact that in the current Treaty and in the draft Constitution , the term European System of Central Banks is interpreted with some ambiguity .
Sometimes it is to be understood that it refers to the total of all the central banks participating in the European System of Central Banks . Sometimes it is understood as comprising only the ECB itself and the participating national central banks .
We have pleaded for the inclusion of a reference somewhere to the core concept of Europe 's system of central banks , that is , the Eurosystem .
It is the ECB that is the hub , the participating national central banks are the spokes ; together they form the central banking system of Europe .
We will , when we are asked for an opinion , and we have to be asked for our opinion , urge the Intergovernmental Conference to make a reference somewhere in the text to this concept of the Eurosystem , which is the central bank of the European people , something which up until now has not been mentioned , either in the current Treaty or in the draft Constitution .
Various speakers Mrs Randzio-Plath and also others have expressed some doubts as to whether the current monetary policy stance is optimal .


The last speaker , Mr Langen , even referred to statements made in recent days by some heads of government Mr Schroeder , Mr Raffarin , and Mr Berlusconi calling on the ECB to do more to promote growth in the current circumstances .
Let me be crystal clear on that .
The current monetary policy stance , in the eyes of the Governing Council , with interest rates at 2 % , is regarded as being appropriate in the light of the developments we foresee for the medium-term future .
We expect inflation for the remaining months of this year to hover around this level of 2 % , then early next year , mainly due to base effects , to fall significantly below the 2 % limit and then , later on next year and in 2005 , to climb back somewhat in a direction that will bring it close to 2 % .
That is our aim .
Given this monetary policy stance , which is regarded as appropriate in the light of analysis of the future , in so far as we can make it , one can conclude that monetary policy has played its part in creating the conditions for a resumption of economic growth and growth of employment in the euro area .
We have played our part and it is now the case that governments maybe I sound a little sharp can no longer hide behind the ECB to try to cover up their failure to enact the structural reforms which are so urgently required for Europe .
Is the definition of price stability too rigid ?
I do not believe so .
We recently clarified our definition and our strategy .
We are striving for a rate of inflation of below 2 % but also close to 2 % .
That should be a guarantee to the European people that we are on our guard , not only to fight inflation , but also to fight deflation if it were to emerge .
Let me answer another question clearly .
Mr Santos wondered whether there was a danger that the appreciation of the euro might lead us into a deflationary environment .
The answer is that we do not see that .
We do not expect deflation , not in Europe and not in individual component parts of the euro area .
Deflation is not around the corner .
That is clear .
Is the definition too rigid ?
Let me speak anecdotally .
We define our price stability as a rate of inflation of no more than 2 % .
Let me remind you and give an example .
The Bank of England has inflation targeting , and the Chancellor imposes a target on the Bank of England of 2.5 % inflation , 2.5 % inflation as measured by the retail price index .
Now the Chancellor has announced that probably in September , when he presents his mid-year budget , he will change the definition of the price index into the European one the harmonised index of consumer price inflation .
When he does so , the implication is that the 2.5 % in England will translate into less than 2 % probably between 1.75 % and 2 % in terms of the harmonised index of consumer prices .
On publishing the minutes and being more transparent , I truly believe that there is no central bank in the world which is as transparent about its monetary policy decisions and the backgrounds and analyses leading up to decisions as the European Central Bank .
About an hour after a decision has been taken , we hold a press conference and give all the necessary background and explanations which led us to take that decision and subsequently , in a question-and-answer session , we answer all the questions relating to it .
Some say that if the minutes of those meetings were published there would be less confusion .
May I refer to the decision taken last week by the Federal Reserve System , which immediately produced a press communiqué giving the decisions and stating how the members of the Federal Open Market Committee had voted .
You all know now that has created more confusion than transparency in the markets .
Mr President , I have answered the most pressing questions .
I would like to thank the Members once again for their good wishes , both for the past and for my future .
I should like to say to Mr Karas , who has a three-year-old son , that I have eight grandchildren of about the same age .
They saw me recently on a television programme for children explaining the functioning of the euro and its intricacies .
They called me after the television interview and I asked them if they had understood what I said .
Their answer was : ' Why ?
What 's so special about the euro ?
We don 't know anything else !
What was there to explain ? '
I regard that as one of the greatest successes of the introduction of the euro , that at least for my grandchildren it is nothing special any more .
It is simply their money .
( Applause )
Colleagues , we have had a rather historic debate on the Blokland report this morning , which has turned out to be a tribute to Mr Duisenberg and all he has done on behalf of the European people .
Mr Duisenberg , I think you will recognise that you take the goodwill of this House with you for your future , and that as representatives of the people we speak for the European citizens .
You have brought a huge measure of stability and firm management to the European Central Bank , and you have set it on a good course for the future .
We are deeply grateful to you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0169 / 2003 ) by Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the international role of the euro zone and the first assessment of the introduction of banknotes and coins ( COM ( 2002 ) 747 - 2002 / 2259 ( INI ) ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr President of the European Central Bank , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the report by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which I have the honour of representing , could not have come at a more appropriate time .
This report is based on the one drawn up by the European Commission , assessing the first four years of the euro and also , as has been pointed out , on another report on the use of euro notes and coins .
The euro has been introduced in a very short time , but has proven its solidity and stability .
The European Central Bank and its President , Mr Duisenberg , must be congratulated on the euro 's sound management and we must thank him , in his last appearance in plenary , and extend our best wishes for the future , hoping that he enjoys them in the company of his grandchildren , who have only known the euro as the single currency .
The introduction of the euro , its increasing acceptance and its appreciation towards the dollar , inevitably lead us to consider its role at international level , which is the main theme of the report .
At the Thessaloniki European Council , the President of the European Commission , Romano Prodi , stated that working on the external representation of the euro is absolutely crucial .
The report attempts to respond to this need articulated by President Prodi , and proposes principally that the euro should have a single representation in the international financial institutions , and also that this representation should be enhanced at international level .
The report does not go further , because we believe that there must be a broad consensus and , obviously , the relevant arrangements in line with this principle must be studied and adopted in the appropriate international forums .
There is a suggestion , however , made by Mrs Peijs , to be specific , before her appointment as minister in the new Dutch government , which is to use the type of post that has already been adopted and proposed by the European Convention , of a European Minister for External Affairs .
The same could apply to a Minister for European Economic and Monetary Affairs who would , at international level , represent the euro on the basis of a formula contained in a proposal from Ecofin , which the Commission has obviously accepted .
This ' Mr Euro ' or ' Ms Euro ' would also hold the post of Vice-President of the European Commission .
I repeat that this is a suggestion , for a post that has already been adopted and proposed in the Convention , and which appears to be accepted at political level , even by the European Council itself and we therefore believe it to be a valid alternative .
In an article that appeared recently in the Financial Times , Martin Wolf said that the Eurozone will very soon be larger than the dollar zone and attributes this to the credibility and soundness of the economy and of the economies that are joining the Eurozone .
Obviously , this solidity and credibility are the result of complying with the stability and growth pacts , which it is absolutely crucial to pursue and abide by .
We refer to this aspect - compliance with and the need to comply with the stability and growth pacts - as a component and guarantee of the euro 's soundness , credibility and stability , and we study , as one would expect , the use of the euro at international level in various fields and , in particular , on the international financial markets , and its use by our new neighbours , including Russia and the Baltic States .
We also refer to the euro 's potential for ensuring greater stability in the supply of raw materials which are extremely important , because of their dependence on the European economy .
We believe that energy supply should be paid for in euros .
We also refer to the growing number of central banks around the world that are increasing their euro reserves .
To conclude , ladies and gentlemen , I shall simply recall that in the report we also study some suggestions and propose a study to be undertaken by the European Central Bank and the central banks that are members of the euro zone , on some aspects of the use of notes and coins , to which Mrs Randzio-Plath has already referred .
.
( ES ) Madam President , I wish to thank Mr Gasòliba i Böhm for his presentation and for his interesting report , since I share his point of view hailing the creation of the euro as a great success .
I wish to focus my comments on two fundamental points made in this report .
One of them concerns economic policies , while the other relates to problems of an institutional nature , to which he has paid rather more attention .
With regard to economic policies , at Thessaloniki the new Broad Economic Policy Guidelines were adopted and we hope the Ecofin Council will formally adopt these at its next meeting .
The guidelines maintain the tone set by the Commission , including some of the comments made by this Parliament in the report presented by Mr García-Margallo y Marfil .
In general terms , the proposal ratifies the broad lines on which we are all working : sound macroeconomic policies , which are crucial to increasing demand , growth and employment and to increasing the potential for growth , on the basis of the Lisbon conclusions .
This implies a need to press ahead with policies of modernisation and structural change , and our main challenge at the moment is to set up and implement these policies .
That is where I believe Parliament must play a crucial role , in this aspect of implementing policies , through its dialogue with the citizens and with the national Parliaments .
As to economic governance , I wish to make two comments ; firstly , the Eurogroup has played and continues to play a fundamental role .
In our opinion , the recognition of its role in the Constitution should be welcomed , since this maintains its informal character .
Nevertheless , the Commission regrets the fact that the idea of creating an Ecofin Council for the Eurozone has not been accepted .
We believe that there is a whole set of formal decisions that must be adopted publicly by the countries of the Eurozone and that the existence of the Eurogroup is nevertheless not sufficient to resolve these problems .
We welcome the fact that some progress has been made in the decisions that the Eurozone countries are to adopt , including in the framework of the current Ecofin .
There are , however , some requests made by the Commission that have not been accepted and we do not believe that this will help the system to function more smoothly .
Decisions such as those on the excess deficit procedure , the procedure of multilateral vigilance in the Eurozone or on the entry of Member States to the Eurozone should , in our opinion , be adopted , not by the Council in plenary , but by the Council that deals with the Eurozone .
This point will continue to be debated and I hope that we can make progress in this area .
I wish to make a final comment on the issue of external representation .
At the Thessaloniki European Council , as Mr Gasòliba i Böhm has just said , emphasis was given to the importance of increasing the Union 's ability to act as a coherent and unified force in the international system .
The need to respond more effectively to the challenges of globalisation and economic interdependence was also underlined .
The effective and coherent representation of the Eurozone in this way is crucial .
Nevertheless , we must acknowledge that beyond raising the issue , little progress has been made on external representation .
In recent years , the progress that has been made has basically been better advance coordination of strategic positions at international meetings , which has enabled us in several cases to put forward joint proposals , but not one common proposal .
We must make more progress in this direction .
I take note of your suggestion , which is not far-removed from another suggestion the Commission made to the Convention .
We must be aware , however , of the technical , legal and institutional difficulties that the issue entails and in light of these , I believe it is crucial to demonstrate enormous political sensitivity , in order clearly to define what we want to achieve in future .
For this reason , we in the Commission will continue to work with the Convention , trying , in the corrections to the final texts , in the part which is still being debated , to clarify some points .
In any event , at the Intergovernmental Conference , the Commission will attempt to put forward a vision that is more ambitious and even innovative , which will enable us to consolidate effective external representation of the Eurozone .
Madam President , as you all know , it is becoming the norm in this Parliament to start speeches with a phrase which , as a result of being repeated so often , has become a commonplace .
This phrase consists of congratulating the rapporteur on the report they have drawn up .
I would not like my congratulations to Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , in this case , to imply that I am simply observing a Parliamentary formality .
I wish to congratulate Mr Gasòliba i Böhm in particular , not only on the content of his report but also , above all , on his good choice of issues .
Parliaments sometimes earn prestige not only by what is said within their walls but also by their choice of issues for debate : if these are topical and affect the citizens , they serve to bring the citizens and their political representatives closer together .
Like Mr Karas , I also wish to thank the rapporteur for his flexibility towards the positions of the other groups .
The introduction of the euro is one of the most significant milestones in the process of European integration .
Having a single currency represents a huge step towards achieving European unity , not only in economic terms , but also , I would say , in political terms .
The Eurosceptics are right to fear the single currency , because no one can question the fact that participating in a common currency involves the greatest possible degree of integration .
We should not , therefore , think that the introduction of the euro has been important only in the economic field .
It is true that the euro has enjoyed considerable success in the field of foreign trade : around one third of trade with third countries takes place in this currency .
Furthermore , as we Europeans continue to use the same currency , we will start to feel more united with one another .
For this very reason , it is the political and human dimension of the euro 's introduction that we should be worrying about - the ' micro ' effects of the new currency .
Concern about these effects , which citizens sometimes see as negative , obliges us to remedy them , inasmuch as we can , or , when this perception is not borne out by objective causes , to try to convince the public that its opinion does not match the reality .
This success cannot conceal the fact that there have been problems in introducing new notes and coins .
Blame for this must be laid at the door of the Commission , the governments and European Central Bank ; there may still be some issues that make citizens feel that some problems are the result of the euro 's introduction .
The success of the euro 's introduction cannot conceal some of its effects , which have damaged public opinion .
In this context , the citizens ' perception is perhaps that the euro has played a major role in increasing inflation and in raising prices .
The reality , however , is that , according to objective data , the euro has had much less influence than the citizens perceive to be the case . There is some basis for this perception because the so-called ' rounding-up effect ' has had a fundamental impact on consumers ' shopping baskets and other essential goods , and on certain services .
The necessary steps must , therefore , be taken to prevent this perception , which can have such damaging effects .
Finally , the last thing I would wish to do is interfere in the internal debate of those countries that have not yet decided whether to join the Eurozone .
I must remain on the sidelines of this internal debate but whilst remaining on the sidelines , I can still express the desire for them to join our common currency zone as soon as possible .
Madam President , many thanks to my colleague , Mr Gasòliba i Böhm , for an excellent report which will be of great help in the ongoing referendum campaign in my country .
Clearly , the introduction of the euro has been very successful .
We have finally obtained a practical common European symbol .
The euro is already the world 's second largest currency .
It has strengthened European identity and bound the twelve countries together .
Even if economic development is shaky , the euro has already shown positive economic advantages , strengthened trade and increased investments for the eurozone countries .
One of the aspects , which was also addressed by Mr Berenguer Fuster and which has been discussed in connection with the introduction of the euro , is that of whether there have been price rises and , if so , unfair ones .
Eurostat 's statistics clearly show that there was a very small , one-off effect of between 0.1 and 0.2 % upon the introduction of the euro .
Within some sectors of the economy , or in certain industries , there were , however , significant price rises , particularly in certain countries .
The overall effect for those inhabiting the eurozone has , however , been very small .
It is good that we should now take up this issue and ask the Commission to investigate it further .
One thing we have found is that pro-active consumers and two-currency price labelling have prevented underhand price rises .
Let us not , however , be deceived into thinking that the price rises were higher than they in actual fact were , and let us not make use of that argument in debates , either .
The big advantage of the euro is , however , that it has provided economic stability in politically and economically very difficult times .
In spite of great unrest in the world , partly due to the Iraq war , European currencies have not tossed around on a stormy monetary sea , as in actual fact happened in the nineties .
The euro has provided stability and security .
That is a fact that should be mentioned more often .
This should be emphasised in the discussion of the euro 's advantages and disadvantages , particularly in those EU countries that at present enjoy the stability of the euro without participating fully in the cooperation and so without accepting full responsibility , either .
Madam President , we can all measure the positive economic impact of the birth of the euro , and I am thinking in particular of the general easing of interest rates and the abolition of risk premiums , from which all European countries are benefiting .
However , we can also see the limits to these benefits : the short-lived expansion phase from 1997 to 2000 and the current economic stagnation .
It was Jacques Delors who said that the euro was not enough .
He asked for strong coordination of economic policies .
We have not yet achieved this , and we are now desperately in need of a European economic policy .
I approve of Mr Gasòliba 's report , which is a move in this direction , and which expresses the desire for , among other things , the development of public and private investment , of human capital , of research , and of the mobility and qualifications of workers .
The Convention should have drawn up the tools to achieve these objectives .
It has not done so and that is one of its great failings .
We have not really been able to construct the euro group within the framework of the work of the Convention .
Even though Member States could , as they say , take additional measures in terms of major economicpolicies , they have neither the fiscal nor the budgetary means to do so .
I would add that the monetary policy which was mentioned just now , and about which complimentary words were spoken , neither anticipated nor understood the reversal in the world economy and was very late in reacting to it , which demonstrates the difficulty that we have in imagining our position within the world as a whole .
It is all very well to talk of structural reforms - and these are certainly essential - but , as Mr Delors also said , competition is not enough : we must build up cooperation and solidarity between us if we want to have a successful economy and play a role in the governance of the world economy .
Without this willingness and these concepts , let us at least work towards institutional reforms , let us try to equip ourselves with institutional tools .
You have proposed a single representation of the euro zone , and have aired the idea of a minister for economic affairs who would play a role that was at once both internal and external and who would operate as part of the Commission .
Obviously I can only support these proposals , which are a step in the right direction .
Madam President , I am not going to paraphrase here the technically excellent report of my fellow countryman Mr Gasòliba ; I do not have the time in which to do so .
On a political level , as a federalist and a supporter of Catalan independence , I ought to be pleased at the relative success of the euro .
For Europeans , the euro reinforces the evidence of the process of integration of which it is the symbol .
For Catalans , whether French or Spanish , it means that we once again have a common currency , which has not been the case since the disastrous Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659 .
I have to admit that I am not entirely happy , however , first of all because this common currency is not as common as all that .
Some people do not have any of it , or at least not enough of it .
For instance , in the Autonomous Community of Catalonia , some 5 % of families are living in a situation of extreme poverty , in other words with an income of less than EUR 240 per person per month .
Secondly , I am not entirely happy because I would like Europe to have a stronger and more human symbol of unity than a unit of currency .
In celebrating the euro , are we not rather like the chosen people who , forgetting their destiny , began to worship the golden calf ?
This earth , which has been so copiously watered with the blood and tears of our fratricidal wars , so distressingly covered with the ashes of our tragic genocides , deserves , I believe , stronger and less abstract signs of its humanity and its unity .
Madam President , I feel it is genuinely important for Parliament to start carrying out an initial evaluation of the introduction of the euro today , a year and a half after its launch in the European market .
The introduction of the euro has , without a doubt , been an extremely valuable development , and not just in economic and financial terms .
It is worth pointing out once again that the euro area is the second largest economic area in the world .
However , the single currency has also contributed to a small revolution in terms of culture and identity , so to speak .
Indeed , the circulation and use of the single currency have given consumers something practical in common and have thus helped them to feel more like European citizens for the first time .
Nevertheless , these same citizens , who exceeded all expectations and sailed through the transition from individual national currencies to the European single currency , are now demanding that the Community institutions carry out careful surveillance to prevent unjustified - and , in many cases , very substantial - increases in the price of both goods and services .
Above all , as has been pointed out in the report too , these citizens are calling upon us to introduce minor measures in the future , effective , practical measures which will make their everyday lives easier .
In particular , the citizens are calling upon us to introduce EUR 1 banknotes or even , in some cases , 50-cent banknotes , as well as for greater availability of low-value notes , especially in cash machines .
I believe that these demands are absolutely legitimate and very reasonable too .
I also believe that it is genuinely important that Parliament makes every effort to persuade the relevant Community institutions to comply with the demands of the European citizens , which , although small , are extremely important .
Madam President , the Gasòliba i Böhm report draws up a positive balance sheet for the operation of the euro zone since 1999 , highlighting many advantages but only rare and hypothetical disadvantages .
Nevertheless , we can be a little more precise than that : the real advantages exist and have , moreover , been known from the beginning . For example , the disappearance of fluctuations in exchange rates between countries in the euro zone , which has no doubt saved us from a few crises in recent months .
Nevertheless , the disadvantages exist too .
These can be found , in particular , in a growth rate that has halved and an unemployment rate that has doubled in the euro zone compared with the non-euro zone .
No doubt there are several reasons for this difference , but one of those reasons is very definitely the inflexibility resulting from uniform interest rates and exchange rates , when these are applied to economies whose needs remain very different .
Another disadvantage , which rarely occurs , is the lack of incentive for structural reforms , which is the result of making responsibilities mutual .
Previously , poor national management could cause a monetary crisis , which would require corrective measures .
Now , the responsibilities of saint and sinner countries are blurred , thanks to the single currency , so that certain parties can put off reforms as long as the euro still has credit .
Admittedly the plan was that the disappearance of the disciplines of the exchange market would be compensated for by the disciplines of the stability pact , but it has now been proved that these administrative disciplines are not enough to replace those of the market .
As for the strengthening of overall economic coordination and a European budget drawn up in accordance with federal principles , which the report calls for , we must not count on these too much in the immediate future , as is shown by the somewhat unsatisfactory results obtained on this chapter in the Convention .
Moreover , it would not be in accordance with what was agreed at Maastricht .
In other words , Madam President , the ship of the euro zone is afloat , but it cannot be piloted , and no one knows where it is heading .
I hope it is not heading towards a superstate .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to devote my speech to payments within the euro zone .
The introduction of the single currency was a huge success , but although the new notes and coins have brought with them widespread satisfaction , the same cannot be said of the processing of payments in the euro zone .
The euro has actually been our currency since 1999 .
For four and a half years the euro has been the currency of 11 Member States , whose national currencies became nothing more than submultiples still in circulation .
Throughout this period , however , the European banking system persistently refused to recognise this new state of affairs .
There were 12 countries with the same currency , but the banks carried on operating as if each country in the zone were financially autonomous .
The euro payment zone did not really exist .
It was not until a year ago that electronic banking cards could be used all over the euro zone as well as in the countries in which they were actually issued . It was not until this week , moreover , that it became possible to carry out bank transfers under the same conditions as those that apply within each Member State .
Furthermore , while this is an extremely beneficial step for citizens and for small and medium-sized enterprises trading in the euro zone , the limit of EUR 12 500 per transaction is ridiculous and unjustifiable .
Since the technical infrastructure allowing single-currency transfers from one country to another is in place , and since the cost is negligible , this being a virtual transaction processed by computers , why has such a low limit been set ?
A EUR 12 500 transaction costs the same as a EUR 50 000 transaction ( which will be allowed from 2006 ) , or a transaction of EUR 100 000 or more .
I would go as far as to say that forcing a company to perform 10 small transactions of EUR 12 500 in order to make up one payment of EUR 125 000 only serves to increase costs for companies and banks .
To conclude , I will state my conviction that the euro zone must be made to work effectively by reducing banking commissions to the rates charged at national level .
Do not forget that the euro zone is our country where currency is concerned .
What does the Commission plan to do to improve the processing of payments in the euro zone ?
Madam President , there is a lot in this discussion with which I can agree .
The euro is not only a means of payment . Instead , it is part of an economic policy and an important key element of EMU policy .
If the euro is to function , a lot of things are clearly required .
Mr Gasòliba i Böhm indicated a number of them in his report , and other factors were also addressed in the debate .
Much more harmonisation and coordination of economic policy is required .
Mr Gasòliba I Böhm goes so far as to talk about federal budgetary principles .
What is required is coordination on tax policy , a structural policy and greater mobility for the European labour force .
In short , a range of measures may be taken to reduce the large differences that exist between national economies .
For example , it would be possible for Ireland and Germany to have the same policy - two countries that , at present , quite clearly have a need for different policy approaches .
Mr Gasòliba I Böhm talks about the need for institutions .
If the matter were to be summarised , there could even perhaps be talk of the need for a European state power in the economic sphere .
He proposes having an economics tsar when it comes to the eurozone 's relations with the surrounding world .
It is precisely all this that gives rise to such a lot of scepticism towards the euro project in my own country of Sweden .
We fear it would mean the small economies being integrated into a European economy in such a way that they would be unable themselves to exercise control and that would not offer any democratic guarantees , either .
There is therefore considerable hesitation , and more than half of the Swedish population will presumably vote ' no ' in the forthcoming referendum .
That is also why the Swedish referendum will be followed with such great interest in the candidate countries .
So far , only 12 of what will soon be a total of 25 Member States are in the eurozone .
The 13 countries that are still outside it have obvious doubts .
People are aware of the ups and downs of the German debate and of the problems there are , and they think it is better to wait .
I appreciate , however , that there may one day be a need for lower denomination notes , especially if economic problems were to arise in Europe .

The first conclusion to be drawn from the introduction of the euro is a considerable increase in the cost of the shopping basket of the housewife , who , Mr Gasòliba , contrary to what you have written , is far from being purely a psychological illusion , and whom I am not confusing with inflation .
One can also conclude that the euro , which is over-valued , is starting to amplify the difficulties of our economies , namely the sluggishness of growth and of internal demand , the handicapping of our exports , the threat of deflation , and a dogmatic stability pact which imposes a procyclical budgetary policy .
Who will dare to put a figure , in terms of jobs , on the cost of the single currency and the delays and excuses of the European Central Bank ?
The United States , which serves as your model in so many fields , should also serve as a model in matters concerning economic and monetary policy .
The US Federal Reserve has other things on its mind than how to beat an inflation rate that is little more than 2 % .
The United States preserves its growth , which is already considerably more dynamic than ours , by issuing dollars .
It uses them to finance not only its deficits but its wars as well , and it also uses them as the basis for its political domination .
Why should we not do the same with the euro ?
The rapporteur states that the advantages of the single currency far outweigh its disadvantages .
That is merely a profession of faith , and the faith must be translated into reality .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report before us today slots perfectly into European policy on equal opportunities , which , as we know , has two basic branches : specific measures benefiting women and gender mainstreaming , or the incorporation of the perspective of gender equality into all stages and levels of public policy by all the actors involved in the decision-making process .
Gender budgeting is the application of the principle of gender mainstreaming in the budgetary process .
As we are all aware , budgets are not gender-neutral , but reflect the way in which power is distributed within society .
Whenever they define revenue and expenditure policies , public budgetary authorities at all levels are taking policy decisions .
Budgets are not merely economic tools but , in fact , key instruments with which political authorities shape a society 's model of socio-economic development and criteria for internal redistribution and prioritise the measures to be taken in respect of policies and the needs of their own citizens .
The impact this has is not the same on men and women .
The way in which public budgets are normally drawn up tends to ignore the differences - in terms of roles and responsibilities - between men and women , and , in most cases , the indicators and data used fail to make any gender distinction .
Although they are presented as neutral economic instruments , public budgets , in actual fact , reflect and thus reproduce the socio-economic disparities already present in the Community .
Analysing budgetary policies on the basis of the different impacts they have on men and women and adjusting them accordingly serves to ensure that public budgets meet appropriate criteria in terms of fairness and cost-effectiveness .
In order to be not merely fair but also efficient , public spending must help to promote the development and exploit the potential of all sections of society .
It is therefore a matter of adopting an economic and social approach based on the principle that , even in an open and globalised market economy , economic and social development are considered inseparable and interconnected .
An economy cannot be competitive , dynamic and healthy in the long term unless the productive , commercial and financial processes are backed up by a stable , cohesive and fair society in which human rights , resources and capacities are properly developed .
The strengthening , modernisation and reorganisation of public intervention , and hence budgetary policies , with a view to social development are , in fact , an absolutely essential intangible investment in capacities , empowerment and new resources and opportunities for economies wishing to be dynamic and competitive through being knowledge-based , in accordance with the objective set by the European Council in Lisbon .
Although this is the first time that Parliament has discussed gender budgeting , it is by no means a new concept .
The Platform for Action drawn up at Beijing at the Fourth United Nations World Conference on Women specifically refers to it ; an experts ' working group has been set up within the Council of Europe 's Directorate-General for Human Rights ; the Commission itself , after the conference organised by the Belgian Presidency , set up a working group of experts ; but , above all , numerous experiments have been carried out in Eastern countries , starting with Australia , which adopted this instrument - like many developing countries , moreover - as early as 1984 , and there have been interesting experiments carried out within the European Union too for some years now at both national and local level .
What are the specific objectives of the report ?
Firstly , raising awareness among the public and political and economic actors at all levels .
Disseminating information on the gender budgeting strategy and method among the institutions of the European Union and the Member States . Calling on the Commission , which has already expressed its support , to produce and distribute as widely as possible an information brochure on gender budgeting .
Involving the actors operating in the Community at all levels in the building of budgets . Most importantly , indicating an action framework for the implementation of gender budgeting , providing for bottom-up democratic participation and the involvement of organised individuals , NGOs and women 's associations .
I will end , Madam President , with this point : wherever , especially at local level , experiments of this kind are already underway , they have also served to wipe away the indifference and detachment we see today at all levels in relationships between the citizens and the public authorities .
This is an instrument which brings great participation as well as great justice .
. ( ES ) Madam President , Mrs Ghilardotti has already referred to the importance of this issue , to its complexity , to the experiments that have already been conducted in countries such as Australia and South Africa and to the experiments that we have also started in the Union .
The Commission indeed first raised the issue at a technical seminar held in October 2001 and in 2002 the Consultative Committee on Equal Opportunities was instructed to look at current experiences and to study how Member States view the gender perspective and how they propose to integrate it into their budgets .
This committee delivered an opinion which is available to this Parliament , distributed by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities .
Clearly , on the basis of this document , the committee is willing to draw up the pamphlet to which you referred and which could be useful in providing this information .
We now have some good practices in place in various fields , such as the European Employment Strategy , social protection , science and research and cooperation development and - perhaps the most interesting example - in the Structural Funds .
All of this demonstrates that gender equality is being addressed more effectively in the current programmes than in the previous period .
Clearly , much remains to be done , but we are continuing to make progress in this field .
The Commission Communication on integrating gender equality into the programming documents for the Structural Funds recommends that the Member States clearly indicate which funds are allocated to specific equality-related actions .
The Member States will provide us with the relevant information , with precise indicators , as part of this year 's review .
Member States are also being urged to ensure that actions pursued under the Structural Funds use gender impact assessments and statistics broken down by gender and , at the same time , the Commission emphasises that specific funds , in most of the programmes , should be maintained and even increased for activities dedicated to ensuring gender equality .
The Commission will continue to develop methodologies and tools to implement the integration of gender into the budget , but this means continuing with our discussions on exchanging experiences and all cooperating with one another .
Consequently its report on integrating the gender perspective makes an , in our opinion , enormously useful contribution to improving the principle of gender integration .
The fruitful cooperation between Parliament , Member States and the Commission must remain in place and be stepped up if we are to achieve the aims that we all wish to attain .
Madam President , I should like to compliment Mrs Ghilardotti on her initiative to draw up this report .
Even though the Commissioner says that a lot is already happening at European level , I view this report rather as a start and a stimulus for building on the little that is already happening .
People may say that there is a lot of expertise , or at least some , but , to be honest , I have to say that I have yet to see much evidence of this .
Why are there calls for gender budgeting ?
It is because a number of items in the budgets of Member States and the European Union are largely only benefiting half of the population .
I shall give two examples .
It is common knowledge that , when it comes to allocating resources for scientific research into health care , a good deal of research is conducted on half of the population : the males and not the females .
A second example is as follows . When resources are given for stimulating democratisation and respect for human rights in developing countries , it frequently happens that these resources are principally used for the benefit of one half of the population and not the other .
That is why it is expressly requested that we perhaps start with an analysis of a number of budgetary items that are very gender-sensitive , where something really could be done .
If this could be carried out in consultation with the Member States , I think that something positive could result .
It is indeed good to have a brochure , but we are actually still only at the stage of developing a mechanism . The development of a mechanism requires the building-up of a great deal of expertise .
I give my support to the Commission , and to Mrs Ghilardotti , and I hope that this own-initiative report bears fruit .
Madam President , I too should like to start by congratulating our rapporteur , Mrs Ghilardotti , on her enormous contribution to the promotion and highlighting of the relatively new concept of gender budgeting .
The promotion of the idea of gender budgeting is obviously not calling for the creation of separate funding headings , nor does it aspire to more financial resources for women .
What we want is for the specific consequences on the economic and social life of both sexes to be evaluated and , of course , for the budgets to be restructured so that , through them , gender equality can be promoted instead of being undermined .
Today , it is becoming more and more understood that macroeconomic policy can reduce or widen the gap between the two sexes in relation to financial resources , economic independence , education and health care .
For example , the health budget should take account of the specific needs which arise from the different physiology of the two sexes and the different health problems faced by the two sexes .
In other words , the male cannot be used as the measure for everything .
I regret that the European Commission does not have at its disposal either methods or reliable statistics for analysing the budget by gender .
I should also like to stress that all the committees of the European Parliament should apply gender budgeting in all their budgets .
Finally , it is also important for there to be transparency and control mechanisms .
Madam President , in this report , the pursuit of equal treatment of men and women is so grossly exaggerated as to give the impression that the European Union would collapse if this aim were not pursued with all available means .
For that reason , some sober correction is in order .
The two genders must be valued equally : I am an outright supporter of this .
However , this resolution smacks of an ideology that wants to forcefully combat one objectionable form of oppression by introducing another undesirable form of dictatorship or collective thinking .
For , ultimately , the equality ideology does not value women as women .
It does not give them their due .
On the contrary , women must become the same as men .
They will be forced to be the same .
Where have I heard those words before ?
It must be understood that I am against any unworthy treatment of women .
If we are to banish from society the problem indicated , we must not take as our starting point a model based on confrontation between the two genders , but instead set to work in accordance with a model based on harmony .
This is the way God the creator intended it when he created humankind - man and woman as a unity of two parts that complement each other .
Unfortunately , this harmonious relationship has been thoroughly disturbed on account of humankind 's refusal to recognise God or his authority , instead insisting on being its own boss .
Unfortunately , there is no place for this original truth in the equality ideology .
As a result , it does not rise above the jealousy-promoting confrontation model , which involves the division of power and money ; everyone the same , as if men and women will be happier as a result .
The resolution tramples on the subsidiarity principle .
It calls for studies and reports from the European Commission that require an enormous amount of work , including from the Member States , in order to achieve an ideological and ultimately inhumane objective .
In our opinion , it would be more just and fair to call for attention to the position of families and the extent to which government policy and budgetary policy in the European Union are family-friendly .
After all , the individualistic spirit exuded by this report has very negative implications for the future of our societies .
Madam President , this report is not about creating conflicts , but about harmonisation , and it is not about levelling down , but about equal treatment .
To my mind , that is a very important distinction , and one that we should not forget .
Gender budgeting does not involve creating separate budgets for men and women , but it does mean working to ensure that funding is distributed fairly and efficiently .
Contrary to what we are often told , public budgets are not gender-neutral ; in terms of both income and expenditure they have different impacts on men and women .
We want to highlight these differences and take account of them .
Few people are aware of the impact of budget policy decisions on women in economic , social , and societal terms .
That is why we need a budget analysis .
Such an analysis means investigating the impact of budgets on women , and on tax systems , that is to say different types of taxation .
How do women perceive cuts and how are they affected by them ?
The answer is : very often more than men are .
To make gender budgeting possible , we need transparency , consultation and joint decision-making .
A group of highly committed Austrian women have written a book entitled ' Women , Power and Budgets - Public Finances from a Gender Perspective ' .
I can recommend this to you as a starting point , and it could also provide a basis for the information leaflet the Commission has promised us .
That leaflet should be widely published , easily accessible and go hand in hand with an information campaign .
Statements like the ones you have just heard should then be a thing of the past .
Madam President , first of all I should like to thank , most warmly , the rapporteur of this report on gender budgeting , because it seems to me that , thanks to this document , we are taking an important step forwards , as Mr Solbes-Mira has just said .
The rapporteur has explained that countries both outside and inside Europe have already been applying the practices of gender budgeting .
Therefore I hope , Commissioner , that we will keenly support this report .
I should like to say , to the Member who believes that we are being ideological when we discuss this question , that this is an economic question .
If I take as an example the issue of pensions , which affects most countries in Europe and , in the last few months , France in particular , gender budgeting enables us to make a diagnosis of the situation .
We discover , for example , that while the difference in wages between men and women is 25 % , that difference rises to 47 % as soon as retirement age is reached .
That is the sort of diagnosis that this study enables us to carry out .
Having said that , this diagnosis is not sufficient , because the pessimists will say that that is going to cost us money .
Economic equality between the sexes does cost money , whether it is professional equality or equality of retirement pensions , as is the case with many other subjects .
I should like to remind those pessimists that it is possible to produce a different analysis of inequality between men and women , namely that it is economic inequality between men and women that costs money .
A better analysis and a better practice of equality in financial matters would make it possible to reduce a cost rather than to increase it .
I say this for the benefit of those who think that we are being ideological .
They are wrong , because we are also thinking in economic terms when we consider this issue .
Madam President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Ghilardotti on the fact that there are not just 20 Members present to debate this report , but that for once we are at last considering equalities issues with a full House .
Gender budgeting is a relatively recent idea , which was developed at the 1995 World Conference on Women in Beijing .
In the context of gender mainstreaming , it involves analysing public budgets to assess their differing impacts on men and women , and to raise awareness among political and economic actors - which we have ample opportunity to do today .
Discrimination very soon becomes apparent when figures talk and we see that only 6 % of the Structural Funds are geared towards helping women .
Let me give you another example from the EU Budget : the forest protection programme has a budget of EUR 52 million , whereas the programme for the protection of children , young people and women is allocated only EUR 41 million , a clear 20 % less .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities hopes , by means of this report , to stimulate a debate that will expose the inequality and discrimination in the Budget .
But we need instruments to achieve that , and this point is addressed to you personally , Commissioner Solbes Mira : please work within the Commission to ensure that we finally get the directive under Article 13 , which relates to discrimination on grounds of gender , which will at last give us a significant instrument .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mrs Gröner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Mr President , the previous Vice-President in the chair quite rightly asked for Members who are coming in to vote to enter the Chamber quietly when a debate is going on .
That is right .
However , every voting time this week has slipped behind not just by a few minutes , but by over 25 minutes .
I ask the powers-that-be or the great and the good to do something so that in future voting time starts on time , as opposed to the rigmarole that seems to happen every part-session with the time slipping by .
I shall ask the powers-that-be : the great and the good are fewer in number in this House .
We will see what we can do .
The next item is the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , I have another small correction to the adopted text as a result of Amendment No 16 .

Amendment No 16 deletes Article 18 ( 2 ) .
Article 6 ( 9 ) of the common position makes reference to Article 18 ( 2 ) ; this article must therefore be changed if Amendment No 16 is adopted .
Mr President , here , too , I have an amendment to the adopted text .
Amendment No 31 deletes Article 10 .
Article 1 ( 3 ) of the common position makes reference to Article 10 ; that article must therefore be changed on account of Amendment No 31 .
Mr President , I have a technical amendment to make concerning the wording of Amendment No 3 and also the original text to which this amendment applies .
It reads as follows : ' that the common agricultural policy 's share of total compulsory expenditure is ? ' .
It should be changed to ' that the compulsory part of the common agricultural policy 's share of total ? ' .
It is about compulsory agricultural expenditure .
Mr President , with reference to the amendment to Paragraph 21a , I propose that the words ' and armed opposition forces which continue to recruit child soldiers ' be added after the words ' strongly condemns governments ' , in order to condemn governments and armed oppositions which make use of child soldiers .
. ( NL ) My group takes the position that the outcome of the Convention does not form a good basis for the next Intergovernmental Conference .
An important reason for this is that the preamble distorts the history of Europe : it deliberately omits to make explicit mention of Christianity , even though this has had a profound influence on , and been decisive in shaping , the culture and politics of all the countries of Europe for centuries .
A good ' European house ' cannot do without sound foundations .
In the Council 's conclusions regarding the Middle East , both parties are called to account on their obligations .
It is a shame that the EU has not always been so resolute in propagating this viewpoint .
The pronouncements on terrorist organisations such as Hamas their relations with countries in the region , and the financing of their abominable actions do not mince words .
This kind of firm language is unfortunately lacking in the conclusions regarding Iran and those regarding Lebanon , with a view to the agreements the EU wishes to enter into with these countries .
This reveals the inconsistency that is so characteristic of the EU 's position , and which makes it an unpredictable party as far as Israel and other countries in the region are concerned .
Open internal borders force the Member States to cooperate in the field of asylum and migration .
There was a lot to be done about this in Thessaloniki , but little was achieved .
The British plan for registration centres and reception in the region was not supported by a majority in the Council .
A pilot project that may be started up is the paltry consolation prize .
It is high time that the Council came up with results , so that the EU meets its moral obligation towards political refugees .
The Thessaloniki Council launched an exercise in reflection on the Union 's security strategy on the basis of a report by the High Representative entitled ' A Secure Europe in a Better World ' , which seeks , in a highly interesting way , to take into account certain recent developments .
In particular , this document reveals the new threats : terrorism , weapons of mass destruction , rogue states or states that are failing , and organised crime .
It demonstrates that , because of increased interdependence , destabilisations that are far away in geographical terms may nonetheless have dangerous repercussions for us , whether direct or indirect .
Finally , it emphasises that often ' pre-emptive engagement ' ( which is not necessarily military ) ' can avoid more serious problems in the future ' .
These considerations could provide a good basis for justifying , after the event , the intervention in Iraq , which provoked the anger of the Chairman of the Communist Group .
Yet I , for my part , applaud this attempt at lucidity .
On the other hand , I think that the High Representative 's report underestimates the future threat posed by increasing and uncontrolled migratory flows .
Moreover , this text appears to be somewhat unrealistic about the possibilities , in Europe , of a unified foreign policy without a substantial reduction in democracy .
I congratulate the Greek Presidency on the progress it has made in the field of justice and home affairs , and on the results achieved at the Thessaloniki European Council .
I welcome the decision taken to step up development of the programme adopted at Tampere , especially as regards drawing up a common European immigration policy ( on illegal immigration , return to country of origin and cooperation with third countries ) .
I would mention the progress made in improving the management of our external borders , in developing the second Schengen Information System ( SIS II ) and the Visa Information System ( VIS ) , as well as the adoption , after three years of negotiations , of the directives on family reunification and long-term residency .
Equally important is the consensus reached on the Union 's position regarding the agreement with the USA on extradition and judicial cooperation in criminal matters .
I also approve of the European Council 's decision on the results of the Convention .
I hope that , using that decision as the basis for the work of the next Intergovernmental Conference , the three pillars will eventually be abolished , as the European Parliament has been requesting for some time now ; the area of freedom , security and justice will then be created more easily and transparently . Finally , as a result of the Council 's decision , I hope that the European Parliament will be granted powers of codecision on asylum and immigration issues .
. ( FR ) We have refused to validate the results of the European Council in Thessaloniki .
First of all , we refuse to consider immigration issues as the main problem in Europe .
At a time when immigrants who are the victims of poverty , political repression or conflicts are dying every day before the walls of Fortress Europe , whether at Sfax or at Lampedusa , we are reaffirming the principle of free movement and freedom to become established .
The creation of transit centres and regional protection zones , or the stepping up of policing and repatriation measures at the border are practices that have proved to be both inhumane and ineffective .
Finally , we do not recognise either the legality or the legitimacy of Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's proposed constitution for Europe .
This text , the result of the anti-democratic process of the Convention , is nothing more than the expression of the supporters of a market-based Europe , a Europe of democratic and social regression .
This draft text , having been through the hands of the Eurocrats , is now in the hands of the Heads of State or Government .
If the citizens of Europe want a constitution , there must be a constitutive process based on democracy , social rights , public services and the general interest .
In voting against the resolution , we are defending that point of view .
. ( SV ) I am unable to support the proposal in Paragraphs 13 and 14 concerning a Community-funded EU border force .
Nor am I able to support Paragraph 27 concerning a European arrest warrant , Paragraph 49 on the development of the EU 's military capacity or Paragraph 51 on a defence capacity body .
I congratulate Mr Bradbourn on the excellent report he has produced on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the granting of Community financial assistance to improve the environmental performance of the freight transport system ( ' Marco Polo Programme ' ) . I support this report , and especially the rapporteur 's belief that the programme should approve the implementation of innovative projects proposed principally by a consortium of small and medium-sized enterprises .
I would also like to emphasise that the project 's goals of ' enhancing intermodal transport and reducing congestion in road transport ' should indeed be clearly reflected in the text of the regulation , as the rapporteur suggests .
This report emphasises the need to make systematic use of gender budgeting , with a view to incorporating the gender perspective into Community and national budgetary procedures . I was persuaded to vote in its favour .
In the context of budgetary policy , gender budgeting implies that revenue and expenditure for all programmes and projects should be assessed and restructured so as to ensure that women 's priorities and requirements should be taken into account , the eventual goal being to achieve equality between men and women .
A campaign must be launched to raise awareness among the general public , governments and national parliaments . Particularly important is the production of a guide describing the tools and methods for introducing the gender perspective into public budgets .
Lastly , I agree with the idea of setting up a European network of organisations and experts active in the field of gender budgeting , to be linked into the network of parliamentary committees for equal opportunities . This will allow the development and dissemination of good methods and practices .
The need to draw up public budgets through a gender perspective , with the ultimate aim of achieving genuine equality between men and women , stems from our belief that budgets are not neutral tools but in fact reflect the way power is distributed in society .
Budgets are thus the outcome of political decisions , becoming key instruments for shaping models of socio-economic development and criteria for internal redistribution .
Any equal opportunities policy must thus be reflected in the manner in which budgets are drawn up at various levels .
As the rapporteur points out , in order to pursue the aim of fairness , governments and public administrations must deal with gender issues and reduce inequalities between men and women , taking due account of the fact that men and women play different roles in society and the economy and , as a result , that economic policies have a different impact on them .
By voting in favour of this report , we are also underlining the importance of implementing the Beijing Action Platform and of drawing up provisions in the European Union 's own budget with a view to applying the proposals contained in Mrs Ghilardotti 's report .
. ( FR ) Up to now , public budgets have been drawn up on an administrative basis , with the credits being shared out between ministers .
There are also , however , methods which show budgets according to major function , according to programme or broken down in economic terms .
Since 1995 , in the interests of seeking to achieve equality between men and women , it has been proposed that budgets should be drawn up on a sexual basis .
This is known as gender budgeting , or budgeting according to sex , which is intended to respond to two questions .
The first question is how the budget expenditure should be shared between women and men , in other words who gets the money , and the second question is who should pay , in other words who shoulders the tax burden .
This brave vision must be expanded to include even more justice .
We need generational budgeting .
Which generations pay the taxes ?
Is it young people , retired people , working people or old people ?
Which generations gain the most advantage from public expenditure ?
Above all , however , we must have class budgeting , or category budgeting .
Which social categories shoulder the tax burden ?
Is it the wage earners , or the holders of movable capital incomes ?
Finally we come to the great taboo , the question of who profits from the budget credits .
Is it the rich or the poor ? Is it the middle classes , old people , small farmers , the small man or the big man ?
This is a question about justice . It is a social question rather than a hormonal one .
. ( FR ) The creation of the Single European Sky , to allow optimum and unified use of European airspace , in the light of the fact that the sky has reached saturation point , resulting in delays to flights , is based on a good intention .
The fragmentation of European airspace , however , is not the only cause of the delays .
The commercial practices of the airlines who increase the number of shuttle services using small aircraft on the most profitable routes is also largely to blame .
The harm done to the principle of subsidiarity by the requirement for organic separation between the regulator and the operator prevents Member States from organising their national air traffic control systems in the way that they would wish , possibly within the second pillar of the CFSP with , as its corollary , harmonisation with NATO .
Thus the Commission 's proposal seeking to modify the way in which airspace is shared between civil and military use should not give precedence to purely commercial interests to the detriment of security .
What will be achieved if the Community duplicates the powers of Eurocontrol ?
Its current operation is organised efficiently as far as security and the control of traffic flow are concerned .
Will we not be creating a technocratic and administrative monster , which yet again distances the average citizen from the decision-making process ?
. ( FR ) We rejected those of Parliament 's amendments that sought to liberalise and deregulate air transport in Europe .
For all that , we are not satisfied with the position of the Council , which rubber-stamps the abolition of the concept of a public-interest mission and public-service obligations .
As so often happens on these issues , after consulting the trades unions within the sector , we are resigned to the policy of the lesser of two evils , while at the same time being aware that the Member States , at the Barcelona European Council , chose to deliver a fatal ' all-liberal ' blow to both users and employees .
The question of the Single European Sky should have been raised not from the perspective of seeking commercial advantages but from the perspective of effective harmonisation using as models the best European standards for operating systems as well as environmental and social standards .
In this way , this Single European Sky could have been turned into an achievement for all our citizens and not a new market for a minority of industrialists and shareholders .
. ( NL ) Economies of scale have their disadvantages , but are sometimes necessary .
This particularly applies in the case of long-distance traffic . This traffic crosses national borders , so responsibility for its safety and regulation is shared by more than one country .
Previously , something like this would have led to plans for the creation of a single European railway company first of all , and then a single European aviation company with a single European air-traffic safety system .
Of course , those monopolies would then have to be under democratic control , in order to prevent abuses of power , wastefulness and nepotism .
The neoliberal ideology has since arrived .
Not only service provision , but also maintenance of support infrastructures and monitoring of safety can be handed over to competing undertakings .
Work funded with public finances is to be allocated by means of competition , and existing jobs are no longer secure .
This causes great unease in those who have to do this work .
It is a good thing that national borders and military zones lose their importance in the course of the organisation of aviation safety , but that does not mean that the means currently being proposed are the best .
It was a surprise a pleasant surprise to hear Commissioner de Palacio yesterday evening inform us in this debate that this proposal is by no means intended for privatisation or liberalisation .
However , I fear that , unintentionally , it may well be used for that in the long run .
. ( FR ) We rejected all the amendments which do serious damage to conditions of employment , quality of service and , more generally , to the mission of the public services .
We have no confidence in market forces in terms of either harmonising or improving air transport .
Parliament 's amendments are the result of all-liberal ideology .
Under cover of harmonisation , they are dividing the European sky into a number of entities and opening the way to competition between service providers .
We therefore rejected the obligation to extend the Single European Sky to airspace at a lower level .
We rejected the idea of the Commission acting as arbitrator in disputes about the creation of cross-border airspace blocks and the introduction of sanctions for service providers .
We are concerned about the relatively short duration of the authorisation granted to service providers ( 5 to 10 years ) and the reintroduction of financial incentives .
In these conditions the Single European Sky of the Commission and the Council will be a factor of uncertainty and insecurity .
In time , the Single European Sky will be a step backwards for both users and employees , as opposed to a public service coordinated at European level , incorporating the long-term view and making use of the most advanced technologies .
. British Labour MEPs are strong supporters of the Single European Sky and wish to see it implemented as soon as possible , to eliminate air traffic control delays , reduce emissions from waiting aircraft and enhance safety .
However , a number of amendments seek to reopen the issue of the coordination between civil and military airspace . In particular Amendments Nos 2 , 6 , 16 and 18 in the Fava report and Amendments Nos 3 , 21 , 23 , 29 , 30 and 32 in the Sanders-ten Holte report .
We cannot support these amendments because they undermine the compromise reached in Council to develop a Flexible Use of Airspace concept .
We welcome FUA as a major step forward . Allowing civil use of military airspace when not in use .
It would be a pity if , by reopening this issue , we delay achieving the one thing we all agree on : the early realisation of a Single European Sky .
. ( NL ) The passage of freight transport by road through the Alps is a bone of contention that recurs time and again both within and outside parliamentary debate .
I have participated in that debate or given explanations of vote on 15 December 1999 , 14 December 2000 , 4 September 2001 , and 11 and 12 February 2003 .
Germany and Italy want free passage through Austria and Switzerland , but the latter two countries want to protect their valleys against those flows of heavy goods vehicles , and want to transfer transport quickly over to the railways .
I support the efforts of those two countries in that regard .
Switzerland keeps up with the EU legislation and participates in the European Economic Area , but it does not make financial contributions or participate in voting .
This also means that it cannot be outvoted by others .
Austria , however , unlike Switzerland , has the misfortune to be a member of the EU , of eight years ' standing .
Others think that this entitles them to enforce their will on this Member State .
They even want to completely abolish distribution through ecopoints in the long run .
It is better if we build the Brenner Base Tunnel for electric rail transport under Austria , then Germany and Italy will in practice border on each other , without inconveniencing any little intervening country .
This time , as on the previous occasions , I shall be using my vote to once more support the Austrian Members , because they are defending their quality of life against large-scale short-sightedness .
- ( FR ) We would have voted in favour of those amendments seeking to provide better compensation for passengers , but since all the amendments are in practice voted on en bloc , we did not want to back those which exempt certain service providers , such as tour operators , or which aim to reduce the obligations of the airlines .
In particular , we are opposed to the latter not being liable in the event of strikes .
It would , in fact , be inconceivable that airline employers should escape their obligations when it is their own wage and employment policy that is the cause of such strikes .
I congratulate Mr Lisi on the excellent report he has presented on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation establishing common rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding and of cancellation or long delay of flights . I support this report , especially the recommendation of opting for a single distance criterion applying to compensation , delay and the placing of passengers in a lower class .
I would also like to stress that complying with the provisions laid out in this regulation , especially those relating to compensation in cases of non-compliance , will require a serious and fundamental rethinking of the way air carriers operate . For this reason it would be appropriate to extend the period before this regulation enters into force by a few months .
. Whilst not perfect , this regulation does address a very important issue .
However , I am concerned that , by adopting the regulation , we may have severely damaged a much needed community service , without realising it .
The helicopter shuttle to the Isles of Scilly is a vitally important link and a necessity to my region .
Without the helicopter service to ferry visitors to and from the mainland , the economy of this tiny island will be devastated .
As the objective of the regulation was to deal with fixed wing services , I do not believe that it was meant to cover such niche operations .
They only operate two helicopters on a shuttle service , are often victim to bad weather , and do not have the luxury of ' standby ' helicopters in case of mechanical failure .
If a mechanical breakdown does occur early in the day , all subsequent flights are affected .
The element that covers such occurrences could mean paying out compensation to such a level that the service would simply cease to operate .
We raised this privately with the Commission at yesterday 's debate , but I would ask the Commission again to rectify urgently an oversight which could ruin a beautiful island and a community .
Food additives are already regulated . Apart from sweeteners and colourings , the bulk of these are obtained from natural raw materials .
These substances , the so-called ' E numbers ' that we find on the packaging of foodstuffs , are needed for the development and running of the agri-food industry . They are used in operations as diverse as preserving and regulating mixtures , enhancing flavours and improving the appearance of the product .
Hence the importance of this report in the context of the broader discussion of food safety , at a time when various food and veterinary crises , such as BSE , foot-and-mouth disease , sewage sludge , dioxins , nitrofurans , etc. have significantly shaken consumer confidence , further highlighting the need to change production methods .
The image of food additives among consumers has deteriorated , even taking account of risk assessments and the concept of the acceptable daily intake .
Today , there are scientific and technological means of improving production methods , and of forewarning us against misuse . This guarantees the precautionary principle .
Tighter labelling and packaging regulations are needed in order to guarantee that the necessary information is included .
For these reasons , we agree with the rapporteur .
The Commission should carry out a general evaluation of the use of food additives , basing future authorisations on three criteria : technological need , a high level of protection for human health , and labelling which does not mislead the consumer .
The conciliation procedure under discussion allows the European Parliament to assess the requirements of the 2004 EU Budget . Among other things , it establishes an agreement on levels of expenditure for agriculture and fisheries .
Against the backdrop of enlargement , this budget promotes greater economic , social and territorial cohesion . On the other hand , it offers a very limited increase in appropriations .
I wish to comment here on some of the financial provisions relating to agriculture and fisheries .
I welcome the appreciable increase in allocations , especially for rural development , although that increase is mainly directed at the candidate countries .
Also to be welcomed are the budgetary efforts dedicated to health protection , consumers and food safety , not forgetting the environmental criteria needed for high-quality agriculture .
I give my full support to the creation of a special budgetary heading for farmers affected by emergencies and calamities such as foot-and-mouth disease , swine fever and other diseases .
Like the common agricultural policy , this budget provides a relative increase in the amounts allocated to fisheries .
I can only disagree , however , with the appreciable cuts made in the research budget and the structural funds linked to this sector .
Strengthening the control and implementation of each Member State 's quotas is , therefore , desirable . This will avoid penalising those who comply while offenders get off scot-free .
It is a cause for concern that commitment implementation for internal policies has fallen to 10 % as of April 2003 , compared with 24 % in 2002 .
This is due , of course , to the budget chapter on technological research and development , which is a priority given the EU 's weaknesses in this area .
There is also a downward trend in terms of commitment implementation for areas of social policy , especially for the titles relating to the social dimension and employment as well as education and youth , even though these priority areas were already underfunded .
The reasons for this situation , apart from a lack of political will , include bureaucracy , a lack of transparency and the inflexibility of spending regulations .
The poor implementation argument cannot , of course , be used to justify cuts in sensitive areas .
It is unacceptable to suggest that allocations to the social dimension and employment are unnecessary , at a time when unemployment is on the increase in the EU .
I regret that the rapporteur did not specifically address the fisheries question , especially the reconversion of the fleet which used to fish in Morocco waters and the lines relating to social dialogue with the sector .
That would have been useful , bearing in mind the planned reduction of the preliminary draft budget for 2004 and the Council 's vagueness about funding for the reform of the common fisheries policy .
Through this report , the European Parliament , which has power of control over implementation of the EU Budget , has analysed allocations for 2003 .
The aim is to ensure that the EU 's financial resources are used effectively in order to attain the goals laid down in its policies , as well as to guarantee continuity with next year 's budget .
It is , therefore , with a sense of grave disquiet that I agree with the conclusions of this report , which draws attention once again to the problem of funds that are committed and not used . This is especially worrying since a part of those funds falls under the N + 2 rule , which states that funds committed must be used by the Member States within two years of the initial allocation , or the funds will be forfeited .
This situation becomes even more unacceptable and disgusting when it occurs in the implementation of the Structural Funds and in the internal policies of the EU .
I therefore lend my support to the transparent , frequent and detailed presentation of sums cancelled , annulled or forfeited because they have not been used , as well as an assessment of the financial impact of those losses .
This valuable information should be presented by budget heading and by Member State .
I also support the idea of streamlining the rules for submitting applications for structural funds , especially by improving the timetabling and implementation of those funds .
These provisions must be adopted when the mid-term review of the Structural Funds is undertaken .
. ( FR ) We voted in favour of this report because one cannot disagree with the condemnation of this despicable situation in which children are turned into slave soldiers .
At the same time , however , the hypocrisy of a text originating from the political representatives of rich countries whose ruling classes are to such a great extent responsible for the wretched plight of these countries is something that disgusts us .
For example , what is meant by statements about having a strategy to combat poverty , or by the promise - which we know to be a lie - to facilitate such children 's access to medical care , social services and schooling ?
Besides , while the European Parliament is expressing its indignation , those States which make up the Union are continuing to maintain relations with the leaders of those countries .
To take only one recent example , the fact that the current President of Liberia uses child soldiers did not , four years ago , prevent the leaders of the French State from giving him an honourable welcome to their country .
The rule of armed gangs has never interfered with the arms manufacturers selling their arms to the regime , or with the jewellery companies recovering contraband diamonds .
While civilian populations are massacred and children are dehumanised by being turned into slave soldiers , the looting continues .
There is a connection between poverty and trafficking in children .
The focus must therefore be upon the fight against poverty if it is to be possible to eliminate trafficking in children .
The Commission must devise a strategy for fighting poverty and design a common EU policy focused upon prevention , support for , and protection of , the victims and tough punishment of the perpetrators .
This also means requiring countries that cooperate with the EU to introduce tough legislation on trafficking in children .
. ( FR ) We voted against the joint resolution .
The discretion of the State must not take precedence over that of the people .
Contrary to what has been stated , the referendum was not a first step towards the restoration of normality .
It was antidemocratic , since the opposition did not have the right to campaign .
It put in place a Chechen constitution which legitimises Moscow 's dominant power , making it compulsory to use the Russian language alone in government matters , and giving the President of the Russian Federation the power to dismiss the Chechen President .
The main concern of the people of Chechnya is not the fight against terrorism , but rather the fight against military occupation and the fight to improve their living conditions .
These are atrocious as a result of Russian bombardments .
Unemployment , which is already massive in the Russian Federation , owing to ultra-liberal policies , is made even worse in Chechnya and in the Caucasus by the demands of the military .
Moreover , it is curious that the ad hoc delegation has not reported these facts to us .
Peace in Chechnya and the search for a political solution require the opening up of direct negotiations between the representatives of President Maskhadov and the Russian authorities .
The end of military conflict can only be based on an official cease-fire and the withdrawal of the Russian armed forces .
.
( NL ) Yesterday , during the debate on Chechnya , my German colleague Mr Markov presented an optimistic view of the renewed stability , the referendum held , and support for reconstruction .
However , he was clearly critical of the policies of the Russian Government and advocated a peaceful and humanitarian approach for the future .
I do not think that I was alone in finding the word ' stabilisation ' somewhat provocative , although I know that Mr Markov did not intend it to be , and now himself agrees that he should not use that word again as it gives rise to misunderstandings .
Terms such as ' stability ' and ' reconstruction ' are often used by occupying powers wishing to gain support for their continuing occupation .
The terminology used creates the impression that the conflict is over and that it goes without saying that Chechnya has a future as an autonomous part of the Russian Federation .
I think that the conflict is still going on , that the referendum is seen by the majority of Chechens as an instrument of the military occupying powers , and that , on the basis of the assurances of the late General Lebed , there must be negotiations between the Chechen State structures arising from earlier elections and the Russian State claiming this region .
In this connection , I can only support the resolution of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , although it unfortunately lacks a reference to the abduction of Arjan Erkel .
. ( FR ) It is understandable that the European Parliament should be concerned about the situation in Chechnya .
Is that , though , a reason for ignoring the most elementary principles of international law , such as the national sovereignty of Russia , non-interference in its internal affairs , the right of the Russian political authorities to take the necessary measures to guarantee the territorial integrity and the indivisible nature of their State ?
I do not think so , particularly since the reasons given to support the usual condemnations of events in Chechnya seem to me to be totally mistaken .
Even if some people sometimes forget it , we are dealing here with a legitimate fight against terrorism .
Contrary to what a handful of people in the humanitarian , human-rights lobby would have us believe , there are no good terrorists and bad terrorists .
There are terrorists , full stop , in other words fanatics who , in their contempt for the dignity of the human person , are committing murderous attacks against innocent people .
Yes , a political solution is desirable in Chechnya , and I applaud the efforts that Vladimir Putin is making towards achieving it , but it will only be credible if the terrorist factions renounce violence once and for all .
That is what I hope will happen .
. ( EL ) The ? U is going to Cancun having carried out what is for farmers a disastrous interim reform of the CAP , which it is offering as a ' gift ' to the competitive global market in agricultural products .
It is also prepared to abolish export subsidies and duty on imports from developing countries , which will result in the sidelining of our agricultural products .
It is also going prepared to start discussions on competition and foreign investment , on terms which will be onerous for developing countries , in that they will suffer even greater exploitation by the multinationals .
They are also discussing the opening up of public services and utilities in these countries , so that the multinationals will have unimpeded access .
What the WTO is not prepared to discuss is access to cheap drugs and the protection of biodiversity .
The right to health , education , safe food , water , telecommunications and energy is being subjugated to commercial interests and increased profit .
We voted against the European Parliament resolution because , although it expresses certain reservations , in essence it accepts the role of the World Trade Organisation .
The Communist Party of Greece does not believe in the reformation of the WTO , so that inequalities in international trade can be levelled out and the countries of the developing world can develop .
However , it does believe in the fight of the peoples .
.
( SV ) We Swedish Moderates believe that the GATS Agreement on including the service sector in the WTO 's free trade provisions is an important step in the right direction of increased international trade . In this area , we see no reason , however , for exempting education , the health sector and important parts of the cultural sector , such as audiovisual activities , from liberalisation .
European education and culture , traditionally characterised by cultural diversity , have every opportunity to thrive in an open world market and indirectly to support minority cultures , in particular .
On this point , we have a view at variance with the resolution , but we are voting for the resolution as a whole .
The 5th WTO Ministerial conference , which will take place in Cancun in September , seems to be governed once again by the requirements of free trade rather than by an approach that seeks to shift the balance back towards national sovereignties .
With regard to procedure , the Commission appears still to wish to use the negotiating mandate granted in 1999 for Seattle , which lacked relevance even then and is today completely out of date .
As for the European Parliament , it is only consulted in the present resolution , which contains a brief debate and has no binding legal value .
Negotiations will , therefore , once again be opened in conditions that lack transparency , which does not bode well .
Fundamentally , the issue at stake is the right of each people to determine the society in which it lives .
In particular , this involves the right to choose its own farming model , as discussed superbly by Mrs Dominique Souchet during yesterday 's debate , the right to choose how its own public services operate ( and their limits ) , the right to safeguard its independence or to apply the precautionary principle by banning certain imports . There is also the right freely to uphold a regional preference or a preference that will benefit poor countries , in order to make a choice that expresses solidarity .
. ( FR ) We have , of course , voted against the joint resolution on the WTO because we are opposed to the capitalist system , and to all international organisations that represent it .
We have also voted against or abstained on most of the amendments because , even though they contain good intentions on making the capitalist world a better place , they are simply participating in the overall dishonesty .
It will take more than a few stopgap measures in the shape of amendments by the European Parliament to improve capitalism .
. ( FR ) We are voting against the joint resolution on the forthcoming WTO conference .
This resolution again adopts positions that have traditionally been advocated by the European Commission for extending the scope of negotiations in the WTO .
On what are known as the Singapore issues , it consequently recommends that negotiations should be officially opened on competition , investments , trade facilitation and public procurement .
This would give the WTO further powers .
This resolution also considers that it would be possible to ensure the satisfactory reform of world governance by establishing a more balanced and closer relationship between the WTO and other international organisations .
This misses the point of what the WTO is .
This organisation was founded with the aim of encouraging trade liberalisation .
It was designed to ensure that the imperialist countries would dominate it .
It imposes itself like an antidemocratic force and its decisions , which are taken without any form of popular scrutiny , have to be transposed into national or Community legislation .
The WTO is a war machine in the service of the financial powers .
Adjusting the balance of its relationships is not enough to solve a problem of this nature .
A democratic reform of international trade will take place despite the WTO , not through it .
. ( FR ) I have voted against this resolution because it lacks balance .
Firstly , Parliament has supported the inclusion on the Cancun agenda of the so-called Singapore issues , in other words , issues relating to investment , competition , trade facilitation and public procurement . This goes against the interests of the poor countries .
Secondly , Parliament has missed an opportunity to take a stand against the complaint relating to GMOs that the United States has lodged against the EU and to reject the slanderous propaganda that has accompanied this complaint and which fools no one .
We only have to recall the unacceptable stance the United States has adopted on the issue of accessibility to medicines .
Thirdly , the idea that the world 's public assets , such as water , must be considered to be the common heritage of humanity has not been accepted .
Lastly , Parliament has not upheld the principle of the hierarchy of laws between WTO law and international environmental and social law , or the principle of the primacy of the United Nations .
Of course we wish to promote a more multilateral approach , but the context of the Cancun meeting is still a source of great concern .
I can only hope that my reservations are unfounded and that unlike at Doha , we will achieve our aim without having to wait for another round of negotiations .
Mr President , I have abstained on the Blokland report and on the amendments tabled by my group because I am not at all unhappy about the recently adopted reform on voting arrangements in the ECB .
I do not think that a system based on Member States ' share of total GDP would be any fairer or more efficient .
In particular , I am not going to condemn the fact that the Council has disregarded Parliament 's decision to reject the ECB 's recommendation .
On the contrary , this recommendation was very well thought-out , extremely balanced and I am delighted that the Council of Ministers has rallied around this proposal .
This is why I have abstained on the Blokland report and voted against an amendment from my own group .
The scant importance accorded to Parliament 's reports on monetary policy is understandable .
Instead of conducting a genuinely critical analysis of the implementation of monetary policy , the same old arguments are repeated , regardless of the economic climate . It is no surprise , then , that this report should begin with the words ' [ c ] ongratulates once again the ECB for a successful introduction [ of the euro ] ' , and concludes cheerfully ' that the ECB reacted correctly to economic and financial developments ' .
All this is always packaged in the dogmas of service , support for the Stability Pact and flexibility of the labour market .
We know that a rigid monetary policy means that adjustments made to overcome economic crises are reflected in salaries and employment , affecting internal demand and increasing inequality , poverty , and social exclusion .
One cannot help but notice that the present climate of recession in the EU , and the disparities between inflation rates , demonstrate that a single monetary policy cannot respond effectively to the needs of Member States at different stages of economic development .
I therefore insist once more on the need for an in-depth review of the guidelines for monetary and budgetary policy . Their inflexibility has not only contributed to a failure to seize on the potential for economic growth in the last few years , but is also primarily responsible for the current recession and concomitant increase in unemployment .
That is why we voted against the report .
. ( FR ) The Blokland report welcomes the Euro 's appreciation towards the dollar but warns that this trend must not endanger exports .
It also exposes a black hole in monetary union : no one knows exactly what the exchange rate target for the euro is .
It is certainly not up to the ECB to set this target , because the bank 's sole task is to maintain price stability .
The call for a wide-ranging study of the euro 's development confirms that the ECB itself does not appear to be taking much interest in this problem .
This acknowledged and even proclaimed ignorance confirms that our analysis of the euro is correct : this is not an instrument designed to support an economic policy that is better coordinated and more favourable to employment .
It is basically a tool for the economic police , intended to put pressure on salaries and social expenditure .
It is not surprising to note , therefore , that this report , like the Gasòliba i Böhm report , is insistent on calling for the strictest orthodoxy , particularly in budgetary matters .
Far from deploring the breaches of the Stability Pact , we consider that its principles are both inapplicable in practice and profoundly damaging in their effects .
This is why we have voted against these two reports , which do nothing but compulsively restate plans that the economic situation has long since proven to be irrelevant .
. ( NL ) The discussion on the annual report of the European Central Bank , with the visit by the President of the ECB , is the only time each year when we are not left with the impression that the note-issuing bank for 12 of the 15 Member States has been privatised .
Whereas this type of bank used to be nationalised in order to enable greater political control over policy , politics is now being left behind .
Interest rates , exchange rates , the implications for vulnerable regions , relations with the United States of America , and the position of the developing world are thus largely being decided outside parliamentary democracy .
This also applies to the influence of the ECB and the Stability and Growth Pact on pensions , social security and the level of public service provision .
The rapporteur , Mr Blokland , rightly shows that the success or failure of the euro should not only be assessed in terms of the speed of introduction of the euro banknotes and coins at the start of 2002 , but also in terms of price increases for the provision of services .
I will gladly support him in his endeavours to have inflation forecasts , the influence of Member States ' governments , and especially reporting on all meetings of the Governing Council published , including dissenting opinions and the balance of votes , and the obtaining of greater influence over the composition of the Governing Council on the part of Parliament .
This is the only way we can prevent the ECB from developing into an instrument that is at odds with the majority of the inhabitants of the EU .
. ( FR ) This report does not constitute a departure from the principle that applies when studying annual reports , according to which one is obliged to praise the institution concerned .
It is true that this time the ' courageous ' rapporteur dares to decry the fact that the introduction of the euro has resulted in what he modestly calls ' effects ' on inflation .
By the same token , the ECB is asked to keep an eye on the speed at which the markets react to or disregard its decisions on monetary policy .
So much for the ' negative ' aspects of a report , which otherwise delivers a eulogy to the ECB 's activities in the guise of an analysis .
Having been congratulated on reacting correctly to economic and financial developments , and on the euro 's appreciation towards the dollar , the ECB is now receiving the dividends of its unswerving allegiance to federalist and monetarist dogma .
In these circumstances , no one will be surprised at the passages dealing with the ECB 's independence and even less with the attack against the Member States that have failed to comply with the Stability and Growth Pact , which risks undermining the credibility of the euro zone !
Incidentally , it should come as no surprise that I have voted against this report .
I profoundly regret the fact that Parliament has not called for a report devoted exclusively to the first assessment of the introduction of euro notes and coins . I proposed such a report , incidentally , in my motion for a resolution ( B5-640 / 2002 ) on the effects of the introduction of the euro , which is annexed to today 's report .
While this report emphasises the success of the entire operation and insists on wider powers for the Eurozone , it also expresses disappointment with the inflationary pressures of the changeover to the euro , particularly in the services sector , and calls for an investigation into financial irregularities , just as I did in my resolution .
The Commission and the ECB recognise that the impact was greater than the 0.2 % predicted but considerably smaller than the effects experienced by consumer organisations and than the information on inflation reported by some national central banks suggested .
Nevertheless , the report discusses developments in bank charges and commissions in the euro zone .
A full assessment is needed to investigate the introduction of excessive increases , especially for domestic payments , and illegal charges on crossborder payments . Such charges penalise consumers and increase the cost of transactions .
Banks cannot expect consumers and SMEs to meet the cost of lost foreign exchange revenues .
I therefore welcome the fact that my amendment has been adopted .
. ( NL ) The tightening measures proposed by the rapporteur are at odds with past experience .
It appears almost impossible for both Germany and France , the large Member States that have taken the initiative for the euro , as well as for southern Member States with a weaker economy , to observe the Stability Pact 's strict requirements .
Low taxation combined with the discharging of public debts and the prevention of new budgetary shortages has disastrous effects on social security , public services and the problem-solving capacity of the government in general .
There will soon be no more money available for everything in which democracy requires the government to play an active role .
Weak areas become increasingly more dependent on the EU 's structural funds , cohesion funds and the common agricultural policy , and here too , less and less funding will be available , proportionately speaking , in the long run .
The rapporteur is right to want to avoid price increases coinciding with the euro 's introduction in the new Member States of the euro zone .
In fact , price increases are already a reality , because invariably , the payment of luxury goods and services is already being required in euros instead of the national currencies that are still valid there for the time being .
The abolition of small currencies , which is also advocated , will in practice lead to yet further price increases because figures will be rounded up by quite a large margin .
It is for these reasons that I reject this measure .
. ( FR ) Everything is for the best in the best of all possible worlds !
This is basically the attitude of this report on the international role of the euro zone .
Whilst everyone is concerned at the euro 's appreciation towards the dollar - a phenomenon that heavily penalises our exporters - whilst some are wondering about the criteria for interpreting the stability pact , and whilst the Commission is stepping up its threats against States that cannot meet the overwhelming constraints imposed by Maastricht , the rapporteur talks about the euro as a major success for European integration , which will lead to greater prosperity and to a European identity , and cannot see beyond the independence of the Central Bank and the policy of price stability .
In his opinion , the euro is so successful that a single representative for the euro zone should even be appointed for the international political institutions !
In short , the European Parliament has once again allowed itself to be carried away by an ideological and demagogic interpretation of the observable situation .
This is all quite mind-boggling and shows unbelievable short-sightedness where the economic reality is concerned .
This report is irrelevant and I shall , of course , vote against it .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

In yesterday 's questions to Council , the President ? in-Office of the Council did not answer my question on the number of victims of the war in Iraq .
He said that he could not reply because he did not have the necessary information .
My supplementary question also met with a contemptuous and deafening silence .
I tabled this question on 14 May and we are now in July ; if the Council had wanted to answer , it would have provided some information yesterday on the number of human lives lost .
I consequently deduce that the Council , rather than being unable to give information , does not wish to answer . This could be interpreted as demonstrating scorn for the fact that the European Parliament represents the people .
The victims of an unjust war must not be consigned to oblivion or to disdain by an institution such as the European Parliament . I therefore ask you , Mr President , to support my request to defend the dignity of our Parliament and to support my request to find out how soon we will be able to get this information from the Council .
We will make a note of that in the Minutes , and the Council will be informed .
( The Minutes were approved )
The next item is the report ( A5-0230 / 2003 ) by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities on women in rural areas of the European Union in the light of the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy ( 2002 / 2241 ( INI ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that it is an excellent political conjuncture to be debating women in rural areas just when the reform of the common agricultural policy is being finalised , the reform of the common fisheries policy is continuing and nothing in the planned reforms has been decided for women .
I thank the Conference of Presidents for approving the initiative of the Committee on Women 's Rights to draft this report and all the political groups which , with their participation and amendments , have enriched the initial draft of my report .
I also warmly thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for supporting this report and cooperating with us by drafting an opinion , the most important points of which are included in the proposed resolution .
Today , in the European Union , we are looking for efficient strategies to develop rural areas on the basis of the new European standard and , at the same time , to combat local and regional inequalities .
Within the framework of this policy , we all recognise that human resources are a development factor of prime importance .
Our policies must therefore be based on the principle of equality between men and women if we really want to give development opportunities to all rural citizens , men and women alike .
The policies of the European Union to strengthen the role of women in rural areas have not had the anticipated results .
Today , in the European Union , the proportion of women working in agriculture is 37 % .
This percentage varies from one country to another , but the situation on farm holdings and in social life in rural areas has more or less the same characteristics .
Only one in five farms are managed by women and the majority of these are small farms .
Over the last decade there has only been an increase in this proportion of 1 % .
Approximately one in two women involved in agricultural production and life have the status of farmer 's wife or partner , a status of invisible , unrecognised work which is not in keeping with the quality of work objectives of the European citizen and which does not provide any preconditions for personal development and the growth of local society .
The level of education of women is very low , both as regards basic education and as regards the level of full or partial agricultural education .
Social security differs from country to country .
In some places women farmers have derived [ rights ] , in some places the same rights , and in this report we maintain that this issue should be dealt with seriously at European level .
We have had a shortage of tools to date .
Directive 86 / 613 on the application of the principle of equality between men and women , which also covers agricultural activity , is not binding enough and we therefore maintain it should be revised and brought into line with the new situation .
The Member States , for their part , must also recognise and safeguard the work of women farmers , as regards security and pensions , with contributions at levels compatible with family work .
Another proposal by our committee is that , within the framework of the programmes and the funding of the Structural Funds for rural development , especially the Leader Plus programme , particular attention should be paid to strengthening the role of women farmers .
At the same time , the Leader Observatory must be strengthened , so that it covers the gaps in European statistics as regards the situation of women in rural areas and completes them by collating additional figures and introducing networks so that we can track the situation as it stands today and measure the progress we hope there will be in the future .
Similarly , the resolution which I recommend that you approve proposes replacing the current method of calculating subsidies , funding for farm holdings , which takes account of the holdings and not the active persons , with the result that women working as the second member of the couple lose out under a system which takes no account of the total number of people working on the holding and their real contribution .
It is proposed to direct the funds obtained from redistributing direct support to programmes in favour of women farmers , while we call on the European Commission to make provision within the framework of the future programme for the Structural Funds for rural development , in the new programme period , for a special programme for women farmers , due to the fact that , so far , the horizontal lines in the Structural Funds have not achieved the expected results .
On the other hand , we call on both the European Commission and the Member States to make life in rural areas easier and more attractive to young women , young women farmers , because we see that the presence of women in rural areas is a declining demographic development .
You can find all the proposals and the explanatory statement in our report .
.
( ES ) First of all , I wish to thank Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for having taken the initiative with this report , and I would also like to express my gratitude to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture on this report .
The committee has welcomed this report , with the content of which it largely agrees .
This is an own-initiative report and raises a set of issues that will help to place women nearer the centre of the Union 's common agricultural and rural development policies .
The report pursues the same approach taken by the Agriculture Council in its conclusions of May 2002 on gender equality in the CAP and in rural development policy .
That document focuses on the need to consolidate the second pillar of the CAP and the Commission fully shares this opinion .
In fact , in our proposals for CAP reform , which were approved in Luxembourg last week , additional funds have already been set aside for rural development as of 2005 .
Before making a detailed study of some of the points , I should like to recall that Regulation ( EEC ) No 1257 / 99 on rural development aid already allows Member States to include specific measures for women in their rural development programmes , such as investment in farm holdings run by women , aid to integrate young women farmers , training , the marketing and processing of farm products , aid for artesanal activity , rural tourism and other things .
Some Member States have already funded measures specifically targeting women or have integrated the principle of equal opportunities in their programmes for rural development , for example , including gender as a selection criterion for allocating Union funds .
For this reason , some of the measures that the report calls on the Commission to take , such as item 6 , for example , should be requested by the Member States that are already in a position to implement them .
The Commission agrees fully with some of the requests made in the report .
I shall now address these .
First of all , in its procedures for approving relevant projects under the Structural Funds , Parliament asks the Commission to ensure that due attention is paid to the need to give women in farming a more relevant role to play .
From the beginning , in the 2000-2006 Structural Funds programming period , the Commission recommended that the principle of equal opportunities should be integrated into the Structural Funds and , more recently , the Commission published a Communication that includes recommendations to Member States such as awarding extra points in the selection criteria to projects that contribute to gender equality or to the application of specialist knowledge in this area in the funds ' management .
The interim evaluation of the Structural Funds , due to take place at the end of this year , will take account of these developments .
The Commission also agrees with the European Parliament 's insistence on the importance of the Leader initiative - items 12 , 13 and 25 of its report - in promoting the role of women in rural areas .
The Member States are already obliged to reveal in their annual reports the number of local action groups in which women are part of the decision-making body , the number of women who benefit from Leader funds and the budget that is allocated to these projects .
The interim evaluation of Leader , which will be presented at the end of this year , will also give us a better understanding of how these initiatives are working .
Furthermore , the Commission intends , in line with the proposal you make in item 24 , to ensure that one of the tasks of the future European observatory , Leader , is to compile and disseminate best practice on integrating and involving farmers in rural development .
The Commission agrees with Parliament on the need to create incentives to encourage women 's participation in farm production and to promote a balanced representation of women farmers in the various decision-making bodies .
There are , however , some points your report makes with which the Commission cannot agree .
The report wants the Commission to attach priority to ensuring that resources obtained through the modulation of direct aid are reallocated to programmes that incorporate measures to benefit the social groups most in need , such as women in rural areas .
Nevertheless , as you know , it falls to the Member States to decide on the future reallocation of resources .
Nor can the Commission accept the request to create a unit responsible for equal opportunities in the Directorate-General for Agriculture .
This Directorate-General has already conducted a highly detailed study of the issue of equality , and consequently we do not see any need to go further .
Lastly , I wish to look at Parliament 's request for a revision of Directive 86 / 613 / EEC on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity , including agriculture .
The Commission is of the opinion that such a revision is unnecessary , since many aspects of this Directive , especially those concerning employment and working conditions , are already regulated in the recent Directive 2002 / 73 / EC amending Directive 76 / 207 / EEC , and , given that these recent amendments also apply to self-employed workers pursuant to Paragraph 1 ( 3 ) , we do not feel there is any need to go further .
Furthermore , applying the category of self-employed worker to spouses provides , in principle , adequate coverage for social security schemes , without discriminating on the grounds of gender since the applicable legislation would in this case be Directive 79 / 7 / EEC , on the progressive implementation of the principle of equal treatment for men and women in matters of social security , which would enable us to address such situations .
These are the observations I wish to make on this initiative , and I thank you very much for having undertaken this task .
Mr President , this report on women in rural areas is well-timed , as the role and position of women in agriculture and rural areas will become even more important in view of the fundamental change in the system of the common agricultural policy to which the agriculture ministers more or less agreed when they met in Luxembourg last week .
Now , at last , there will be improved opportunities for giving support in this area , although , of course , for the farmers whose income is to be cut , this is no substitute and not much of a comfort .
This is where women will come into their own , having , as is well known , a greater flexibility and more imaginative approach when it comes to taking on new tasks that can bring in some additional income .
This does of course depend on the right framework conditions being in place , and also on gender mainstreaming - or , to put it in comprehensible terms , equality of opportunity for men and women .
Serious attention needs to be given to this in this context , so that new potential sources of income can be opened up in labour , marketing , tourism and culture - areas in which women are especially efficient , and in relation to which there are many sensible suggestions in the report by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , whom I thank most warmly for her work .
I am particularly grateful that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , in its opinion , harks back to my 1997 report on the situation of assisting spouses of the self-employed in agriculture .
Six years have passed since this House called upon the Commission to cause an amendment to be made to the 1986 directive on the application of the principle of equal treatment between men and women engaged in an activity , including agriculture .
I regret that the Commission has taken no specific action in response to this report .
As Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has just reminded us , we did , for example , demand the registration of working married couples , so that they would no longer be invisible in the labour force .
If I might say one last thing , Mr President , if you want to do something to keep women in rural areas , you have to ensure that they suffer no discrimination either as regards fair payment for their work or as regards social security .
We want and need mandatory insurance specifically for the millions of assisting spouses , and this is where I might , perhaps , recommend Luxembourg 's approach as exemplary .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I am speaking not as a woman , but as my group 's representative .
You too , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , spoke as chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Women make up some 40 % of the fifteen million people who work in agriculture in the EU , and run one in every five farms - around 1.3 million - which , apart from a mere 3 % larger ones , are small and medium-sized operations .
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report gives more detailed information on this .
Although , of all the Community 's policies , the CAP is far and away the most highly developed , there is still a positively criminal neglect of gender mainstreaming .
The consequence of this is that there is scarcely any visible sign of women in rural areas enjoying equal status and equal rights .
Although a number of instruments have been devised , any visible breakthrough in the CAP is still a long way in the future .
Even though , in my view , the reform of agricultural policy left the fields strewn with dead lobbyists , it does have a very apparent shortcoming in that women have not managed to get the systematic promotion of women in agriculture accepted .
Especially painful though that is , it is primarily in the restructuring of rural areas in the candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe that even greater pain will be felt .
What is on our minds is the new working arrangements that have to be devised .
We are thinking about facilities that improve the balance between working life and family life , as well as about childcare facilities , and the provision of care for disabled and older people .
We are thinking about the need to further develop rural tourism , and about how to promote alternative energies , and regional marketing cycles .
These may be only ad hoc approaches , but they have added to the range of culture on offer .
Women have eventually found a small niche in all this and seized an opportunity , but I think of the state of Bavaria , from which I come and which the President knows well - there , in 2002 , EUR 17 million from the rural development programme were not allocated , which - if we add in the co-financed sums that could have been used for specific projects , including for women - means that a total of EUR 34 million could not be paid out .
As regards many of the available resources , we still have to exert pressure on the Member States , and so I ask the Commission , when monitoring the programmes ' operation , to pay much closer attention to the way in which gender mainstreaming is actually implemented , so that it does not remain merely a topic for pious utterances .
My group has endorsed Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report .
We have tabled amendments in the hope of extending it to cover the fisheries sector , in which a very large number of women work .
I speak also on behalf of the rapporteur when I ask the House to support us in seeking this , and I appeal to the Commission to include this dimension .
I too should like to congratulate Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou on her sound report and , above all , would advise the Commission again to read it very carefully , particularly the statistical summaries , which paint a lamentable picture of the impact of women in rural areas .
Women have far too little power ; far too few of them are at the helm of businesses , and in my country , the Netherlands , with 6 % of female business managers , they are worse off than anywhere else ; we should hang our heads in shame .
Moreover , one in two women farmers fall within the spouse or partner category , which is particularly detrimental to their entitlement to social security .
That should change ; in that respect , I totally agree with what Mrs Lulling said about finally adopting the recommendations of 1997 .
I should like , for a moment , to dwell upon the rural policy regulation .
Agricultural policy has indeed changed recently , and I do not know whether we should be that pleased with every aspect of this change .
When the whole dossier is finally analysed , the rural policy regulation appears to have become the cuckoo in the nest .
Mr Olsson too has already indicated in his report on rural policy how important this can be , for example , in order to give the switch-over to other sources of income , such as , agro-tourism , care farms , new energy sources , organic farming , local services and cultural manifestations a shot in the arm .
That is where opportunities lie , particularly for women .
This has already been said by other speakers and I should like to add something .
There are vast areas in Europe with large cities .
Particularly rural areas near large cities can develop a raft of special services , and so I urge that this rural regulation should include a rural policy criterion in relation to large cities .
I really think it is worth giving serious thought to this as a committee , and I have also raised questions in writing on this matter .
I should like to take this opportunity to warn against certain forms of rural pauperisation .
Although buildings , in particular , do , in fact , form part of the cultural heritage , they are in a bad state of repair in many areas .
I think that a sound rural policy could save a great deal , and especially for women , there are many opportunities to use these buildings for new services , such as cultural events , receiving tourists , and so on .
I was disappointed when the Commissioner said that he could not give any guarantees for channelling the resources from the CAP leg to the second pillar .
I know that the Commission wanted to put aside more resources for this in the first instance and that the Council cut these back .
I also know therefore , that we must sound the alarm , particularly in our own country , but nevertheless , I hope that the Commission will continue to insist on a greater shift towards the rural policy regulation .
Mr President , it is important to pay particular attention to women in rural areas of the European Union , who represent almost half of the agricultural workforce and almost 29 % of the unpaid workforce in some countries , such as Portugal .
In many cases , however , their contribution is not properly recognised and they do not have the support they need for their quality of life to improve .
This report is thus very timely .
I congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , on the work she has carried out , and especially on her inclusion of proposals , some of them tabled by me , relating to the need to put particular emphasis on family-based farming , support for small and medium-sized farmers , and recognition of women from these areas in terms of social security . The latter includes women 's right to a respectable retirement pension , though without their having to pay contributions which impose an excessive burden on family farms .
I cannot , I fear , offer similar congratulations to the Agriculture Council on its conclusions of 25 and 26 June , in relation to the reform of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) , because I believe that these conclusions pave the way for severe problems for family-based agriculture and small and medium-sized farmers . Women in rural areas play a prominent role in such farms , especially in less-favoured regions and in countries such as my own .
I would emphasise the special importance of the statement made in the report under debate here to the effect that the mid-term review of the CAP will only have a positive impact on equal opportunities if its objectives are substantially modified so as to ensure that family-based agriculture and small and medium-sized farmers are given particular prominence .
Equally important , however , are the proposals upholding the establishment of a specific programme devoted to the ' Women ' project , as well as those proposals emphasising the need to pay particular attention to creating public infrastructures , community facilities and quality services , so as to ensure an appropriate network of rural services in all areas , including high-quality family planning , educational and training services and cultural facilities .
I would conclude by insisting also on the need to close the severe gaps in agricultural statistics . The appropriate measures could then be adopted to improve living conditions for these women and make it easier for young women farmers to establish themselves .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteur for her initiative .
I think , Commissioner , that the whole debate illustrates the fact that we are facing two major problems .
First of all , I should like to see the common agricultural policy as an opportunity to look at rural development in a new light .
For this purpose , we will need to employ all the forces in rural areas .
We will need to shape those forces .
Some of these forces are more flexible than others .
I know from experience that women are often much more open to innovation than men .
I therefore hope that projects will be set up whereby entrepreneurship - which women display in practice but which is often not recognised economically , politically or socially - will be promoted .
This recognition is , of course , necessary .
I would like to give the example of farm tourism in Australia , where agriculture stopped being profitable a long time ago .
Families there live by farm tourism .
What would become of this without the female entrepreneur ?
This does , of course , require a proper social statute .
Do you not find it shameful that after all these years , as Mrs Lulling clearly stressed , there is still not one country , as far as I know , that has a proper statute for the self-employed helper ?
This is all done in dribs and drabs .
It remains a major problem and I think that the Union should take the initiative to guarantee women helpers in rural areas at least a minimum social standard .
( Applause from the centre and left )
Mr President , I support measures designed to assist and encourage the continuing participation of women in the challenging work of agriculture and rural development .
In so doing I ask the House to reflect on and acknowledge their already outstanding contribution , in particular the sacrifices and generosity of previous generations of rural women , who silently toiled under the most difficult conditions with little or no recognition other than the satisfaction of ensuring the welfare of their families and instilling in them the culture , ethos and spiritual values of a profession that has no equal .
Society owes them a debt of gratitude .
In the context of CAP reform , and with the greater emphasis on rural development , the role of women in rural society is of increasing importance .
Their leadership qualities are crucial in the mobilisation of the human and physical resources of the rural areas of an enlarged European Union .
Equal opportunities for rural women are a necessary prerequisite if we are to achieve the full potential of rural development measures .
I would like to see , for example , the Early Retirement from Farming Scheme amended to provide for their greater security .
Not for the first time I express concern about the continuity of the EU family farm structure , of which women are an important component .
Uncertainty about the long-term economic sustainability of farming , coupled with the availability of more financially rewarding employment for young people , has led to a worrying increase in the age profile of European farmers , of whom 37 % are women .
Of the 14.65 million people working on farms in the EU , 5.37 million are women .
The figure for Portugal , at 49 % , is the highest and for Ireland , my own country , at 11 % , the lowest .
Ireland 's unique family-farm structure is , however , best demonstrated by the fact that 97 % of Irish farms are jointly managed , with women playing an equal and important role .
If national governments are to achieve the desirable objective of restoring urban rural balance , already seriously out of hand , then the role of women must be adequately recognised and rewarded .
In conclusion , in Ireland there are many examples of women in leadership roles .
The Leader Programme is just one area that comes to my mind .
Likewise , the Irish Countrywomen 's Association one of the oldest in Europe has played an historic role in advancing the cause of rural women and in bridging the rural and urban divide .
Mr President , this is a timely report and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur at the outset on her well-intentioned drive .
Given the short deadline , she has taken a very reasonable and consensus-based approach .
Last year , at the Third World Congress of rural women held in Madrid , the principle of equal opportunities for countrywomen was upheld as a separate requisite of sustainable development for the rural areas of Europe .
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report follows that line .
She urges the Commission and the Member States , in cooperation with local government , to implement policies to improve the general living conditions of women in rural areas .
Although she clearly proposes the adaptation of the Leader + programme to the new circumstances arising from the accession of the candidate countries , the Commission , as Commissioner Solbes said , will not necessarily go further and immediately extend this adaptation process to all Community initiatives , Interreg , Equal , Urban , etc .
The accession of the new members of the European Union will overturn the current criteria and methods for maintaining the rural areas ' internal balance , owing to the fact that the percentage of the rural population in the European Union will more than double this year .
Although we have no reliable statistics on the percentage of women in these areas , either in the European Union or in the accession countries , the Spanish Economic and Social Council has put forward its available statistics on the European Union 's Member States .
To refer to just one statistic : half of all women working in rural areas only have primary school education .
Finally , it is quite evident that the Council of Agriculture Ministers needs to make a special effort actively to incorporate the gender dimension in rural development issues .
As the rapporteur , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , clearly urges , it is absolutely necessary to ensure that the old saying ' men for production , women for reproduction ' no longer has any meaning .
Mr President , I am very happy with this document .
I believe that it opens the door to more profound and structural phenomena , which relate to women in rural areas .
I believe that we have so far had successes in relation to isolated aspects , projects such as Equal and many others , which represent bringing women closer , an intention to help women in rural areas .
But often society does not accept or support these efforts by the European Union to help women .
The Leader projects , for example , are not always led by women .
It is frankly difficult to find a woman sitting at the table : the social system rejects it . What worries me in particular , however , are the structural problems .
For example , the depopulation of the countryside essentially goes hand in hand with the abandonment of women , because women have no place in the rural environment , their requirements are not socially recognised , they can neither exercise their rights nor develop themselves as individuals .
Studies have been done , in the University of Cantabria for example , which demonstrate that practically 99 % of women with university qualifications do not wish to return to the countryside .
We must incentivise transversal policies for helping women .
For example , with regard to accessibility of services , we must support the policy of subsidised transport , because women in the countryside often live far from any opportunity , far from medical service , and their children are far away from education since school transport has been removed .
Amongst the transversal support policies we should promote access to IT systems and bring the wealth of the urban system closer to the countryside .
Similarly , I believe we should study the harm that will be done through the delocalised policy , because clearly , not only are women going to end up without work , as in the case of the milk crisis , for example , and many other agriculture crises , but also their moveable and immoveable assets - particularly the former - will no longer be in the market .
Furthermore , reforestation is all very well , but we should bear in mind that these people go to the city without any assets , which have been the inheritance upon which they have supported the development of their enterprise .
Mr President , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has done great work on this report , which I believe has been improved .
I have therefore changed my initial position and I am voting in favour of this final text .
The results of the Council of Ministers of 26 June 2003 , however , have been insufficient in this regard .
I understand the efforts made today by Commissioner Solbes to present it in a positive manner .
I understand it because Mr Solbes , when he was Minister for Agriculture in Spain , was sensitive towards women in the field of rural development .
What has been agreed on the reform of the CAP , however , in no way takes women into consideration .
What is more , neither Commissioner Fischler in his proposals , nor what the Ministers have approved , makes the slightest mention of women .
I have studied all the agreements and only indirectly , by means of rural development or the mention of young farmers , can I see any improvement .
Bearing in mind , therefore , the importance of these agreements on the reform of the CAP , this is very serious and we must ensure that the regulations included in this reform take account of women .
The most interesting points in the Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou report , as it now stands , are the recognition and improvements for assisting spouses , men and women , the effective promotion measures , microloans , soft loans , and the proposal , which is very necessary , that women should participate in decision-making in professional and sectoral agricultural organisations .
It is necessary because the CAP is still sexist .
Mr President , the report mainly identifies the unfortunate position of women farmers .
However , it does not highlight the causes or who is responsible for this situation .
A conscientious effort is being made to disorientate by creating the impression in women farmers that their position can be improved within the framework of the even harsher anti-farming measures being promoted with the recent reform of the CAP .
The findings about the efficiency of programmes such as Leader I and II are also misleading .
It is a known fact that these programmes refer to complementary actions as far as farming and rural development are concerned and the level of funding under the so-called second pillar is not only trivial , but also mainly profits those who exercise a business activity in the subsidised sectors of these programmes .
The report essentially accepts the supplementary and unequal role of women farmers in agricultural activity , as well as the effort to remove women in rural areas from agricultural employment , which is why they are being guided to similar activities .
These proposals serve the European Union 's objective to further shrink the agricultural population and desert rural areas , which already have huge abandonment problems , especially in Greece .
Finally , this being so , proposals such as creating crèches , cultural centres , public transport and so on range from the insignificant to the cynically hypocritical .
Women farmers ' acute problems are the result of the CAP and anti-farming policies .
Consequently , only overturning them can safeguard the continuity of farming activity , a stable income and a dignified standard of living for women farmers .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I too should like to warmly congratulate and thank Mrs Kratsa for her own initiative report .
She has made a very big contribution to promoting and highlighting the problems faced by a particular professional category of women , women farmers .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , understanding and valuing the particular contribution which women farmers can make to improving rural areas , organised a public dialogue on the subject on 18 March 2003 .
Following the recent reform of the CAP , we expect , Commissioner , the additional funds which will be made available for rural development to target and improve the life of women farmers , which is downgraded and undervalued in all the regions of the European Union .
We particularly hope that the necessary infrastructures will be created which will allow women farmers to combine their working and family life and have quality of life .
Of course , we recognise that the third Community Support Framework helped enormously to create an institutional and funding action framework for rural development , which included women .
In Greece , thousands of women are benefiting from the Community initiative , Leader .
Nonetheless , legal and advisory support is needed for women in rural areas , with information and awareness-raising actions within local communities , training programmes , actions which will support the specific needs of women and local development objectives , in the aim of supporting and safeguarding employment and ensuring women farmers stay in their area .
Finally , I should like to refer to a very successful field of action in Greece , women 's cooperatives , especially rural tourism cooperatives .
The presentation of the report by Mrs Kratsa , whom I congratulate on her excellent work , makes up for the culpable silence on the fundamental role of women in the strategy for rural development .
At a time when we are adopting ' gender budgeting ' , we can only insist on the need to be able to quantify and assess this participation accurately .
We must also consider the social protection available to women and the support which is necessary and specific to their professional development and to their quality of life .
This is all the more important on the eve of enlargement .
The aim of this recognition will only be usefully achieved if the Commission applies itself to submitting a revised directive that would finally enable a genuine policy of equality to be developed in this sector , which should lead to the balanced representation of women farmers in the various decision-making arenas , access to separate social rights , the principle of equal pay , particular focus on the needs of women in rural areas when actions are selected and extending the LEADER + programme to cover the new situations created by enlargement .
This is how we will bring working spouses out of invisibility and make democracy work .
The next item is the oral question ( O-0049 / 2003 B5-0100 / 2003 ) , put to the Commission by Mr Caveri on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , and concerning the safety of coaches .
The question 's author , Mr Caveri , is unfortunately unable to be present , so we will first hear Commissioner Solbes Mira on this question .
. ( ES ) Mr President , until now , coach passengers have not been obliged to use safety belts , but a new directive has been approved recently , in accordance with which the Member States will require all occupants over three years old in vehicles of categories M2 and M3 to use the safety devices installed in vehicles in service .
Passengers in these vehicles will be informed of the obligation to use safety belts when the vehicle is moving .
The Member States will adopt the legal , regulatory and administrative provisions necessary to ensure compliance with the directive by 9 May 2006 .
In order to extend the obligatory installation of belts to all vehicles , including coaches , the Commission has also recently proposed a modification of three directives in force relating to safety belts .
Secondly , with regard to the issue of road infrastructure , the Commission intends to propose a directive on the guidelines to be adopted by the Member States in order to establish national systems for the identification and management of blackspots , safety audits and minimum rules on information for drivers for application within the trans-European road network .
The point relating to rail crossings , which is one of those raised by Mr Caveri , will be included in the procedures for the management of blackspots and safety audits proposed in this directive .
Finally , I would like to point out that the Commission has recently adopted a new action programme on road safety which includes a specific chapter on the safe transport of goods and passengers .
Apart from the directive approved recently on the training of professional drivers of goods and passengers by road , a legislative proposal is also being prepared , specifically a directive aimed at improving the application of the social provisions on driving and rest periods , as well as working hours .
This directive will lead to a considerable increase in the number of controls for verifying compliance with driving and rest periods .
Although the action programme does not include any specific measure on the construction of coaches , the Commission will carefully study the recommendations of ECBOS research project , which is producing a final report .
This project will make proposals aimed at improving the rules in force and will propose new regulations and standards for the construction of safer buses and coaches , in order , for example , to achieve better protection in the event of accidents involving overturning .
Furthermore , the Commission plans , in the near future , to propose an obligatory system for the approval of vehicles , for coaches and lorries , similar to the one in force for private cars .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , over recent months , a series of accidents involving buses , some of them serious , has led to public disquiet and to many bodies now giving their close attention to the question of whether the present rules on bus safety are adequate or whether they have to be made more extensive .
In so doing , they have shed light on the position as regards the law , organisational issues , and the technical state of the art .
To sum all this up , there is a strong common interest in not damaging the buses ' image as a basically very safe means of transport , with buses and coaches accounting for only 0.2 deaths per thousand million passenger-kilometres , compared with 6.8 for private cars and 0.6 for railways .
I would not want to let this opportunity go by without expressing my gratitude and appreciation to the many reputable bus companies and their drivers .
It would appear that the consensual view is that what is lacking is primarily attributable to the human factor on the one hand and to the way laws are implemented on the other .
Does the Commission think it possible that the situation may be improved , above all by influencing how people behave in road traffic and within enterprises , but also by the exchange of information ?
Secondly , is it not the case that greater use should be made of the opportunities for monitoring vehicles and their drivers , in order to be able to identify those we call the black sheep and make them take responsibility for their actions ?
I take the view that , thirdly , checks should be carried out to see whether the standards for testing currently in force are sufficient to ensure that the main examinations and safety tests on buses are carried out to a qualitatively high standard .
As the use of electronic components to ensure the stability and safety of vehicles increases , all the more necessary , I believe , does the regular inspection of this electronic equipment become .
Fourthly , I expect the Commission to give priority to the safety of buses and coaches when it submits its proposal on the Third Action Programme on Road Safety .
Mr President , apart from the accidents in France and Hungary , we also had a terrible accident in Greece just after Easter , in which 21 pupils lost their lives in Tembi , between Thessaloniki and Larissa , while they were on a school trip in a coach .
It was an incident which shook all of us in Greece , it was widely reported in Europe and , together with the other tragic accidents , has brought us to today 's debate .
There is , of course , the European Commission 's ten-year programme , which we shall also be looking at and commenting on extensively within the framework of the Committee on Regional Policy and Transport , and there are other ideas which are already referred to in our motion .
It has rightly been stressed that we must look immediately at the question of safety belts .
It has also rightly been stressed that we must look at the question of coach specifications and I welcome the European Commission 's position on this point .
However , we must , of course , also look at the question of driving times , because often drivers cannot do their job properly because they are exhausted .
The European Parliament has made a proposal here , which I hope the Council will deal with positively .
I , for my part , want to comment on two individual issues .
The first is the issue of speed limiters .
I highlight this because I myself was rapporteur to the European Parliament .
The legislation exists .
And it is up to the governments to apply this specific legislation as quickly as possible .
It has been proven that by limiting speed , especially in the case of large vehicles , we also limit the possibility of accidents and their consequences .
The second thing I want to say , and this concerns the European Commission , has to do with the projects funded under the Community Support Framework .
We will need to pay particular attention to road projects in order to avoid poor workmanship .
I have the particularly sad experience of my own country , where new projects have very serious levels of poor workmanship , which is why they are dangerous and cannot always be used safely .
Consequently , the quality of works needs to be strictly controlled by the European Commission .
The next item is the Commission statement on the fine imposed on the FNSEA and other French federations in the beef sector .
. ( ES ) Mr President , as you know , on 2 April 2003 the Commission adopted a decision confirming a violation of the competition rules by six federations in the beef sector .
The appropriate fines were imposed to the tune of nearly EUR 17 million .
We are talking about an agreement made in France between four federations of farmers and two federations of abattoirs at the end of 2001 .
The agreement consisted of a minimum price commitment and a suspension-restriction of imports from other Member States .
Initially it took the form of a public written agreement and then , once the Commission had sent letters of warning , of a secret oral agreement .
These agreements were made within the context of low prices in the beef market as a result of the crisis in the sector .
On the basis of data communicated by the Directorate-General for Agriculture , the Directorate-General for Competition opened up an investigation and sent demands for information in the middle of November 2001 .
On this basis , the Commission - and I would like to stress this - initially did no more than send letters of warning at the end of November 2001 .
All the parties to the agreement then assured the Commission , in writing , that they were putting an end to the illegal agreement .
But the Commission found evidence that the parties were maintaining the agreement secretly .
The unannounced inspections carried out in the middle of December 2001 confirmed the Commission 's suspicions .
The parties were given the opportunity to present written and oral comments .
The decision adopted on 2 April 2003 concludes , on the basis of a repeated ruling of the Court of Justice , that , firstly , there is a price agreement which violates the provisions of Article 81 of the Treaty and that , secondly , there is an agreement to suspend imports from other Member States , which also violates Community competition rules .
The documentation discovered by the Commission during the course of the investigation demonstrates that , furthermore , all the organisations in question knew that the agreement they were making was illegal and that they were liable for intervention by the competition authorities .
The Commission imposed fines of EUR 12 million on the FNSA , the main French agricultural federation , and of up to EUR 480 000 on one of the federations of abattoirs .
Please allow me to remind you that , in the event of very serious violations of competition rules , the Commission imposes fines of the basic sum for each participant , in principle , of a minimum of EUR 20 million .
The three main criticisms levelled at the Commission 's decision are : firstly , that this is an attack on trade union freedoms ; secondly , that the fine is excessive , given the context of crisis ; and thirdly , the Commission 's lack of action over the second mad cow disease crisis .
I will try to respond to these three arguments .
With regard to trade union freedom , the Commission believes that the scope of the decision has been exaggerated .
Trade union freedom is a fundamental freedom , recognised by everybody . The Commission reiterates this in its decision .
But this freedom does not give the right to do absolutely anything : a trade union cannot legitimately make an agreement on prices and import restrictions violating the principles of the common market .
The decision says no more than that .
With regard to the size of the fine , it must be borne in mind that it is set in accordance with the seriousness of the violation and with the aggravating circumstances .
Well , in this case the violation was serious but so were the aggravating circumstances .
In this respect , we should remember that the farmers obliged the abattoirs to sign the illegal agreement through acts of violence .
We must also remember that the parties , having provided assurances that the agreement would not be renewed , in actual fact continued to apply it in secret .
Furthermore , the Commission did take into account the difficult economic context the agricultural sector was working within , the dual crisis of mad cow disease and foot and mouth disease , which Mr Bernié referred to in his speech in this House on 7 April , and , it was precisely as a result of this very unusual context that for the first time the fine has been reduced by 60 % , a not inconsiderable percentage .
The third criticism is that it was the Commission itself that did not adopt adequate measures to deal with the mad cow disease crisis .
In this regard , we should remember that the Commission multiplied its measures for market stabilisation .
The intervention mechanisms were used extensively , and the application conditions were increased , specific crisis mechanisms were created to allow the Member States to withdraw from the market additional quantities of channels .
In this way , in a few months , almost 10 % of European consumption was withdrawn from the market .
More than EUR 1 billion of the Community budget was used for this operation and , furthermore , the Commission authorised the Member States to grant national aid to the worst affected farmers .
In the case of France , the Commission approved more than EUR 300 million in state aid .
Finally , we should remember that , although the crisis in the beef sector affected the whole of Europe , the Commission is not aware of any parties in any other Member State deeming it necessary to create an illegal cartel .
The decision , which explains the facts as established by the Commission and its illegal conclusions in detail , will be published shortly .
Commissioner , I asked the Commission to provide this explanation because I was so shocked at the fine that you wish to impose on French farming unions .
It punishes the unions twice : firstly you punish a sector for its ability to demonstrate initiative , which enabled it to provide assistance for coping with a quite exceptional crisis .
You then threaten the very existence of the unions , because the size of the fine is greater than their budget .
The French beef industry employs 200 000 farmers , whose average income is less than EUR 8 000 per year .
In the autumn of 2001 , prices fell by more than 45 % whereas the price of beef for consumption continued , paradoxically , to rise .
Furthermore , there was no sign of any European solidarity and the French market was saturated by consignments of meat at giveaway prices arriving from other Member States .
In this context of exceptional crisis , there was no longer even a market .
French farming unions decided , with the agreement of the French Minister for Agriculture and of his Ministry , to set a minimum price . This price was so low that it allowed for no profit margin at all .
There is no way that it was a secret agreement because , on the very evening on which the agreement was signed , the French unions held a press conference .
Despite what one reads in the press , therefore , this was not the setting-up of a cartel ; it was instead an act of solidarity to prevent the disappearance of one aspect of farm production : high-quality beef .
If Europe had not failed in its task of ensuring market stability , French farmers would not have needed to take over from it .
In an exceptional crisis , exceptional measures are needed .
To conclude , Commissioner , I should like to ask you a few questions .
Can you specify what measures the Commission took and can you tell me why these measures failed ?
Did you really understand the depth of farmers ' concern and the risk that a high-quality sector might disappear ?
Can you tell me on what basis you set the fine at EUR 16.7 million , a figure that I believe is astronomical ?
Do you not think that the Commission 's position runs counter to the principle of setting a minimum price ?
Lastly , do you not think that in a context in which the farming unions have asked the European Court of Justice to arbitrate , the Commission should try to calm the situation , given the circumstances , by withdrawing these penalties ?
Mr President , I totally disagree with your analysis .
We must remember the tragic situation facing the European Union in the autumn of 2001 , when the appalling mad cow crisis emerged : exaggerated fears on the part of consumers led to a staggering fall in beef consumption and prices collapsed to unprecedented levels .
Institutional caterers , hypermarkets and slaughterhouses refused to accept beef .
Desperate farmers saw their livestock pile up and their feed stock disappear and threatened public order .
And what proposals did the European Commission come up with ?
Feeble and ineffectual measures , which came nowhere near to addressing the scale of the crisis and the troubles that it was causing .
It proposed optional measures for slaughter and destruction , which some Member States did not implement , in particular Germany and the Netherlands , which exported their problems to France and refused to come to the aid of their own farmers .
In this context , the measures adopted in France by common agreement between the public authorities and the farming profession , which consisted of setting , in conjunction with slaughterers , a buying scale at prices that also matched the ' purchase for destruction ' prices set by the Commission and of appealing to importers to stop importing beef were perfectly appropriate to the situation and had an immediate calming effect .
The Commission 's accusation of an illegal agreement appears , therefore , to be completely out of touch and scandalous , given the seriousness of the situation at the time and , to be quite honest , both absurd and irresponsible .
I therefore urge the Commission to call off this action , which makes no sense and to dedicate all its energies to uncovering the real secret agreements which are the real threats to free competition .
.
( ES ) Mr President , clearly Community rules must be applied ; the system for calculating fines is regulated and I believe that in this case it has been applied in accordance with the established procedure and - as I have said - the special circumstances were taken into account and more favourable treatment given accordingly .
With regard to what the Commission did to resolve the crisis to which you refer , I mentioned in my initial presentation the sums allocated and the need to act in order to maintain the stability of the market .
Those are the arguments and naturally the Commission 's decision will explain all these elements in detail .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon .
The next item is the debate on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0337 / 2003 by Mr Bastiaan Belder , on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities , on the situation in Cambodia on the eve of the general elections of 27 July 2003 ;
B5-0343 / 2003 by Mrs J. van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the elections in Cambodia ;
B5-0346 / 2003 by Mrs Patricia McKenna , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on Cambodia ;
B5-0349 / 2003 by Mr Hartmut Nassauer , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on Cambodia ;
B5-0353 / 2003 by Mrs Luisa Morgantini , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Cambodia on the eve of the general elections of 27 July 2003 ;
B5-0357 / 2003 by Mr Graham R. Watson , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the situation in Cambodia on the eve of the general elections of 27 July 2003 .
Mr President , the political situation in Cambodia is complex .
Only this morning , a Dutch aid worker over there told me that he would not know which party he would vote for in the general elections at the end of this month .
His message is clear and fair : Europe must treat all Cambodian parties with the same amount of criticism as we follow their progress to the ballot boxes .
In that sense , I am also waiting for the report of the EU election observers .
Meanwhile , Cambodia is undergoing a transition - from being a country primarily dependent on humanitarian aid to being a regular developing country .
There is still a need for assistance from the European Union .
I have heard very critical comments from the field about the coordination and effectiveness of this European helping hand .
The way to build a better future for the people of Cambodia is through decentralisation and the frequent involvement of co-financing organisations .
In short , the Echo investments , while useful , require a logical sequel in the form of the actual implementation of the EC strategy document for Cambodia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it must indeed be recalled that an entire people were traumatised by the terrible years under Pol Pot 's regime in Cambodia .
Some two million people lost their lives , while an incalculable number were displaced and deported .
Even the wearing of spectacles put your life at risk , and higher education meant that you were doomed .
If , today , you travel through this beautiful tropical country , with its impressive stone buildings that testify to the antiquity of its culture , then , wherever you go , you still come face to face with the physical and mental damage done to a tormented people , who , first , were terrorised by the Khmer Rouge , and then put under the yoke by their Vietnamese liberators , finally achieving a small measure of normality under the UN mandate .
The reason why I have been able to follow this process is that I have visited the country a number of times and was one of the many who observed the elections in 1998 .
I might add that nowhere else in the world are there so many households headed by a woman in comparison to those headed by a man .
Even more than the women , it was their sons , husbands and brothers who fell victim to a system that held human life in contempt and in violent conflicts , including American bombs and Vietnamese landmines , which , time and time again , blew people to their deaths or left them gravely wounded - something that they continue to do .
What is left is poverty , need , a people torn up by their roots , and - it has to be said - a certain willingness to resort to violence .
The latter is now , of course , being manifested in the run-up to the elections , but I do believe that it has to be made clear - as has been unambiguously stated by , among others , the High Commissioner for Human Rights in Cambodia - that the situation is proving to be less hazardous than it once was , and the organisation ' Asian Network for Free Elections ' notes a marked decrease in violence in comparison to previous elections .
As regards these elections , it will be very important that we keep an eye on how things develop before they are held , for it is clear that they will not pass without any friction whatever .
Nor , I believe , can we expect them to do so in view of the history on which this country can look back .
If , though , we can help to strengthen the forces of democracy in it , and deeply impress upon the population the significance of democratic elections , we will have taken an important step towards creating , in this region , something of an enclave journeying towards democracy , for we have to concede that conditions in neighbouring countries are no better - indeed , they tend to be even worse .
I therefore hope that Cambodia will find its way to democracy , a way to be humane and a way to renounce violence , and will be able to lead its neighbours by example .
Mr President , one of the big concerns is that since January apparently at least 15 people , mostly opposition supporters , have been killed in violence related to the forthcoming election in July .
When we in the ASEAN delegation were in Cambodia not so long ago , we met with some of the opposition parties and some of them were going to funerals of their members who had been killed .
This situation is completely unacceptable .
The human rights situation and standards have not improved in Cambodia in the last 10 years and human rights organisations have routinely pointed out that their big concern remains impunity for the perpetrators of human rights violations , notably members of the police and the military .
The only successful prosecution in Cambodia dates back to 1993 , when under the UN administration someone was charged and sentenced ; that was a Mr Ten Seng , who is still working as deputy chief in the prison where he committed his crimes .
There is also grave concern for the Vietnamese Montagnard refugees , who are still being returned to Vietnam to face ill treatment and unfair trials .
This was brought up before in this Parliament .
The legal safeguards exist but they are not being respected in Cambodia .
There is a provision to outlaw the use of torture and to provide mechanisms and safeguards within the judicial and penal system against different forms of ill treatment and to ensure sanctions towards the perpetrators .
That problem however , is still not being solved because there is a disregard for the existing safeguards .
I would hope that a new or future government and parliament would ensure respect for these laws and ensure that this kind of situation cannot continue .
There must be total freedom there .
It is also very important that the new future government or parliament will ensure the former leaders of the Khmer Rouge are put on trial .
It is quite incredible to think that these people are still getting off scot-free for mass abuses of human rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a new parliament is to be elected in Cambodia on 27 July , and some twenty political parties want to take part in this election .
That is in itself an indication of some degree of progress towards democracy .
At the end of the day , of course , what counts is the way in which these elections are conducted , as well as what happens before and after them , and whether the process is fair and deserves to be described as democratic .
It is this that we have good reasons to doubt .
Violence continues to overshadow the preparations for the election ; opposition politicians are intimidated , two of them having been murdered in June alone .
Everything demonstrates the total power wielded by the autocratic Communist Party , which evidently cannot reconcile itself to the idea that other parties have to exist .
Rules on local elections are infringed , as a rule by the local authorities , and such breaches go unpunished .
The quality of a democracy depends on freedom of access to the media , above all to the electronic media , something that is not guaranteed , not least because the latter continue to be under the control of the Cambodian People 's Party and the Prime Minister , Hun Sen , or of organisations and persons associated with it .
The European Union is sending observers to monitor the Cambodian elections .
To do so makes no sense unless they are able to do their work unhindered , and the country 's government must ensure that they are able to do so .
By demanding all these things , we are not in some way illicitly interfering in the country 's internal affairs , but are acting on the basis of a cooperation agreement , Article 1 of which states in clear terms that respect for the principles of democracy and for basic human rights are among the elements of this agreement and that they must be adhered to by both parties .
Since 1992 , the European Union has been deeply involved in Cambodia .
Having invested some EUR 250 million in the country , we can legitimately make certain demands as regards the fairness of elections .
We therefore demand that the Cambodian Government should put an end to the violence and prevent the intimidation of opposition politicians and their parties .
Our further demand of the Cambodian authorities is that they should ensure that these elections can be held freely and without interference .
Cambodia has a horrifying and violent past .
The Cambodian people deserve a peaceful future .
This is why it is of great importance that the forthcoming elections should proceed in a fair and peaceful manner .
Moreover , the mass slaughterers should not escape their sentences .
My group has concerns on both counts .
We are receiving many reports on atrocities being committed in connection with the elections .
The Cambodian People 's Party is omnipresent and the authorities go out of their way to intimidate the people , particularly at local level .
It seems that they can do this undisturbed and unpunished .
The electronic media are also in the hands of Prime Minister Hun Sen 's party .
My group is particularly anxious that Sam Rainsy 's party will not be given a fair chance as a result .
Given his great courage and his merits in respect of a democratic Cambodia , Sam Rainsy deserves the Sakharov prize .
The human rights situation is still bad .
It is also regrettable indeed that , despite considerable amounts of European aid , economic and social development is stagnating .
We are in favour of linking this aid to progress in the field of pluralism , human rights and free elections .
After all , democratisation and prosperity cannot be seen in isolation from one another .
We have to put the past behind us by doing now what is necessary to ensure a rich future for the poor Cambodian people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we all know , Cambodia is also important to its neighbours such as Vietnam and Laos in particular which , as Mrs Junker said , are facing much more serious situations .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members because I believe that this is a good resolution .
Having said that , it always comes back to the question of whether the glass is half full or half empty : as it happens , Mr Nassauer sees the glass as half empty and Mrs Junker sees it as half full .
Whatever the truth , I believe that the most important thing now is the elections .
The national electoral commission has set good standards and is doing a remarkable job .
We too have come a long way .
In January and February the situation was extremely worrying .
Violence is still taking place today .
If , however , we compare the situation today with what happened at the last elections , things are better .
It is true that access to the media is not perfect , but it is better .
This is where our resolution is so important : we must remain extremely vigilant so that between now and 27 July , the situation remains positive and elections that are as democratic as possible are able to take place .
. ( ES ) Mr President , the Commission has listened carefully to your speeches and the various contributions made to this debate .
We believe that the coming national elections will be a key moment in the development and consolidation of the democratic system in this country .
The Union is firmly committed to supporting this process , which will be backed up by the presence of international observers .
It is true , however , that in this regard we share Parliament 's concern that the existence of acts of political violence and the creation of a climate of interference and impunity at the moment is creating tensions in relation to this electoral process .
Violence prior to elections is an issue which has been pointed out and highlighted by the Union during the elections of 1998 and 2002 and , although the majority of observers agree that the level of violence seems to be diminishing , there is still concern about its impact on the electoral process .
The Commission sincerely hopes that the measures adopted by the authorities to ensure that the law is complied with , without intimidation , harassment or violence , will have a positive effect and I can assure you that , in this regard , the Commission , in close coordination with the Member States , is continuing to monitor the process closely , in order to try to ensure that these situations do not arise .
The Commission is also concerned about the need for press freedom in order to overcome the difficulties resulting from a public media which is firmly controlled by the government .
In this regard , the Commission is insisting on the effective application of the positive measures adopted by the Cambodian authorities , and in particular by the national electoral committee , with regard to the media during the period prior to the elections .
There is no doubt that this issue will be of particular interest and concern to the European Union 's mission of electoral observers , which began on 11 June , with the arrival of the basic team , headed by Mr Evans : 36 European observers have already arrived in Cambodia and 70 additional observers should arrive on 22 July .
The head of the mission of electoral observers will make a preliminary statement immediately after the elections .
With regard to our capacity for action in Cambodia , I must point out that the National Indicative Programme 2002-2004 allows us , by means of contributing resources , to try to have an influence on the processes of democratisation in the country .
In this regard , the whole concept of governance has been treated as a fundamental horizontal and transversal issue , in all areas of cooperation .
So far , we have allocated EUR 10 million to this field , which have allowed us , in particular , to support the electoral process .
All of these elements reflect the commitment of the Community and the Commission in the field of human rights and democracy , as demonstrated by the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights , which has treated Cambodia as one of the fundamental target countries for this experiment .
The NGOs , selected by means of invitations to tender , are acting as one of the main channels for the implementation of actions , within the context of this initiative , which are directly benefiting the Cambodian population .
These are the elements on which we are working , and this is the way we believe progress can be made on this process of consolidation and on achieving the fairest possible elections which will allow us to take a step forward in pursuit of this objective which we all share .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon following the debates .
' For almost thirty years now , these people have been hunted down like wild animals ' was the judgment of a journalist who managed to work his way through to the Hmong people .
In the northern mountainous region , many of the 300 000 ' forgotten people of Laos ' are still bearing the brunt of the Communist regime 's vengeance .
Their political choice during the Vietnam War was considered ' treason ' and is still an anathema justifying the present reign of terror .
The show trial and the absurd sentencing in Phonsavan of a French and a Belgian journalist and an American Hmong pastor is no isolated incident .
Cut off from the outside world , Vientiane is trying to break this people .
It appears that interest in , and recognition of , the conflict with the Hmong is unwelcome .
As such , Laos features on the obscure list of countries that commit serious breaches in respect of freedom of religion .
The Christian minority , in particular , is harshly persecuted , and their religion is even prohibited .
This violation of individual freedom and personal dignity cannot be justified in the name of any culture or country .
With the present resolution , I would therefore call on the Laotian authorities to end their repression against Hmong and other , particularly Christian , minorities with immediate effect .
Failure to respond to this request should prompt the Council and the Commission to reconsider every aspect of relations with Laos .
Mr President , Commissioner , the right to information is a fundamental right and freedom , which guarantees the continuation and the strengthening of peace and democracy in the world .
Once again , these rights have been flouted and today we are forced to condemn the situation in Laos .
Since 5 June , two journalists , one French and the other Belgian , have been imprisoned , together with their guides , in Vientiane in Laos .
They were arrested in the Xieng Khuang province whilst reporting on the situation of the Hmong minority .
After a trial that bordered on the farcical , on 30 June , Thierry Falise and Vincent Reynaud were sentenced to 15 years in prison for ' obstructing an official in the performance of his duties ' , as the case against them described it .
This fallacious charge on the one hand and the sentence handed down , on the other , contravene the provisions of the Laotian criminal code .
Thierry Falise and Vincent Reynaud were in fact convicted simply for carrying out their work as journalists and cameramen , filming a group of mountain people who have been hounded for years by an authoritarian regime that flouts every principle of democracy .
The resolution that we propose Parliament should adopt and which we urge its President to convey to the Laotian authorities and to all member countries of ASEAN calls first for the immediate release of the two journalists and their guides ; secondly , for international conventions to be applied , including the convention adopted by French-speaking countries in the Bamako declaration , which Laos has ratified , in order to protect the rights of journalists , particularly those reporting in conflict zones .
Thirdly , the resolution calls for the immediate suspension of all policies of persecution and repression towards the Hmong people and other minorities in Laos ; and fourthly , for all economic cooperation between the EU and Laos to be reviewed , as soon as possible and with the European Parliament being kept informed , as provided for in the agreements to which our resolution refers .
I believe , Mr President , and I wish to state , on behalf of my entire group , that we cannot continue to assist and maintain relations with countries which , in full view of the whole world , breach human rights .
It is one of our responsibilities as the European Parliament to condemn things that are totally unacceptable and to say so relentlessly .
Mr President , the arrest of the European journalists and their Laotian companions raises grave concerns : first , about the freedom of the press .
If one looks at what has happened since , there have been restrictions on access to people in prison , their place of detention has been kept secret for more than a week now .
Clearly the trials did not respect their rights under international law .
They did not get a fair trial .
The situation in Laos is quite alarming .
Not only are these people suffering , but so is the rest of the country .
People 's rights are not being respected : their civil , political and religious rights are not being respected .
There are no rights , for example , for people in prison .
Many of these people are unjustifiably in prison .
They do not have visitation rights .
This morning we met with a delegation from Laos .
The evidence that they gave us raised serious concerns .
Some speakers have said that we need to reconsider our relationship with Laos if the authorities do not take notice of the situation in their own country .
It is clear that there should be an immediate release of these journalists .
There should be freedom of the press .
They need to end the persecution of the Hmong and other minorities .
It must stop .
The court case was also criticised by Washington .
They called it a farce . They called for a fair trial .
We need to be very careful here in respect of who is pointing the finger at whom , considering that Washington is responsible for the Guantanamo Bay issue .
Those people have not had a fair trial , nor have they had legitimate charges posed against them .
I doubt that this would happen in the European Union .
The Americans need to look at what they are doing before they point a finger at anyone else .
Mr President , important though they are , minorities and European journalists are not the sole foci of our attention today ; our concern is with the people of Laos themselves .
Laos is an ancient kingdom and very rich in culture ; it was , as a country , peaceful and tolerant , which , in the days when it was a kingdom , was a threat to nobody .
I am glad that the Laotian royal family are present with us today .
In the course of the twentieth century , the country became a victim - firstly of colonialism , then of the Second World War and , last but not least , of the conflict between East and West .
It was brutally wrecked by Communist occupation .
It must be clear to us that , at the beginning of the twenty-first century , our task is to ensure that Laos becomes a flourishing democratic country rather than ending up as a museum of real-life socialism .
We therefore declare that human rights and the rule of law need to be reinforced , that freedom of faith and conscience need to be respected , and that political prisoners must be set free .
As a matter of priority , Laos must become freely accessible to the media , so that the world can learn what is actually going on there , and so that the country 's continuing deficiencies are not hidden from it .
We in the European Union seek cooperation with Laos .
We will abide by the trade and cooperation agreement if the human rights to which it refers are respected , but if this human rights clause is disregarded and treated as nothing but a joke , then we will have to put a question mark against our cooperation - with the regime rather than with the Laotian people - and make it perfectly clear that , while trade , business and cooperation are necessary , they are founded upon law , underpinned by human rights and by the values on which our global community depends .
It is for that reason that we make it our concern that Laos should once more be free , democratic and under the rule of law .
Mr President , we have just been informed by Reuters that the Laos Government is prepared to pardon the two journalists and the American interpreter who were arrested on 4 June and sentenced , on 30 June , to fifteen years in prison for unproven acts , which caused widespread indignation .
I have here the communiqué , dated 1.30.p.m : ' the Laotian Minister for Foreign Affaires awaits a request from the governments of the countries from which the three men come : Belgium , France and the United States , for their pardon ' - which will of course be granted if this has not already been done .
We can only welcome the effective role played by our Ministers for Foreign Affairs and by the diplomats in the area , a role which , without a shadow of a doubt , has led to the prisoners ' imminent release .
Although we rejoice in the outcome of these actions , we remain extremely concerned at the fate of the four Laotians who were accompanying Thierry Falise and Vincent Reynaud and who , we are told , could face a sentence of twenty years in prison .
We also appeal to the clemency of the Laotian Government .
Too many journalists have paid with their lives or have been given stiff prison sentences for having done their job , which is to inform people .
We recall that freedom of expression is a fundamental right .
We expect the Commission and the Council to support the actions of our diplomats and we hope that our European office in the region will intervene to ensure that the four Laotian citizens are also released .
We wish to state , Mr President , before this House , all our solidarity with the journalists and with their families , who have been through such a hard time and assure them that the European Parliament , the guardian of freedom , will relentlessly defend the right to a free press , the right to free information and , more than ever , human rights , whatever regime is in power .
Mr President , in the world rankings for freedom of the press compiled by Reporters sans frontières , Laos occupies the unenviable place of 133rd out of 140 .
To give you some indication , Italy comes 40th , after Benin and South Korea .
In Laos , the media remains entirely in the hands of the only political party and its parliament is taking its time over adopting a law that will allow private media ownership , which was promised in 2001 .
There is still no news of the five leaders of the October 1999 movement who have disappeared , including Thongpaseuth Kenakoun , the author of several articles and pamphlets on the situation in Laos and the need for democratic reform .
The case of Thierry Falise and Vincent Reynaud is not , therefore , a judicial accident .
It has arisen in a climate of ongoing breaches of human rights and the scandalous verdict that sentenced them to fifteen years in prison on 1 July raises at least two questions .
The first is that of the freedom of the press in general , which as we have seen is often flouted , even in Europe .
This freedom is one of the pillars of democracy and we must defend it at all costs .
The second issue concerns the democratic clause of the cooperation agreements , which could often be described as a clause in form only : a hollow shell .
Can we expect Europe to be taken seriously , however , when , having signed an agreement , it does not ensure that this clause is respected , by means of appropriate sanctions ?
We know , as Mrs André-Léonard has confirmed , that the joint pressure exerted by Belgium , France , the United States and the European Union will probably lead to the release of Falise , Reynaud and Naw Karl Mua , which will be a relief for everyone .
I call on Parliament , however , also to call for the release of Thao Moua , Tha Char Yang , the two guides , Pa Phue Khang , their driver , and a fourth , unknown Laotian , because they are neither reporters nor foreigners .
They are simply Laotians .
The sentences they received range from 12 to 20 years in prison and we cannot , Mr President , wash our hands of them .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to welcome their Royal Highnesses of Laos , who have taken their seats in the galleries , the Members of the Laotian royal family , the president of the Laotian movement for human rights and the president of the Hmong community in France .
I also wish to acknowledge their struggle , because it is as a result of that struggle that we in this Parliament are able to work ; as a result of their tireless fight for democracy , for the rule of law , for freedom and also for national reconciliation in their country .
I think that everything has been said in this debate and Mrs de Keyser was right to insist on this point : Mrs André-Léonard 's news about the likely release of the Belgian , French and American journalists does not mean that the four Laotians who were accompanying them will be released ; they will end up spending 10 , 15 or 20 years in the gaols of Vientiane .

This business involving the journalists is the umpteenth such occurrence , the umpteenth proof that the situation in Laos is extremely serious , that this regime is totally corrupt , that this regime should be investigated by Interpol and all the international financial bodies , due to the scale of its trafficking , and that the European Union should change its policy vis-à-vis Laos .
Every complacent policy simply strengthens the extremist elements in the Laotian regime .
We must , by adopting a firm policy , do what we can to encourage those within the regime who wish to work towards a policy of democratisation , towards a policy of reconciliation .
This is crucial .
We have instruments in place ; we give Laos EUR 160 million per year under trade agreements in the textile sector alone .
We have dozens of cooperation projects running .
We must undertake a very thorough assessment and tell the Laotian regime that , unless they undertake specific and practical reforms in the fields of justice , information , economics and politics , we will end all forms of cooperation .
. ( ES ) Mr President , I would firstly like to point out that the Commission generally supports the European Parliament 's joint motion for a resolution which we are debating .
Secondly , with regard to the issue of the European journalists arrested , Mr Falise and Mr Reynaud , this issue is being dealt with at bilateral level by France and Belgium .

The European Union 's ministerial troika , however , has had the opportunity to talk bilaterally through the Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Laos , on the occasion of the recent Association of South East Asian Nations ( ASEAN ) Regional Forum in Phnom Penh on 19 June .
The Commission is in close contact with the French Embassy and with the Belgian Consulate in Vientiane , and with other Member States with local representation or accredited in Bangkok , and the Commission has held an informal meeting with top officials of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Laos .
Of course , the Commission supports the diplomatic actions taken by the Member States in question to find a satisfactory solution to this case , a solution which - we agree with Mrs André-Léonard - can only be found by means of a diplomatic and political solution .
Furthermore , we are prepared to take any necessary action to put pressure on the government of Laos at European Union level .
We do not , however , consider it useful to include an issue of this type on an agenda of a different nature , such as the meetings of ASEAN , since we do not believe it to be appropriate to raise this issue in high-level multilateral meetings .
We hope that the news given earlier by Mrs André-Léonard will eventually lead to a good result .
A final comment on the general human rights situation in Laos and our position .
The Commission is closely monitoring the situation by means of our delegation in Vientiane and we are going to continue to analyse the human rights situation and its possible impact on the EC-Laos cooperation programme in view of the joint EC-Laos committee scheduled for next autumn .
In this regard , the Commission is always prepared to discuss this issue with the European Parliament .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place following the debates .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0344 / 2003 by Mr Margrietus J. van den Berg , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Uganda ;
B5-0347 / 2003 by Mrs Nelly Maes , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , on the situation in Uganda ;
B5-0351 / 2003 by Mr Mario Mauro , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on violations of human rights in Northern Uganda ;
B5-0352 / 2003 by Mrs Yasmine Boudjenah , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Uganda ;
B5-0355 / 2003 by Mr Johan Van Hecke , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , on the kidnapping of children by the Lord 's Resistance Army ( LRA ) ;
B5-0358 / 2003 by Mrs Cristiana Muscardini , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on violations of human rights in Northern Uganda .
Mr President , until recently I believed that Uganda was one of the better African states in terms of human rights .
A fortnight ago Amnesty International , as part of Refugee Week , arranged for MEPs to be partnered with refugees for a day .
The reason for doing this was simply to allow politicians to understand at first hand the experiences of people who become refugees and to listen to why they had to escape from their home countries .
I had the privilege to meet a Ugandan refugee living in Scotland whose name is Innocent Jakisa .
He has been given refugee status to stay permanently in the United Kingdom .
His story was shocking .
I do not have the time to go into detail here .
He was not from the north of the country but was a disabled rights activist who spoke out against his government .
That is why Paragraph 5 of the resolution , calling on the Ugandan Government to introduce good governance and political pluralism , is absolutely vital . Freedom of speech is essential for democracy .
Uganda has come a long way from the brutal dictatorship of Idi Amin , but there is still much to do .
The fact that there are no political parties in Uganda should be a cause for concern to us in the EU and although the president is supposed to lift this 17-year ban on multi-party democracy , subject to referendum , this process needs to be closely monitored by the EU .
As for the substance at hand in the resolution , the treatment of children in the northern part of Uganda is of serious concern .
Only a few weeks ago , a number of schoolgirls were abducted by the brutal rebel group , the Lord 's Resistance Army .
If they are not found their fate will be one of sex slaves to militia commanders .
According to Jo Becker of Human Rights Watch : ' The increase in abductions is dramatic and alarming . '
More children have been taken in the last ten months than in any previous year of the conflict .
Since the military offensive by the Ugandan Government , in just over a year , it is estimated that 5 000 children have been abducted .
In the year before it was less than 100 .
In the 17 years of conflict between the Ugandan Government and the LRA , it is estimated that 20 000 children have been abducted .
Much needs to be done .
I hope that in future the children of Uganda will be able to live peacefully and that people like Innocent will have their human rights respected .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall continue where Mrs Stihler left off due to a lack of time .
She is right to denounce the serious situation in the north of Uganda , with a huge number of abductions of children who are used as child soldiers , sex slaves and carriers ; in short , children who , under death threats and in life-threatening circumstances , are kept in slavery or are even required to kill .
Responsibility for this lies in various quarters .
It has already been stated here that the Ugandan Government is no soft touch .
It would be useful if the European Union looked closely at all unchecked budgetary aid that goes to Uganda , from the Member States and from us , because Uganda is no model state .
There may have been progress in a number of areas , but the reports of systematic cases of torture deserve a close inquiry .
This applies , for example , to the cause of death of a certain Mr Murisidi , who died in a police cell .
The government of Uganda leaves the population at the mercy of the terror of the ' Lord 's Resistance Army ' .
It is unable to guarantee the safety of the people of the northern province and neither has it succeeded in involving the LRA in peace talks , despite increased military expenditure on the part of Uganda and despite Uganda 's military presence in the east of Congo where their presence is apparently more lucrative .
The government of Sudan , however , does not get off scot-free either .
Sudan denies any responsibility in the crimes of the LRA 's rebels .
It is obvious that these receive weapons from the Sudanese army itself .
I have the testimony of religious leaders who described in detail a huge arms delivery , in mid-March 2003 , of bombs , various types of grenades , and hundreds of boxes containing everything from bullets to uniforms .
It is clear that , as long as the LRA is armed , they will shoot , kill , and abduct children rather than negotiate peace .
Mr President , I am deputising for Mr Mauro , the author of the resolution .
The escalation of the conflict in northern Uganda is reaching unprecedented levels and is causing a genuine humanitarian crisis .
Approximately a million people have been displaced in Acholiland and in the Lango and Iteso regions .
At the beginning of the year , the Acholi Religious Leaders Peace Initiative seemed to have achieved unmatchable results .
A number of meetings were held between the religious leaders and the rebels ; a presidential peace commission was even set up with many responsibilities ; the LRA and the government called for a cease-fire .
In May , for the first time , the Consultative Group Meeting discussed the crisis in northern Uganda as a national issue , and there were substantial contributions from civil society .
Despite these small rays of hope , the conflict has been deteriorating severely over the past two months .
For the first time since the start of this distressing affair , rebel activity has intensified and has carried on for over six months , breaking the traditional mould of cycles of violence which initially took the form of brief raids rather than permanent conflict .
Recently , it has become clear from the LRA 's order to attack Catholic missions that the Sudanese Government has renewed its support for the LRA , providing sophisticated heavy armaments .
Joseph Kony , the leader of the so-called Lord 's Resistance Army , spoke again last Monday , telling his men to kill mercilessly anyone who comes within range , including the elderly and children , to spare only pregnant women , to kill priests and missionaries in cold blood and to beat up nuns in cold blood .
The crazy orders were given over the frequency used by the network of two-way radios belonging to the Catholic missions of northern Uganda .
Indeed , the rebels are able to use the same two-way radios in their internal communications as those used by missionaries for they have plundered numerous Catholic parish churches in recent months .
Moreover , despite the fact that the humanitarian situation is getting worse and that rebel activity is clearly on the increase , the Ugandan Government has announced that the situation is still under control .
In this regard , I must highlight the prodigious efforts of the European Commission to help these people , not least through monitoring in the field .
At this confusing time , marked by violence , terror and war , the real danger is that of resorting to weapon-power as the only way of addressing this serious situation .
Moreover , there is also the risk that the international community and citizens will hide behind indifference , treating this disaster as the concern of the Acholi people alone .
We have to take notice of the cries of the people and the leaders of Acholiland : sadly , their story has already proven that peace can never be achieved by forcing a people into submission .
Commissioner , Mr President , I have to say that I am rather annoyed .
The issues that are addressed under the emergency procedure , and today provides yet another example of this , deal with extremely important matters .
I would , therefore , like us to consider the possibility of not always tabling human rights for Thursday afternoon , when only a few Members are present .
I believe that issues as serious as human rights and freedom of expression deserve that this item be moved from time to time to a more suitable point on the agenda , when more Members are present .
Turning to Uganda , this country has for a long time been considered to be a window onto development in East Africa .
Today , however , it is the worst location for attacks on physical integrity and for breaches of human rights .
Yesterday 's slaves were kidnapped , thrown into ships ' holds and traded for goods or money .
Having cleared their consciences - particularly in Durban where they condemned slavery as a crime against humanity - western countries ended up forgetting that other forms of slavery still exist .
Today , slaves do not wear chains or work in cotton fields , slavery does not need the colour issue to stamp its authority more thoroughly on black people whose souls have been destroyed .
No !
Slavery today takes the form of so-called resistance armies that claim to serve self-proclaimed ' lords ' and all of this results in the tragedy with which we are familiar today : that of child soldiers .
Child soldiers , it should be pointed out , are children who , as Kourouma explains very well in his book , are forced to kill a member of their family in order to become a child soldier .
They are sexually exploited , as has already been said .
There are around 20 000 such children in Uganda today and one reason why this tragedy is allowed to happen is that a whole host of countries is giving logistical , financial and military assistance to countries such as Sudan and Uganda .
I wish to say that in this regard too , I have the feeling that our own policies employ double standards .
A few weeks ago , I visited Togo , a country to which , perhaps rightly , we have refused to give aid in the fields of health and education .
It is , therefore , being punished .
At the same time , a country such as Uganda is being supported by the United States . At the same time , conventions that we have signed up to , such as ' Everything but Arms ' , are not being duly applied in Uganda , where arms trading still goes on throughout the country .
I wish I could be sure that all the conventions on trade on the ground , of weapons in particular , were being properly implemented in countries such as Uganda .
I also wish I could be sure that the various conventions that we have signed are more than just labels to ease our consciences , because signing up to the convention protecting the rights of the child or to an entire set of conventions intended to protect basic rights does not mean that we can carry on acting as if nothing were wrong .
If the serious attacks on human rights , the breaches of children 's rights and the murders are the everyday lot of Ugandans , we must shoulder our responsibilities .
This does not mean conducting a policy that employs double standards ; it means real sanctions and monitoring the aid with which we provide that country .
The situation in northern Uganda has been appalling for years .
Does the Ugandan Government 's failure to exercise any military power result from unwillingness , from powerlessness or from both ?
In any event , the Ugandan troops that are currently stationed in Congo must move to that region , because they only have other intentions in Congo .
There is total anarchy in northern Uganda , and the ' Lord 's Army ' does everything that God forbids .
It is inconceivable that these incredible villains can continue to descend on schools and kidnap women and children in order to turn them into sex slaves or forced soldiers .
Prisoners are forced to kill or torture one another if they try to escape .
For far too long now , the international community has been standing idly by ; the atrocities simply carry on without hindrance .
The African Union is losing face by doing nothing , and it is high time that the Security Council got involved .
Sudan has announced it will no longer provide aid to the ' Lord 's Army ' , but my group is not at all convinced that Sudan will keep its word .
To top it all , the threat of war with Rwanda hangs over the region .
How does the Commission assess this threat of war ?
In addition , there is the question of what the European Union is prepared to do to protect the population there and provide humanitarian aid .
It is high time that the appalling rule of the ' Lord 's Army ' was brought to an end .
Mr President , we are devastated by the reports we hear about Uganda and the appalling acts of cruelty committed there .
When one sees all that is perpetrated by the loathsome armed sect which calls itself the ' Lord 's Army ' , one is inclined to think that the Ugandan army had enough work to do when it comes to guaranteeing peace and security in its own country , without sowing discord and strife in neighbouring countries , where it intervenes to promote the interests of the great powers , economic and tribal interests , and so on and so forth .
It is , however , lamentable that , even if the Ugandan army were to concentrate on Uganda , that would not resolve the problem , as the Ugandan army and government are part of the problem rather than a means of dealing with it .
That is why we need a clear-cut policy here .
We must first see to it that the Sudanese attacks on Uganda , along with other interventions by outsiders , are stopped ; then , secondly , we also have to get the Ugandans to put a stop to their own incursions into neighbouring countries ; thirdly , Uganda needs to make a start on using the police and armed forces , under the rule of law , to do away with the criminal elements , a process that must go hand in hand with a process of reconciliation and negotiation , leading progressively to the setting up in Uganda of something like genuine democracy and the rule of law .
This country has had much to endure under various dictators , through several wars , and at the hands of diverse criminal elements .
It is vitally necessary to restore the precarious balance between the tribes and ethnic groups of this country , whose diversity is known to us from the days of the Kingdom of Buganda under the Kabaka , which also includes many , many other ancient kingdoms and tribes and will have a democratic future only on the basis of the rule of law and if the balance of races and ethnic groups is carefully maintained .
Mr President , I am not completely happy with the resolution .
First of all it says that the LRA has a complex political agenda .
The agenda is one insane man pretending to receive messages from the Holy Spirit that he should rule Uganda according to the Ten Commandments .
Since this agenda has no public appeal , Kony abducts children to lead his war .
He has no intention whatever of negotiating with anyone about a ceasefire .
The only way to stop the atrocities is to make sure that Kony has no way of receiving arms .
Nevertheless it is a fact that the Sudanese commander has supplied Kony with massive amounts of arms , which has enabled him to carry out the recent abductions .
Even if the Sudanese Government has no part in this , it is responsible for its army 's actions . I therefore urge Sudan to ensure that none of Sudan 's armed forces will ever again be able to arm the LRA and bring about the unspeakable suffering of thousands of children .
. ( ES ) Mr President , we share the view that , despite having gone on for so long , the crisis in Uganda is to a certain extent a forgotten one .
The Commission is therefore pleased with Parliament 's initiative to expose the suffering of the people of that region .
We agree with Parliament that we must condemn the campaign of terror being carried out by the Lord 's Resistance Army , with its murders and kidnappings .
The lack of security created by its activity is a significant obstacle to humanitarian aid , since it restricts access and endangers both the humanitarian aid workers and the civilian population , in addition to all the other problems you have pointed out very effectively .
You have raised the issue of what the Union is doing .
At the moment the Union is providing significant humanitarian assistance and support , by means of the European Community Humanitarian Office ( ECHO ) , in so far as the security measures allow it .
The assistance is being provided in the form of health care and food support , increasing the availability of drinking water and improving the sanitation system , providing seed and tools , in order to guarantee food security , and distributing basic necessities such as shelters and blankets .
This week , the Director of ECHO has been in the area participating in the tasks of increasing our resources , in order to deal with the current needs , and the assistance we are providing this year will be equivalent to EUR 4 million , double that of last year , and it will be increased by a further 2 million .
Providing aid is clearly not everything , however .
We will also have to see to what extent this aid can be used as a lever for achieving other results .
The main donor countries are holding a dialogue with the Ugandan Government in order to promote a policy in the north to facilitate the full integration of the northern districts into the rest of the country .
The Commission 's delegation is chairing the group of donors which is studying the problems affecting the northern region and , especially , trying to resolve the problem of the children .
We are naturally using the lever of financial resources to make progress in the right direction .
The first tranche of budgetary aid , from the Eighth European Development Fund ( EDF ) , was released once the condition not to spend more than 2 % of the total budget for military purposes was fulfilled , and the decision to release further tranches will depend on what agreement can be reached with the government of Uganda on the appropriate conditions for its use .
Furthermore , the Commission is preparing , together with the government , a programme for the rehabilitation of the north , a particularly difficult area .
We believe that the difference in standard of living between the north and the rest of the country is one of the fundamental causes , as well as the consequence , of the persistent instability and insecurity .
However , we believe that , if we had other external support , our actions would be much more effective .
The Commission would therefore be very glad to see greater involvement by the African Union in the efforts to find a lasting solution to the problem , which would then allow us to deal with the problems faced in other areas which you have referred to in your speeches .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place next .
Mr President , the resolution contains a slight inaccuracy : it talks about ' before ' and ' after ' the electoral period .
Since the electoral period has started , it should say ' during ' and ' after ' the electoral period .
Mr President , I would in fact like to put an oral amendment , or , as it might better be termed , a supplementary motion , namely that something should be inserted as Q a ( new ) .
As printed in the joint text , Q has to do with the repression of Christian groupings and of Buddhist monks , but it is worthy of note that Islamic teachers have also suffered repression .
My group takes the view that , if we are to mention certain individual groups , we should also refer to all of those who suffer , or have suffered , repression .
That is why we want to add to it .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has indicated to me its willingness to accept this , and I believe that the other groups are able to do likewise .
I will now quote the oral amendment , of which you have the English version .
It is as follows :
Qa . ...
Mr President , I ask you to accept the inclusion of this additional clause .
Mr President , Article 12 proposes to call for a NEC ( National Electoral Commission ) meeting to be included on the agenda , as the representative of the Commission stated .
I do not believe this would be appropriate .
Since Laos is not a member of this Parliament , we could instead ask for the ASEAN assembly to be informed .
This is not exactly ASEAN 's role , but at least Laos is a member of that body and we could take this matter to ASEAN , if the House agrees .
Furthermore , the original text contains a mistake , Mr President .
It talks about ' the American journalist ' .
It should instead say ' the American interpreter ' , since that is what he was .
. ( FR ) Europe is now , once again , demonstrating its mastery of the art of the paradox .
Whilst on the one hand it destroys our agriculture by dismantling the CAP and the system of direct aid to farmers , it suggests in this report , that priority should be given to family farming and to support for small and medium-sized holdings , to stepping up actions to promote rural development and even to protecting women on farms and in the EU 's rural areas .
Unfortunately it appears that , at a time when the death of our farming is pre-ordained - this is why all farming unions condemn the CAP reform that will come into force in 2005 - the wishes of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities will remain pious hopes .
This report rightly condemns the ageing of the female farming population , the low number of women who have the status of spouse-partner or assistant , which puts them in an extremely difficult situation with regard to their pay , their social security , their care under the medical system , their retirement and their professional development .
The report also notes the high unemployment rate in farming regions .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( FR ) We have , of course , voted in favour of this resolution which seeks to improve safety in coaches , whether this involves the wearing of safety belts , driver training or limiting driving time .
The series of fatal accidents that have occurred recently has once again highlighted the exploitation of drivers , who are often forced to drive to the point of falling asleep .
We also wish to condemn the scramble for profit which encourages the construction of coaches with ever-greater capacity , in particular , double-decker coaches .
Where transport sector employers are concerned , profit comes well before safety .
Mr President , I would just like to make brief reference to something that happened this afternoon , and which gives me pause for thought .
Specifically , I refer to a report to the effect that my group had lost a vote , even though , according to the Rules of Procedure , we had won it .
The vote was on Amendment No 17 to the Lisi report .
There were 457 of us here in the Chamber for the vote .
In Germany , there is a novel entitled ' Der Sommer , der ein Winter war ' - I do not know what it was called when translated into other languages , but I think we can start writing a novel entitled ' The Thursday that was a Friday ' .
I would like to ask the bureau to find out whether a majority of our Members want to ascertain whether the last 50 cents of our allowances were spent on a stamp or whether we might perhaps do some real legislative work here on a Thursday .
A vote by 457 Members , 160 of them voting against , means that we are , in some sense , neutering ourselves as a legislative body with the power of codecision .
This state of affairs has to be stopped , and measures must be introduced in order to do so .
Thank you very much for you comment . I have taken good note of it .
Parliament has come to the end of its agenda .
The Minutes for this sitting will be subject to the approval of Parliament at the beginning of the next part-session
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned .
( The sitting was closed at 5.35 p.m. )
Statement by the President
Colleagues , after what has been a particularly violent summer , including ongoing attacks on military personnel in Iraq , horrendous attacks on innocent civilians in Mumbai , in Jerusalem , and again at the weekend in Najaf , it is my sad duty to recall in particular the bombing of the United Nations ' headquarters in Baghdad .
On 19 August 2003 the UN Special Representative to Iraq , Mr Sergio de Mello , died together with UN personnel , Iraqi civilians and workers from other humanitarian aid and bilateral organisations attending a coordination meeting in the UN building at that time , on that day .
Immediately , on your behalf , I sent a letter to the United Nations Secretary-General , expressing our most profound sympathy and solidarity with the families , friends and colleagues of the victims .
This time the United Nations has suffered a grievous blow .
We are aware that with the tragic death of Mr de Mello , the United Nations Secretary-General , Mr Kofi Annan , lost not only a uniquely competent representative and advisor , but also a close and valued friend .
Mr Annan should know that he has the full and determined support of the European Parliament in these sombre and testing times .
The tragedy of the lost lives has touched us in Parliament too in personal and direct ways .
Among the dead were a former parliamentary assistant to a Member of this House and the brother of a member of our staff .
The most fitting tribute to the steadfast courage of Mr Sergio de Mello and the others who lost their lives in Baghdad would be for the United Nations to achieve its aims of rapidly re-establishing in Iraq respect for international law and law and order , and decent living conditions for the Iraqi population .
I ask you to honour their memory with a minute 's silence .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , August 28 2003 has been distributed .
The following change has been proposed :
Mr President , with regard to this proposal , please allow me to remind the House that , in my capacity as President of the European Parliament , in 1991 , I had the honour of presenting the Sakharov Prize , in the absence of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , to her husband , a British citizen who has since died .
She has continued to fight for the same cause since 1991 .
I believe that , rather than hold a topical and urgent debate , we should make an appeal and pay homage to the perseverance of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi , and also support her just cause .
Clearly the House is fully in agreement with that sentiment .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
The order of business was thus established .
Mr President , I know there is a dreary repetitiveness about this , but could you tell us , now that poor old Ryanair has been prevented from flying to Strasbourg , whether Air France - about which this House has very mixed views - is prepared to reinstate its flight from London which it cancelled at the first sign of any competition on the route ?
I raised this matter last week with the French Minister for European Affairs .
I understand that it will have her urgent attention .
If I have any further information on further contacts I propose to have this week , I will be happy to ensure that the House is informed .
I suppose we also have to learn from experience , which is another form of information in this regard .
Mr President , just to add to that comment , the spokesman for Brit Air , the subsidiary of Air France which operated the flight , opined in The Times newspaper last week that even if the judgement against the Ryanair subsidy was confirmed , they might not re-establish the flight to Strasbourg , since they might find more profitable routes .
This led me to write a letter that The Times printed , saying the European taxpayer would find it more profitable not to subsidise this EUR 169 million a year travelling circus to Strasbourg at all .
Mr President , I am sorry to have to denounce an unacceptable and disgraceful action by the Turkish forces illegally occupying the northern part of Cyprus .
Last Saturday , two Greek Cypriot teachers from the Greek primary school of Rizokarpaso , Alexia and Grigoris Koukotsikas , were expelled together with their children from Rizokarpaso , where they had gone to hand over the school building and requisites to their successors .
The Karpasia Coordinating Committee is conveying fears that any Greek Cypriots remaining in Karpasia will be expelled , starting with the families with children of secondary school age .
The committee has emphasised that , following a proposal to run a private secondary school in Rizokarpaso , the Turkish conquerors are also threatening to close the primary school in the village , which is the only Greek school open in the occupied territory .
I think there is no need , Mr President , for me to stress to this House how many and which fundamental rights and international agreements are being violated .
I call on you , Mr President , to intervene with the Turkish authorities in Ankara , the agents of which are again brazenly breaking the law in the occupied part of Cyprus .
Mr President , I would like to raise the same point .
For nearly 30 years the enclaved Greek Cypriot communities in the northern part of Cyprus have been denied secondary schooling for their children .
The result of this is that once their children reach school age , they have to go to other parts of Cyprus to attend schools .
This leads to the break-up of families and is designed purely to drive from their homes the few remaining Greek Cypriots in the northern part of Cyprus , which is currently controlled by Turkish authorities .
This is a matter on which the European Court of Human Rights has registered its protest and noted that this is a violation of Article 2 .
I would call upon the House to appeal to Mr Denktash to reverse his decision not to allow the secondary schools to reopen .
For too long families in these enclave communities have been deprived of their human rights and deprived of the right to education .
Now that there are increasing signs of reconciliation between Cyprus ' two communities , and on the eve of Cyprus ' membership of the European Union , this is a very good time to show evidence of that reconciliation by allowing the secondary schools to re-open in the enclaved Greek Cypriot communities .
In response to the two Members , we will raise the matter with the appropriate authorities in both Ankara and Northern Cyprus .
Mr President , on behalf of this House , I ask you to convey your sympathy and commiserations to the family of Mrs Jean McConville , whose remains were accidentally found in the last week or so .
She was one of the nine ' disappeared ' who the IRA in Ireland claims responsibility for .
This woman - a mother of ten children , a 37-year-old widow - was abducted , murdered and buried in a secret location nearly 30 years ago .
Five of the nine people for whose disappearance the IRA claims responsibility remain unaccounted for .
I also ask you to appeal to the Irish and British Governments to use whatever intermediaries they have with the IRA to seek more precise information about the location of those five unfortunate victims of IRA terror .
The peace of mind which the families of these ' disappeared ' need is more important than the security and safety of the perpetrators of these murders .
Mr President , a week ago I was in the small town of Jogeva in Estonia and I witnessed the EU referendum campaign roadshow .
They had professional uniformed promotion girls distributing handfuls of tendentious propaganda .
One piece , with the imprint of the PPE-DE Group , featured a male model and was bizarrely headlined ' Vote yes for sexier men ' .
( Laughter and applause )
A diplomat from the German Embassy in Estonia , Mr Carsten Wilms , made a speech in favour of accession .
This was a clear violation of Article 41 of the Vienna Convention 1961 , which forbids diplomats from interfering in the internal affairs of host states .
Mr President , will you join me in condemning this breach of the Vienna Convention and will you write to foreign ministers of Member States reminding them of their obligations in this matter ?
If I understood correctly , Mr Helmer , you remarked that the reference to ' sexier men ' was on literature from the PPE-DE Group .
They must have known , sir , that you are associated with that group .
Mr President , allow me to observe that the military forces in Iraq , which you referred to at the beginning , are in fact occupying forces .
To my point now .
According to our information , the Romanian judiciary has deleted the Socialist Labour Party , which has 110 000 members and was represented in parliament until recently , from the list of recognised political parties in its country .
The decision to delete it is downright illegal , in that it violates Law 14 of 2003 on the operation of political parties .
It was taken following acute pressure exerted by the Romanian Government on the judiciary and following intervention in the internal affairs of the Socialist Labour Party on the part of the governing Social Democratic Party .
The Communist Party of Greece condemns the illegal and unacceptable action by the Romanian authorities , which is obviously intended to muzzle any opinion which defends fundamental rights and promotes socialist visions .
We cannot but correlate this illegal action with the installation of American military bases in Romania and with the imminent integration of this country into the European Union .
Mr President , with regret I would like to raise the issue of whistle-blowing .
I am referring to the case of a constituent of mine , Mr Robert Dougal Watt , who formerly worked for the Court of Auditors and who over a year ago communicated to many MEPs a deep concern about certain aspects of the conduct of business in the Court of Auditors .
Subsequently he went on sick leave and following that he became subject to disciplinary proceedings .
As his representative , I contacted the Secretary General of the Court of Auditors , not to express an opinion on the correctness or incorrectness of the points which Mr Watt had raised , but simply to draw to the attention of the Court that in my opinion , Mr Watt was , whether correct or incorrect , a public-spirited person acting for what he understood to be the public interest .
He ought to be treated with the respect that is due to those who do so .
I understand that subsequently the disciplinary board recommended that he be demoted , but , on 13th July 2003 , I learned that he had just been dismissed .
This is the first opportunity I have to mention to colleagues my profound distress at the matter .
I believe that this House should look into the question of whether we have adequate protection for whistle-blowers in the European Union .
The rules have been changed and tightened but I am not satisfied that the situation works satisfactorily and I say this with great regret .
Those of us who believe most profoundly in the virtues of European integration have the greatest interest in ensuring that it is carried forward with unimpeachable integrity , taking into account the protection of individuals .
The issue to which you refer certainly deserves consideration .
Perhaps the Committee on Budgetary Control would be the most appropriate parliamentary body to consider that matter in the first instance .
Mr President , at the end of July and the beginning of August 2003 I attended the summing-up of the trial in Bogota of three Irishmen accused of training the FARC in Colombia .
Following the conclusion of the prosecution case , General Moro , Chief of Staff of the Colombian Army , went on television to call for the men 's conviction , and this before the defence had even summed up .
The observers from the United States and Australia all concluded that there was no evidence against the men .
The delegation included lawyers , politicians and trade unionists .
This trial has been carefully watched internationally and if there is a negative verdict it will undoubtedly be a miscarriage of justice .
The Colombian authorities have made numerous serious prejudicial comments which cast doubts on the possibility of the trial being fair .
I would ask you , Mr President , to respond to the e-mail I sent to your office at the end of July concerning this issue .
Also , during our visit to the prison , the prison governor indicated quite clearly that these three men would not be safe in any prison in Colombia .
Therefore , now that the trial has come to a conclusion , it is very important , Mr President , that you , on behalf of the Members of this House , intervene on their behalf - as the British Government is doing in many cases where its own citizens are in difficulties .
I will respond to that .
Mr President , I was in Latvia a few weeks ago at the invitation of the Socialist Party of Latvia .
I had the opportunity to obtain information about certain very serious violations of fundamental human rights , the occasional progress reports on Latvia notwithstanding .
Thus , the Communist Party of Latvia is still outlawed .
Over 70 000 residents are deprived of all political rights and the right to obtain Latvian nationality , because eight months before the break up of the Soviet Union they had not left the Communist Party .
For the same reason , Latvian citizens have no right to stand for election .
Such is the case of Alfred Rubiks , the president of the Socialist Party , which is represented in parliament , and other important public figures .
Similarly , several hundred thousand out of a total population of 2 500 000 have no national identity , even though many have been living in Latvia for 100 years .
30 % of the population have no voting rights and will not therefore be taking part in the referendum to be held on the European Union , meaning that the referendum is already null and void .
Although 45 % of the residents of Latvia are Russian speaking , the Russian-speaking universities were closed in 1998 and although the full ban on Russian primary and secondary schools was ultimately revoked in the face of protests , it was limited nonetheless to just 40 % of lessons .
In the face of this situation , the European Union is maintaining a stand of guilty tolerance , not to say consent .
Again we have the well-known policy of one sauce for the goose and another for the gander .
And this situation is not only in Latvia , it is also in Estonia and elsewhere .
How do you intend to react , Mr President , especially as there is a similar situation , as I said , in Estonia where , among other things , monuments are being erected to the SS ?
I shall look into the issues you raised .
Mr President , you have already mentioned the tragic spate of terrorist bomb attacks against innocent civilians in Jerusalem and Baghdad on 19 August 2003 , and the gruesome attack in Bombay on 25 August 2003 .
Now we have Najaf .
I wish to address the serious issue that the Jerusalem bomb , which killed 20 bus passengers , including young infants , was carried out by the Islamist group Hamas , in spite of there being a cease-fire agreement with Israel at the time .
How is it possible that the EU continues to allow the political wing of Hamas to operate and gather funds for its activities and so-called charities in the EU ?
Already America has placed it on the list of banned terrorist organisations and even the Palestinian Authority has cracked down by freezing its financial assets and closing down its newspapers .
Surely it is time for the Commission and the Council of Ministers to do likewise in our common cause of fighting international terrorism .
We will have a debate on the Middle East in the September II part-session .
This is an issue , among others , regarding the Middle East that can be raised with the appropriate institutions at that time .
Mr President , the European Union continues to keep quiet in the face of the major crime being perpetrated in Palestine by Sharon 's mafia government .
In addition to the wall of shame , which is now 150 kilometres long - with the prospect of increasing to 350 km - and 8.5 metres high , Israel 's policy is still to murder political rivals - Hamas cadres - in cold blood and bomb the Palestinians , resulting in death and injury .
My question is : why is the European Union still financing Israel and why has the European Union 's High Representative , Mr Solana , who is in Israel , not condemned these murders ?
Mr President , I wish to ask you about the fate that awaits the Laotian companions of Thierry Falise and Vincent Reynaud who , as we know , have fortunately been released after being arrested and sentenced to more than twenty years in prison .
We know nothing , however , about the fate of the Laotians who were travelling with them .
I should like to know whether it would be possible to obtain any information about them because logic would dictate that the men accompanying the journalists should also be released .
They appear not to have been fortunate enough to benefit from the action taken by Foreign Affairs Ministers and Ambassadors to ensure the journalists ' release .
We will need to make inquiries on that , Mrs André-Léonard , and then refer back to you and the House on the matter .
Mr President , before the August holidays I was in Romania , not least in order to carry out a task assigned to me by the Robert Schuman Foundation , of which I am Secretary-General .
While I was there , I met groups of entrepreneurs and , in particular , farmers and growers .
I received a complaint that I would like to pass on to the Commissioner and all the members of the delegation for relations with that country .
First and foremost , the farmers complained of unacceptable delays in the implementation of the ISPA and Sapard programmes , delays which they made it quite clear were due to the poor functioning of the government agency acting as a filter : a lack of basic information , no help in planning the projects , the arbitrary way in which the projects are transferred from Bucharest to Brussels , the exorbitant cost of the little advice available and unjustified delays imposed by a bureaucratic machine which penalises , above all , the outermost areas of Romania , which are certainly the poorest .
I would ask you , Mr President , to be so kind as to inform the members of the Romanian delegation of this issue at the Conference of Presidents , and I would ask the Commissioner to intervene as far as is in his power .
Mr President , I should like to report that we have arrived safely here in Strasbourg .
Five members of our group went the whole distance , all of the 530 km .
Mrs Buitenweg , Mr Turmes , Mr Bouwman , Mr Mayol and I would like to thank you for the support .
It was a real advertisement for cycling in Europe , both short and long distance .
It was also an advertisement for the European notion .
We crossed four national boundaries .
In that way , we met a huge number of people , and the local authorities welcomed us with open arms .
We invite you all to join us next year to do it again .
Mr President , setting aside the issue of the choice by the new Spanish caudillos regarding Mr Rajoy - which , by the way , reminds us of General Franco 34 years ago - I will focus on the meaning of the outrageous exclusion of my political party more than one year ago .
Political pluralism and cultural diversity are values preached by everybody in this House .
The banning of Batasuna is thus a European , and not just a Spanish , mistake .
That is so because , for the accession countries , it is vital that there should be an overall agreement on the principle that strong , assertive , renewed cultural and political diversity is , at the beginning of the new Millennium , a universal fact of European life .
European integration can never be reduced to the sheer assimilation of small nations : our cultural diversity and inner cohesion could be destroyed .
This Parliament cannot evade its responsibility on this crucial issue .
Those who have been outlawed will , all the same , stick to the political path , wrangling for rapid and efficient diplomatic action , without preconditions , towards a definite solution to the ongoing conflict in the Basque country .
Be sure , Mr President , of my personal commitment .
Mr President , towards the end of last year the Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee agreed on the final content of the second pillar of the Aarhus Convention , the Directive on public participation in decision-making on the environment .
I was in the role of rapporteur during the conciliation procedure . Of key importance in the acceptance of the outcome of conciliation was the undertaking by the Commission to put forward a proposal on the third pillar of the Aarhus Convention during the first quarter of 2003 , which is to say by the end of March this year .
In compliance with a decision taken by the Conciliation Committee , the Commission appended a declaration to the directive published in the Official Journal of the European Communities , in which it reconfirmed this undertaking .
At present , that undertaking by the Commission remains unfulfilled .
The Commission has still not adopted the proposal for a Directive on access to justice in environmental matters , even though the last quarter of the year is already upon us , which means the proposal is six months late .
The failure of the Commission to live up to the undertaking it gave is greatly undermining Parliament 's confidence , and is indefensible and unacceptable .
For this reason , I would ask you , Mr President , to draft a letter to the President of the Commission without delay , containing a reminder by Parliament of the undertaking given , and in which you reprimand the Commission for not having kept to this undertaking of theirs or not even having shown they were in any way ready to explain the delay to Parliament , and in which you call on the Commission to adopt the missing proposals to be appended to the Aarhus Convention and present them to Parliament during September .
Please send a short note or e-mail to me with the relevant facts which I will communicate to the Commission , as you suggest .
Mr President , on 14 August there was a very serious accident at the oil refinery belonging to Repsol YPF in Puertollano , one of the main refineries in Spain , located in my region of Castilla-la Mancha .
The explosion and fire which followed it led to the deaths of seven workers .
Many people were also injured , causing great distress in the city , in my province of Ciudad Real and in the whole of Spain .
Unfortunately , the deficiencies in the protection measures in such a dangerous industry have been demonstrated , but , above all , it has become clear that accidents and deaths resulting from them have increased as a result of sub-contracting and the general work insecurity in Spain , which is three times higher than the Community average .
I would like to ask the President to send a message of condolence and solidarity on behalf of this Parliament to the families of the dead and injured workers and the municipal , provincial and regional authorities which have played an important and worthy role in dealing with the accident and its consequences .
I would be happy to do that .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many of you have heard of Ingrid Betancourt , representative of Colombia 's Green Party , whose relatives have visited this House on several occasions .
It is now a year and a half since she was kidnapped by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia ( FARC ) .
The position of the family and the Colombian Green Party , as well as the European Parliament 's Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , has been to encourage a humanitarian exchange , whilst criticising FARC and saying that it is unacceptable to propose a political exchange .
Yesterday , the Colombian press received a cassette containing a threefold message from Ingrid Betancourt : firstly , if you want to mount a military operation in order to set me free then go ahead , but be careful !
Secondly , humanitarian exchanges can only take place between armies and thirdly , as far as we are concerned - we , the politicians who have been kidnapped - only FARC can give us an unconditional release .

I believe that this message , surprising as it is , can be explained both by the extreme courage of Ingrid Betancourt on the one hand , who does not hesitate to take risks in the name of her political principles and , on the other , by FARC 's desire to show that they are prepared to allow their prisoner to appeal to public opinion , even if only to say ' attack us ! '
What I would ask , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , is that we give firm support to Ingrid Betancourt 's third proposal , which is to clearly ask FARC to release all their political prisoners unilaterally , because it is unacceptable to take negotiators or representatives of the people hostage .
Mr President , the news from Britain that the future of the Thorp nuclear reprocessing facility is bleak is very welcome from the Irish perspective .
The people of Ireland have been totally forthright in their opposition to the existence and expansion of nuclear operations at Sellafield .
I have spoken on this many times in this House over the last 20 years .
I have had the privilege to visit that plant on behalf of my party in Ireland on two occasions , one of which was the NIREX inquiry .
However , we were particularly angered by the imposition of the Thorp nuclear reprocessing plant in 1993 .
The Thorp plant has long been a nuclear white elephant for the British people , but the people of Ireland have been totally opposed to it for many years , and will continue to be opposed to it .
It was reported last week that operations at the Thorp nuclear reprocessing plant may cease sooner rather than later .
I hope that the British Government gives the necessary clarification in this case .
I urge you , Mr President , to ask the Commission to monitor this situation very closely under the powers vested in it by means of the Euratom Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to speak on the same topic .
I must express my indignation at a decision taken by my government - the French Government - which has classified the transport of radioactive waste as top secret .
This means that informing communities and elected representatives about the transport of radioactive goods is now forbidden in France .
All of us here , however , know how dangerous highly radioactive waste is and we are also aware of the concern felt by our fellow citizens about issues involving radioactive waste originating , in particular , in nuclear power stations .
In my opinion , ladies and gentlemen , this decree constitutes an attack on our freedom of expression ; it runs counter to the European Parliament Resolution on the transport of radioactive goods , for which we voted in this very Chamber in February 2001 .
This resolution required elected representatives and local authorities to be informed of the movement of trains containing radioactive waste .
We also emphasised in it our right to freedom of expression and to demonstrate peacefully when these trains pass .
I would therefore ask you , Mr President , to contact the French Government in order to inform it of the European Parliament 's resolution and so that it can revoke its totally preposterous decree .
I personally shall continue to inform any colleague or fellow citizen who asks about the movement of radioactive trains .
Mr President , I would like to draw attention to the astounding failure of the British Government - a Labour Government , although I cannot describe it as socialist - to respect EU anti-discrimination law .
It has purported in recent months to implement both the race directive and the employment framework directive , but in both cases the scope of the new UK regulations falls short in key aspects of the protection conferred by the EU directives .
The UK is therefore in apparent breach of EU law .
As regards the race directive , the government has refused to give protection against discrimination based on colour , claiming the ban on discrimination based on racial or ethnic origin does not extend to colour .
This is absurd , blinkered legalism at its worst and does no credit to the lead in Europe that UK race relations legislation has previously given .
As regards the framework directive , regulations purporting to give effect to the EU directive 's ban on discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation actually allow an employer to impose a requirement relating to sexual orientation , if the doctrine of the religion or the religious convictions of its followers so dictates .
This is a direct result of lobbying by right-wing elements in the Church of England hostile to homosexuals .
It could mean that a gay person could be refused a teaching job in a Church school , however devout they are .
It is shameful that a government which six years ago was elected on a manifesto promising to end unjustifiable discrimination wherever it exists is ready to breach EU law to satisfy reactionary opinion .
The next item is the Commission statement on the effects of the summer heatwave .
Mr President , honourable Members of the European Parliament , the summer of 2003 , which is not yet over , has in many ways been a tragic one .
A short while ago , you called for a minute 's silence to be observed in memory of the entire United Nations team murdered in Baghdad and there are other indications of this difficult and sometimes tragic summer that we have just been through .
Last Thursday , I visited Portugal in order to spend several hours flying over the devastated regions of Santarém , Portalegre and Castelo Branco .

What confronted me was a desolate sight , the scale of which my colleagues Mrs Diamantopoulou and Mr Vitorino had already seen a few days earlier : the desolation with which I was confronted also reminded me of the sight that met me almost a year ago to the day , in Germany , the consequence of different events .
Indeed , the summer of 2002 was also a tragic one for a great deal of Central Europe , for the Länder of eastern Germany , for the Czech Republic , Austria and even for France .
Faced with such environmental disasters , which do not all have natural causes , as we well know , in the face of their human consequences - in Portugal , eighteen people lost their lives in these fires - faced with their economic consequences - hundreds of thousands of hectares have been destroyed and , as a result , thousands of farmers are out of work in central Portugal , the country 's poorest region - faced with these thousands of people who can no longer work unless we find jobs for them straightaway and who will be tempted to migrate towards the towns or to the coast , we must take action on all fronts and at all levels .
Given the circumstances , it goes without saying that the level we represent here , and by that I mean you , Parliament , we , the Commission , and the Council , is the appropriate level at which to act .
I therefore thank you once again , Mr President and I thank the European Parliament and all the political groups for giving the Commission this opportunity to bring you up to date on what it is doing , on what it intends to do and on what it has still to do at European level .
The first tool or instrument with which we can provide assistance is the European Union Solidarity Fund .
I recall , ladies and gentlemen , what was more or less my first speech here to you .
As many of you know , I have long been interested in the environment and in ecology and , in October 1999 , just after being appointed Commissioner , I had to go to Greece in order , Mr President , to assess the damage caused by an earthquake .
I said at the time that there was no exceptional instrument available that would enable us to react to exceptional situations , to tragedies , to exceptional natural disasters .
The only responses we could provide were the usual , run-of-the-mill ones .
It took last year 's disaster , the floods in Central Europe , for the Solidarity Fund to be created .
The initiative adopted by the Commission on this matter was supported immediately and , I must say , extremely efficiently by this House : I well recall the work undertaken by your rapporteurs , Mr Rolf Berend and Mr Ralf Walter , who gave us their support .
This Fund was set up in three months .
It has a fund reserve of EUR one billion per year and is now our main form of assistance for remedying - a little later I shall say a few words about prevention - the damage caused by fires such as those seen in Portugal or those still raging in France .
Not only was the Fund itself set up extremely rapidly , the response that we provide is also extremely rapid .
Portugal 's request reached the Commission on 14 August and last week , in other words , two weeks later , we provided an emergency sum of EUR 31.6 million for aid , temporary accommodation , energy supply , repairs to basic infrastructures and for animal feed , because everything has been devastated .
This year , the Solidarity Fund has received five requests and my staff have accepted four of them ( the eruption of Etna in Italy , the earthquake in the Molise region , the shipwreck of the Prestige and , of course , Portugal ) totalling EUR 88 million .
In 2002 , having been in existence for only three or four months , the Fund gave Germany , the Czech Republic and Austria aid totalling EUR 728 million .
Where Germany is concerned , I can inform Parliament that this Thursday I will be travelling to Dresden , in Saxony , an area I visited a year ago .
I will see , observe and assess the way in which European funds intended to remedy the flood damage have been used .
Ladies and gentlemen , in addition to this Solidarity Fund , which is earmarked for emergency measures that receive no European funding , we do have other forms of support , in particular for rebuilding devastated economies ; this is the purpose of the Structural Funds and of the Cohesion Funds , which can be redeployed or reallocated , according to the requests made by governments .
Consequently , Portugal informed us that it was going to request the redeployment or reallocation of Community structural funds to the value of EUR 182 million in order to address the reconstruction of the forestry and farming sectors .


As to the Structural Funds , Mr President , please allow me to digress a little : a short while ago , President Cox referred to the departure from this House of Luciano Caveri , who has been extremely important to you and to me , in his capacity as Chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to him and to thank him for the quality and the openness that have characterised our relations with that committee for several years .
Ladies and gentlemen , I now come to an idea that some of you will perhaps wish to raise : this is the idea that the Solidarity Fund criteria that we adopted jointly at the proposal of the Commission and which have been adjusted or modified by the Council need to be evaluated .
I do not claim that these criteria , which we have been applying for a year and a half in a consistent , objective and impartial way to all disasters , are absolutely perfect .
I shall , therefore , keep the option of assessing this Fund 's operation open - we will have to do so before 31 December 2006 - and , if necessary , to propose that its intervention criteria be modified .
As a result of the heatwave , which contributes to or accelerates fires , many regions , in southern Europe in particular , have experienced other types of economic and human tragedy .
I am thinking in particular of the drought , which some of you will probably mention .
This phenomenon has also caused considerable damage .
By way of example , in northern Italy alone , the damage to milk production is estimated at EUR 70 million and the damaged to crops and fodder at EUR 380 million .
In the specific case of drought , of course , Europe 's response cannot be based on the Solidarity Fund , which was not designed for that purpose .
Just to remind you , this fund is intended to address disasters that do not receive any form of aid .
Where the drought is concerned , and particularly in the context of the common agricultural policy , we had and we still have means with which to provide assistance .
On this subject , I wish to recall that at the initiative of my colleague Franz Fischler , the Commission adopted , at the beginning of July , a number of measures to help producers in all of the affected regions .
In particular , these measures involve the use of vegetative cover as set-aside land , using some intervention stocks of cereals and rice to feed livestock , the possibility of increasing advance payments to 80 % in the beef sector and anticipating some payments in the beef , sheep or principal crop sectors .
The Commission is , of course , willing to examine as rapidly as possible any eligible requests for State aid or modifications to the rural development programme that Member State governments affected by the drought might submit .
My third point concerns civil protection .
I had the opportunity , the other day , in Castelo Branco , to meet some voluntary firefighters who have done a fantastic job and wherever such disasters take place , we see a surge of solidarity , cohesion and generosity .
The many emergencies that we have experienced and are still experiencing , however , raise the issue of coordinating resources for civil protection at European level .
We do have , in the field of civil protection , a Community response centre established by a Council decision in October 2001 and which has the task of implementing European cooperation in the event of an emergency .
This is principally a centre for coordination and specialist knowledge which has been very active where fires are concerned - as it was in the case of the Erika and the Prestige shipwrecks - and which has made use of all the means available to it under its mandate .
Experience has shown , however , particularly this summer in Portugal , that this centre 's current mandate does not , unfortunately , allow it to provide all the assistance that is needed when a major disaster occurs .
This is why the Commission , at the behest of my colleague Mrs Margot Wallström , will , by the end of September , present the fruit of its discussions on how best to address this situation and will submit proposals .
This , I believe , is an area in which we must be more ambitious , by discussing the financial and operational means needed to facilitate more effective intervention , on the part of this centre in particular .
Whatever proposal or measure we submit , I would remind you that civil protection generally remains a national and often even a regional competence and consequently nothing can be done unless the Council of Ministers asks the Commission to submit a project .
I must also say that your House will also have to tell us , as some of its Members have already done , what it wants and how far it wishes us to go in this field .
I have talked about the Solidarity Fund , the drought and the state of our forthcoming proposals in the field of civil protection .
I would like to conclude my talk by referring to what is , for me , a very long-held conviction .
I have always believed that in any discussion about natural disasters - knowing , once again , that they do not all have natural causes , and there was nothing natural about the Prestige and the Erika - whatever the truth of the matter , I have always believed that , in all of these cases , prevention is less costly than repair .
I therefore wish to highlight the efforts at prevention at all levels : at global level - I shall refer to this again in my summing-up , in the context of Kyoto - and at local level , on the ground at regional or national level .
This is why when in a few months we conduct the mid-term review of the regional policy programmes , I shall pay very close attention to the requests made by States or regions for assistance under the Structural Funds 2000-2006 programming , for all aspects of prevention .
I wish to go further , however ; beyond what we have done and beyond what we are currently doing in order , once we have concluded our discussions , in the proposals that the Commission will be making on future regional and cohesion policies , to make disaster prevention measures more or less compulsory in all regional programmes .
I also hope that together we can find a way of stepping up the budget effort for renewable energies or for clean forms of transport in regional or national programmes .
Furthermore , since I am talking about preventive action , we are all aware that to be able to prevent , we need to understand , to be aware and to be well informed .
On this subject , geographical information is a major element of risk prevention and management .
The Commission has developed a European information system on forest fires .
This system enables a map of fire risks that covers all of Europe 's territory to be plotted on a daily basis .
This now forms an integral part of the Community support mechanism for the civil protection forest services in the Member States .
Lastly , I wish to emphasise that this system also enables a rapid and reliable assessment to be made of the damage caused by forest fires .
This is how we were able , last week , to estimate the surface area of Portugal destroyed by fires to be 400 000 hectares .
To conclude , ladies and gentlemen , I shall refer to the most important , the most difficult , and the most necessary form of prevention , which is global prevention , in other words , the action taken by our Member States and by the Union on climate change .
If , as all climate experts predict , it is increasingly likely that the current process of global warming will lead to major changes in rainfall distribution and in drought conditions , it is crucial for the Community and for each of its Members to remain at the forefront of the fight against climate change and for their actions in this field to set an example .
No country and no bloc of developed countries such as the Union is in a position to solve a problem of this magnitude on its own or within its own borders .
This is why the Union would like the Kyoto protocol , which has already been ratified by 113 countries representing more than two-thirds of the world 's population to enter into force as quickly as possible .
The Union has already adopted several measures in order to achieve the targets set out in this protocol .
It has also incorporated environmental principles into its strategy and its decision-making process .
Having said that , ladies and gentlemen , as you well know , the commitment or the involvement of each Member State is not equal , despite being crucial .
The most recent data on emissions show that ten out of the fifteen current Member States are still a long way from achieving their targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions .
On 22 July , the Commission started court proceedings to ensure compliance with European Union legislation designed to improve air quality in Europe .
As you know , we have also adopted a proposal for a regulation intended to reduce certain fluorinated greenhouse gas emissions .
This proposal represents a new phase for action undertaken by the European Union to fulfil the obligations imposed on us by the Kyoto Protocol .
Lastly - and Mr Franz Fischler can tell you more about this matter than I - the new environmental and ecological requirements are now being taken into account in the guidelines for the common agricultural policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in any discussion of natural disasters , of all the things that have happened this summer , we will inevitably touch on the economy , on the hundreds of thousands of hectares of forests destroyed , on a farm economy that has suffered a massive blow , the consequences of which will be felt for a long time , but also and perhaps most importantly , we are bound to talk about the men and women whose property and lives have been affected .
I could not end my statement without referring to the memory of several thousand of my fellow countrymen and women who have died as a result of the exceptional heat that we have experienced in the last few weeks .
Perhaps for this reason too we should attempt to understand the particular situation of each of our Member States , consider how we can further coordinate our actions , our assessment instruments and probably also make more substantial progress in the field of public health in Europe .
As you know , together with Klaus Hänsch and Íñigo Méndez de Vigo , I have long been involved , on your behalf , in the work of the Convention , in the Praesidium and in the Convention itself .
Together with many other representatives of Parliament , we have tried to improve the texts in the field of European action on public health .
The text of the Constitution might denote some progress , but I am not convinced that this text goes as far as it should when we see the genuinely European dimension of some disasters .
Consequently , even if this subject appears to be somewhat removed from the fires in Portugal , I should like to mention , in terms of the heatwave and other major scourges affecting the health of Europe 's citizens , the need to go further in our common and even Community action , in the field of public health .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your speech and for the visit you paid to Portugal , for the gesture of solidarity you made on behalf of the Commission , after two of your fellow Commissioners had visited my country , and for the comments you made in Portugal .
I want you to know that the people of Portugal were particularly moved by Commissioner Barnier 's statement that he had never seen such a tragedy in the whole of his political career , and by his acknowledgement that the EUR 31 million of aid from the Solidarity Fund was not enough , or , to use his exact words , that it did not come up to expectations .
It was indeed a very great tragedy that struck Portugal , as you said .
A tragedy whose cost is reckoned to be more than EUR one billion in damages and more than 400 000 hectares laid waste , according to the Commission 's own figures .
That latter statistic is equivalent to 5 % of the total land area of Portugal and almost 11 % of its woodland .
It was , as you said in your speech , a tragedy with repercussions in terms of human lives lost and with enormous long-term social , economic and environmental repercussions .
The much-needed emergency aid , which is crucial for those people who have nothing , who have lost everything , is now being distributed , thanks to decisive action on the part of the Portuguese Government , local authorities and those non-governmental organisations which pledged their solidarity .
As you well know , Commissioner , and as you have argued in the past , European solidarity is needed .
That solidarity must be reflected in the amount of aid and in the speed with which that aid arrives .
I would like to underline these two elements : not only must the aid be appropriate in financial terms , but it must also arrive promptly , so that Europe can make an impact straight away .
To use your own words , then , Commissioner , the aid does not come up to expectations : the EUR 31 million is , of course , only for emergency aid , but the expenses which may be claimed as emergency aid have already risen to EUR 90 million , three times as much as the Community aid package .
As I said , moreover , it is estimated that the cost of the tragedy will exceed EUR one billion .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats was therefore right to emphasise the need for a Parliamentary resolution .
Following this debate , Parliament must approve a resolution stating its position on this matter .
You mentioned many themes , Commissioner , notably the need for preventive action .
We are with you on this point : prevention is indeed needed , because this is also an area in which prevention is better than cure .
With that in mind , it may also be worth rethinking provisions such as those laid down as part of ' Forest Focus ' , in order to ensure that we have the financial wherewithal to prevent forest fires .
The importance of Mediterranean woodland for regional and local economies , for creating employment , for protecting the land , for biodiversity and for quality of life renders this necessary indeed .
I would like to conclude by thanking all the Member States who showed such solidarity in providing prompt assistance to Portugal .
I would also like to thank those countries that are not Members of the European Union and that also gave aid .
The President of the Swiss Confederation is in Portugal this very day , bringing with him almost EUR one million in aid for one of the worst-affected municipalities , Mação .
I wish to say a final word to emphasise a point that Commissioner Barnier has already mentioned : the dedication of the fire-fighters and of the civilian population , whose acts of courage , generosity and heroism are ample proof of the well-known fact that during tragedies such as this one , when the worst aspects of humanity occasionally become manifest , there are also many people who show us the best that humanity has to offer .
Mr President , Commissioner Barnier , you have described the situation in very clear terms , and I was glad that you , as a former environment minister , also pointed out that disasters do not happen on their own .
I respect the calls for solidarity that Members from the countries particularly affected are quite naturally making .
They are right to do so .
Members from countries such as France , Portugal , and other countries in south-eastern Europe , are right to call for solidarity , but - and let me make this quite clear - I would not want us to limit our present discussion to whether it is 31 million , 90 million or 120 million that we need in order to repair the damage , for it is equally apparent - and you , Mr Barnier , have also made it very clear - that we are patching things up .
If we do not want to carry on patching things up year after year , we have to give some thought to the causes .
Another reason why we have to think about the causes is that we will , at some point , exhaust our capacity for making good the damage .
As of next year , we will have twenty-five Member States .
This will not double the Budget , and disasters will keep on happening - floods , storms , heatwaves and fires , in varying sequences , and , as you have observed , Mr Barnier , this has something to do with climate change .
Nobody is now left unaware of that .
Are we , though , prepared to act consistently with what we know ?
Let me say bluntly that no , we are not .
We , all of us , are unprepared , and we are in fact unwilling to listen to something so uncomfortable .
Here in the European Union , we are far from creating the conditions in which the Kyoto criteria can be fulfilled .
At present , only three Member States - Germany , Great Britain and Sweden - are getting anywhere near it .
At the moment , we are at most complying with half the Kyoto criteria , by cutting back on gases that have a detrimental effect upon the climate , causing , for example , global warming , due to greenhouse gases , which occur in agriculture and in waste disposal but especially , in the areas of energy and transport .
We are not prepared to take action and to be consistent when it comes to changing the underlying causes .
Road traffic is constantly increasing , and we know that it is one of the principal sources of greenhouse gases , and is so to an increasing extent .
At the moment , road traffic accounts for some 20 % of total emissions , and in 2010 , the deadline for getting in line with the Kyoto Protocol , the figure will be 28 % .
So you see that we may well be talking about disasters , but we are unwilling to do anything to prevent them .
What I am putting before you is utterly sober fact .
You will not be surprised when I say that we never , of course , set our sights high in matters of environmental policy .
I have now been an MEP for more or less fourteen years , in which time I have been involved in environmental policy , but I also know perfectly well where we all stand when it comes to passing real legislation .
What happens when we talk in terms of taxing kerosene , the fuel used in aircraft ?
What will happen if we tell Mr Barnier to strictly limit structural funding to such things as rail transport or action that benefits the environment ?
I 'd like to hear what our counterparts in the stricken countries have to say about this !
Once and for all , we have to create incentives to do such things as getting traffic off the roads and onto rails , using preferential treatment , rewards , and also sanctions , although it is the sanctions that this House never wants .
It also means , for example , that we reduce emissions from industry , that we take action to improve controls , that we tax activities that do harm .
What did we do at the beginning of this year when there was talk of taxing the generation of energy ?
We funked it .
The Council funked it , and again , we all chickened out .
Although the Commission has , to some degree , gone on ahead , we all , again and again , find ourselves influenced by what we term the needs of our electoral districts , where there is industry that does not want influence exerted on it , that produces chemicals - which do matter ! - that produces pesticides , and we have to use them .
None of us , then , really wants to do anything , but every year , once summer or autumn is over , we stand up in this House and talk about disasters .
Let me mention , in addition to that , the report I have read in the press to the effect that the chairman of the French old people 's homes association has said that there are four times as many staff in German old people 's homes .
That appals me ; it is quite shocking , for German old people 's homes are generally in a disastrous state .
It follows that we in the European Union must also , at long last , put solidarity into practice in social services .
We have to lay down once and for all what standards apply to people who live in the European Union .
How then are they to live with dignity in old people 's homes , and what is the situation with health insurance ?
As you are aware , I wanted the constitution to give the European Union clear competences in health policy .
We did not manage to do that .
They did not manage to do that .
It looks as if we did not want it ; that is something I regret .
If , though , we are talking about disasters , that means , on the one hand , carrying out repairs and helping our counterparts in the countries concerned , but it also , above all , means preventing these things from happening again , and that I also ask you to do in future .
Mr President , I too wish to thank Commissioner Barnier for the clarity and the transparency of the balance-sheet that he has presented .
The summer of 2003 has indeed been a real scorcher throughout Europe , from Rovaniemi to the Algarve , and the tragic consequences of this heatwave have been unprecedented .
This has been a cruelly unfair summer in Europe : as we have seen , it is the weakest in society who have been the main victims .
Almost 20 000 elderly people , living alone and in some cases suffering from respiratory disorders , have succumbed to this deadly heat .
On behalf of the Liberal Group , I would like first of all to offer my sincere condolences to the victims ' families .
In parallel with this human tragedy , with this public health disaster which continues to shake France to its core , the forests in the Mediterranean countries have suffered almost irreversible damage .
This summer , particularly fierce fires have devastated more than 400 000 hectares of forest .
This is a human , economic and ecological balance-sheet that might have been even more serious had it not been for the bravery and the efficiency of the fire-fighters , many of whom are volunteers , for the assistance given by the Red Cross to the communities affected , for the solidarity that European States have shown one another , not forgetting the substantial cooperation of third countries .
Europe has acted effectively : the Commissioner referred to the EUR 31 million spent in the context of demonstrating solidarity with Portugal - a solidarity which is to be found at the very heart of our Treaties - and the Structural Funds .
There is another observation I must make : the EUR 23-odd million , which is the cost , to date , of the centralised Community forest fire management and research programme , have not been spent in vain .
The pilot projects for fire prevention , for identifying at-risk areas and for replanting affected areas have demonstrated their usefulness , not least in Portugal , but also their limitations .
It is true that Europe must do more .
These enormous fires in Portugal and in the South of France have proved one thing : the fleet of fire-fighting aircraft in most Member States is ageing .
Without the assistance of the neighbouring countries that I have just mentioned and in particular without the assistance of the Russian jumbos and their 12-tonne tanks , considerably more than 400 000 hectares would have gone up in smoke .
This is why the Liberals are in favour - and this should answer one of your questions - of creating a European civil protection force that would be responsible for combating forest fires , floods and also for addressing risks posed by industrial disasters in particular .
Increasing human resources in this way must go hand in hand with stepping up material resources .
Europe cannot lag behind Canada , Australia , the United States or Russia ; it must consider in particular acquiring its own powerful European water bombers , appropriate to our various specific geographical characteristics .
I look forward , therefore , to hearing Commissioner Wallström present the proposals referred to by her colleague , Commissioner Barnier .
Nor can Europe ignore the fact , and no one has yet referred to this , that 95 % of these fires are started by man .
It is crucial that we step up awareness-raising campaigns .
A single cigarette thrown out of a car window can lead to the destruction of an entire forest .
Holding those who are negligent responsible is , therefore , another of our articles of faith for prevention .
Lastly , and I could have started with this point , how can we fail to make the link between these endless natural disasters and global warming ?
The Liberal Group supports the Commission in all its efforts to reduce greenhouse gases .
This summer , the records for ozone pollution have been broken in all Member States .
Despite the battering that the Kyoto Protocol takes on a regular basis , and despite its limitations , it must remain a tool , a minimum target for some , but also a commitment .
The European Union must , now more than ever , make this protocol its warhorse in its international negotiations .
Mr President , the severe forest fires which broke out in Portugal this year also affected agricultural and urban areas , destroying houses , factories , schools , power grids , telephone networks and other installations .
They caused the deaths of eighteen people , stripped families of their homes and possessions , killed game and livestock , and deprived about 45 000 people of their wages and income .
This was an enormous disaster , one which has worsened Portugal 's already difficult socio-economic situation .
That is why we asked the European Union for aid and support from the outset .
According to recent estimates , more than 400 000 hectares have been consumed by the flames , the equivalent of 5 % of our total land area and 11 % of our woodland , with more than 80 % of woodland areas destroyed in some municipalities , and damage estimated at more than EUR one billion .
This situation calls for special aid measures , since the amount proposed by the Commission is clearly insufficient , as Commissioner Barnier rightly pointed out during his visit to Portugal .
Over and above expressions of sympathy and solidarity with the victims ' families and everyone else affected by this catastrophe , over and above paying tribute to the courage of fire-fighters and the civilian population for their determined efforts to fight the fires despite the scant resources at their disposal , it is imperative that the sum provided by the European Union Solidarity Fund should at the very least equal the amount requested by the Portuguese Government , that is to say , more than EUR 52 million .
The seriousness of the situation , however , calls for further extraordinary measures , through both reprogramming Structural Funds and through the various Community programmes currently in place , making the rigid fund allocation procedures more flexible and simpler .
This is necessary not only in order to provide compensation for the social costs incurred but also to help restore productivity in the affected areas and to encourage reforestation .
While it is true that forest fires constitute a yearly blight consuming hundreds of thousands of hectares in the European Union , especially in the south , it must be borne in mind that this year the atmospheric conditions which plagued Europe served to make matters worse , producing the right conditions for fires on a huge scale which were difficult to fight .
This also means that more effective preventive measures must be encouraged at Community , national and local levels , and that more attention must be paid to public health in Europe .
The common agricultural policy ( CAP ) itself has led to the disappearance of thousands of farms and farmers in recent years , especially in my country , and has thus contributed to the complete unravelling of the traditional reciprocal relationship between woodland and agricultural areas in regions where small-scale farming predominates , accelerating the process of desertification in the rural world .
The CAP has thereby helped to produce the right conditions for large-scale fires to start .
The changes to the CAP will tend to worsen this situation ; this requires us to rethink the measures set in place .
We call on the Commission to continue working with national authorities , both to minimise the environmental impact and to support the communities affected , but also to aid reforestation by supporting all the government aid initiatives and revising the Forest Focus programme to make its scope broader .
We also urge the Commission to introduce an integrated Community fire-fighting strategy ; furthermore , we would like to emphasise that this calamity testifies to the unreasonableness of the requirements of the Stability Pact given Portugal 's socio-economic circumstances , since , although the situation demands a high level of public investment , the Stability Pact imposes restrictions on such investment .
We therefore appeal to the Commission and the Council to rethink the Stability Pact , and in particular to eliminate all public costs and investment stemming from this calamity forthwith when calculating the budget deficit .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this summer should be , for us politicians , our latest warning finally to take action on climate change .
We talk a lot - obviously , and that is only right - of the thousands of victims in France and Portugal , but we forget that , this summer , floods in China have claimed four million victims , developing countries being more affected than ourselves .
Faced with this fact , we must put a more resolute policy into effect .
We can no longer be satisfied with our usual routine .
As Greens , we have therefore taken the initiative and written an open letter to Mr Prodi , the most important features of which I shall explain .
What are we requesting ?
Firstly , we must set up a stability pact in relation to climate change .
We cannot tolerate governments in Spain , Portugal and Ireland being indifferent to climate change and the European Union being ridiculed at international level because these governments are not assuming their responsibilities .
European Environment Agency statistics clearly show the extent to which these governments are lagging behind .
Secondly , what emerges from the analysis of the initiative on European infrastructure that has just been lodged by the Italian Presidency ?
Motorways and more motorways , regional airports and more regional airports !
It is madness !
We cannot now use the billions from the European Investment Bank or the billions from the European budget to pursue a transport policy that has completely lost its way .
As Greens , we are in favour of a policy of economic stimulation , but it must take the form of investment in the railways .
We do not at present have the rail network needed for implementing a different policy on the transport of goods in Europe .
We must make huge investments in these policies .
Thirdly , the heatwave has shown that electricity-producing stations , extremely centralised as they are , were in danger of no longer being able to produce electricity if the rivers no longer had enough water or were too hot .
A coal-fired power station and a nuclear reactor have a yield of less than 35 % .
This means that they heat the atmosphere more , with the risk of producing fish soup , and do not produce electricity in a way that respects the environment .
We need to invest much more in decentralised forms of energy and , as Greens , we would thank you , Mr Barnier , for pronouncing yourself ready to review the criteria relating to the structural and regional funds .
I was taken aback by the fires in the Mediterranean .
One of the problems is the clearing of scrub .
In Austria , there is a policy of improving the status of wood .
We are world leaders in wood heating .
Electricity is now to be generated at the same time as wood is to be produced and , if Europe finances projects , the link will have to be made between necessary scrub clearance and improving the status of wood .
Finally , Europe lags well behind when it comes to energy control .
We have been waiting a year for two directives on energy control .
Instead of wasting her time preventing the decline of the nuclear industry , Mrs de Palacio would do better finally to present the directives required if Europe is to catch up in this area .
We have written to Mr Prodi to ask him to change up a gear and to coordinate his team better in the race against the clock to prevent climate change .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin , first of all , by thanking President Cox for responding so promptly to the letters written by Mrs Figueiredo and those that I myself wrote on behalf of my group when the crisis in Portugal was still unfolding , and for announcing so promptly that this debate would take place , despite being on his summer holidays from 11 August onwards .
I am also grateful for the fact that , within the Groups and in the Conference of Presidents , this debate has been marked , as we requested , by a declaration by the Commission and a vote on a resolution at the end .
I would also like to thank Commissioner Barnier for making himself available for this debate , for the words he spoke at the start of the debate , for his amicable and thoughtful visit to our country , for the statements he made there and also , of course , for the concern shown by the Commission even before that , through Commissioners Diamantopoulou and Vitorino .
Having expressed my gratitude , I must now tell you the facts and appeal for help .
To tell you a little about the tragedy my country has been through : three weeks of profound anguish , the savage destruction suffered by our country and which was caused above all - though there are , of course , always several factors involved in such phenomena - by truly terrible weather conditions .
They were not only terrible because they were abnormal in terms of temperature , humidity , and continental winds , abnormal in nature : they were also abnormal in their duration .
In fact , the really distressing thing , which was a terrible tragedy for those who were directly affected and most involved in fighting the fires , was that we were at the centre of the action and perfectly aware of our powerlessness while the weather remained the same .
Indeed , it was only when the weather finally relented , on 14 August , about three weeks after the crisis had been unleashed with such great intensity , that we saw it abate .
We are therefore dealing with a natural disaster whose devastating human , social and economic consequences have already been mentioned here .
Various figures have been quoted : 5 % of the total land area , 11 % of woodland .
These statistics are misleading , however , because , as we have already heard , in several of the worst-affected municipalities those percentages rose to 80 % of woodland , more than 50 % of the land area , 70 % in some cases .
Furthermore , these figures are no more than that : figures .
One needs to see with one 's own eyes , as Commissioner Barnier has seen and as he has testified .
In recent days , I myself have revisited various areas such as Vila do Rei , Mação and Gavião .
To give you an idea of the situation : in Gavião , a town in the north of the District of Portalegre , on a hill , from a tower behind the church , looking inland towards the horizon ? we are talking about an area many kilometres across ? everything , over the mountains , to the left , to the right , and straight ahead , is scorched .
That is the true enormity of what has befallen my country , and the reason why my country is asking for assistance and support from the European Union .
The Commissioner quite rightly mentioned the speed with which the government acted , especially in setting the wheels of the Community machinery in motion , and also the speed with which the Commission acted .
I align myself , however , with those of my fellow Members who are asking Parliament for greater means with which to respond in a more caring and generous way to my government 's request .
Portugal applied for around EUR 50 million from the Solidarity Fund , and I believe it is right to grant that sum .
I understand the Commission 's rules , but I think the Portuguese application is reasonable .
EUR 50 million is the sum advanced by the Council of Ministers at the height of the Portuguese crisis , and this sum equals the value of national contributions to the restructuring of various Community programmes already mentioned by the Commissioner .
I believe , though , that my government did its sums well and applied to Parliament for aid on that basis .
Furthermore , as my fellow Members have said , this is not only a question of harnessing the Solidarity Fund .
Other programmes must also be restructured as appropriate , especially as the date fixed for the second reading of the Forest Focus regulation for 2003-2008 is fast approaching .
I believe that this crisis , which struck my country particularly hard , proves that Parliament was right to adopt the positions we voted for here at first reading and that the representatives of the Italian , Spanish and Portuguese governments were right to abstain from the common position when it was discussed months ago , drawing attention as they did to the need to increase forest fire prevention means under this programme .
I therefore trust that when that regulation returns for second reading in a few weeks ' time , we will all unanimously restate the positions adopted by Parliament at first reading and that , as a result , both the Council and the Commission will come to share those Parliamentary positions .
Mr President , this summer , we have observed the disastrous effects of the heatwave : drought , fires , and water and air pollution . Above all , however , we are dismayed by the deaths of elderly people , and in particularly high numbers , in a country like France .
We should not normally , however , call upon the EU for help .
Our European neighbours too have been hit , and a large country , properly governed , should be able to deal with this type of situation by itself .
France is now in an extremely vulnerable position , however , since the budgetary margins for manoeuvre were not restored when this was possible , that is to say at the time when tax revenue was plentiful .

France is also characterised by two very negative factors : the greater difficulty of operating the health care system , particularly in summer , when there is a lack of practitioners and when the working week has been reduced to 35 hours ; and the fact that families are apparently more spread out than in neighbouring countries , so that it has been less easy for loyalties of blood to come into play .
In this regard , I would point out , in passing , that the need for geographic mobility on the part of workers , often defended by the European Union , should be strongly qualified in order better to preserve , wherever possible , the social and family link .
Above all , a great task for the EU in the future will be to step up its internal and external actions to combat the greenhouse effect and , therefore , global warming .
Maintaining the current level of CO2 emissions would , for example , have irreversible effects upon the climate , and we are asking the EU to pursue implementation of the Kyoto Protocol carefully with a view to better integrating policies on energy and the environment .
On this point , it will be necessary to give priority to renewable energy sources , certainly , but , above all , to nuclear energy , which is very thrifty in terms of CO2 emissions .
If nuclear energy is to be more widely accepted , however , the issue of managing and eliminating radioactive waste definitely needs to be resolved .
With this goal in mind , we wish to see joint research on a large scale put in place , something that is an absolute priority , because on this everything else depends .
Finally , a third avenue of reflection has to do with the fact that a reduction in greenhouse gases will come about partly through getting a better grip upon road transport .
We think that the proposal for a directive on road infrastructure charging should accept the incorporation into the price of tolls not only of the costs of maintaining the networks but also of the cost of the damage , not at present broken down , inflicted by such transport upon the environment and , therefore , upon the community as a whole .
Mr President , Commissioner , unfortunately , it is the tragedies of this summer that bring us together again to talk about matters that have already been the subjects of quite a few past debates in this House .
With regard to the forests and forest fires , we would first of all express our heartfelt condolences to the victims of these fires , above all in Portugal but also in the other countries that have suffered the same disasters , for we are concerned here with genuine environmental disasters in Southern Europe .
The forests destroyed by fire will have to be built up again , with due respect for climatic and ecological features .
Certainly , these forests have burned down , but other forests too will suffer the consequences of the drought .
One has only to travel through our mountainous regions in order to see such trees already burned to a cinder before the arrival of autumn .
It is going to be necessary to rebuild these forests , and we can ask ourselves if , with our agricultural policy , we have been able to adopt a genuine rural planning and development policy .
Agricultural policy has caused us to lose some farmers .
Unfortunately , we can now say that , if our countries had had a few more farmers , the areas would have been better maintained and the forests better laid out , not as the only alternative to desertification but in such a way as to have been productive .
Just now , one of our colleagues spoke about wood as a source of energy .
I am entirely in favour of this , and I develop wood myself in an area for which I am responsible .
We must no doubt review our agricultural policy and , primarily , support our farmers who will suffer the terrible consequences of this drought , since they all say that it will cost them a year 's income in order to take account of the consequences of this drought .
Livestock farmers now no longer know how to feed their cattle , and they are waiting for help to be provided quickly .
This has been promised , but , most of the time , it is too late arriving .
We must show , at European level , that we are perfectly capable of putting a community-based policy in place .
The meadows will also have to be restored , including in the semi-mountainous regions with which you are very familiar , Commissioner , and to which you are very attached . They will have to be restored when there is no irrigation and when there are no mechanical means available to farmers on land that is very difficult to farm .
Finally , I should also like to talk about water problems , because we have not perhaps been able to put in place a water policy likely to ease the difficulties encountered .
We have also talked about the ageing of our populations .
During the work on the Convention in preparation for the future European Constitution , I had asked for public health to be an important feature of this Constitution .
Unfortunately , public health has not so far been taken into account , which is something I regret .
If , then , I have one more point to make , I should simply like this connection between the disasters and climate change to encourage us finally to respect and implement the Kyoto Protocol .
I do not think that taxation is a good response .
Europe must be innovative . It must convince governments and populations that a different agricultural policy needs to be supported , and that it is necessary to rebuild forests that are productive .
It is also necessary to have decentralised , community-based policies , and , above all , to redefine energy policy and transport policy .
Finally , quite simply what must be done is to pursue a genuine European policy of sustainable development .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too believe it my duty to begin by expressing my appreciation and gratitude to Commissioner Barnier for the way he behaved during the tragic events which occurred in Portugal .
He was the very image of distress and understanding , saying the words the Portuguese people wanted to hear and appreciated , and which other officials were not always able to put as well as he did .
As the Commissioner said , the end of our summer holidays has left a bitter taste , after a tragic summer , with its tragic tally of deaths and devastating forest fires .
Thousands of elderly people have died as a result of the heat in various European countries and ozone peaks may have claimed many more victims .
Was this an inevitable climatic event or could we be suffering the consequences of climate change caused by human behaviour ?
Was this the result of humanity 's own thoughtlessness ?
The answer must be both of those factors .
Mr President , Commissioner , the area of woodland destroyed in Portugal , as we have already heard here today , is as much as 400 000 hectares , which is more than all the woodland destroyed by fire in the rest of southern Europe put together .
This gives us food for thought .
How can Portugal , a relatively small country , have forest fires on this scale ?
Are the Portuguese fire-worshippers , perhaps ?
Some have written that we are , because of our love of bonfires on Saint John 's Eve , and of firework parties .
I doubt it , however .
The explanation for the incredible events which unfolded in Portugal this summer can be found to a large extent in the serious mistakes and omissions of the authorities .
The fires brought to light the weaknesses of a disorganised and irrational forestry system such as we have in Portugal .
Over the last few decades , Portuguese woodland has been chaotically managed , as the Commissioner has already said here .
One third of Portugal 's land area of 90 000 square kilometres is given over to woodland .
Most of that woodland ? two thirds ? is made up of pines , used only in construction .
The rest is eucalyptus for producing wood pulp for paper , and also that extraordinary tree , the cork oak .
Each tree , each vegetable species in the Mediterranean has , over many millennia , evolved strategies to protect itself and recover from fire .
The problem is that the woodland is becoming more impoverished by the year , either turning into scrub or becoming dominated by conifers , more flammable than slower-growing hardwood forest made up of trees such as oaks and cork oaks .
Soil erosion does the rest , and desertification continues .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Solidarity Fund was born of water but applied to fire .
It brings to mind the two original Greek elements of Thales and Heraclitus .
Born of water , applied to fire , but applied sparingly , as we have heard .
The funds at our disposal are very slender , Commissioner .
I feel the amount should be reconsidered because , being a palliative measure , it must increase , given the huge budgetary difficulties currently faced by the Portuguese state .
I believe that the reallocation of the Structural Funds suggested by the Commissioner is a good solution to the problem of financing the reforestation and reordering of Portugal 's plant cover .
We therefore agree that funds should indeed be reallocated .
Swift action is needed in Portugal before this shock is forgotten , and this applies to the rest of Europe too .
Prevention is the keyword and the golden rule in protecting woodland , as several people have already said here today .
So , however , is the surveillance and policing of our woodlands , as well as heavy penalties for the criminal acts of those who deliberately and intentionally set fire to them .
The State must take on a new role in reordering and reorganising Portuguese woodlands , as well as in addressing today 's climate-related problems throughout Europe .
Climate change is a grave threat indeed , and steps must be taken immediately .
Mr President , I would firstly like to express my gratitude for the fact that this debate has been scheduled in order to analyse the problems relating to the heat wave we have suffered this summer .
This heat wave has furthermore led to a series of disasters , some of which are now recurrent , such as forest fires .
I would ask that we separate , on the one hand , the effects of this year 's heat wave from , on the other , a problem which is endemic in the south of Europe , in the Mediterranean countries : the problem of forest fires .
These forest fires may have become more frequent as a result of climate change , but also as a result of change in the circumstances of the forests and the rural environment .
The depopulation of rural areas is a reality .
The non-use of wood produced in the Mediterranean forest , which is no longer economically viable , is a reality .
Therefore , the forest ceases to have an economic function and takes on an environmental role , which is also very important .
But the circumstances are different : depopulation takes away farmers , who - let us not forget - are the main protectors of the forest and of nature .
The farmer is the first person to confront a forest fire .
Since we are talking about an endemic affliction it is important to adopt emergency measures : they would serve as antibiotics .
But what we really need for this type of affliction is ' vaccines ' .
In this case , the vaccines would take the form of preventative measures and any resources which can act quickly in the event of forest fires .
Commissioner , this year we have seen the devastating effects of forest fires .
You have spoken of updating the Structural Funds , the Cohesion Funds , in part , in order to deal with these effects .
I would ask you also to think of the Community Initiative for Rural Development ( Leader ) , and how this initiative - which is applied in certain regions in particular - could also be applied to areas which have been devastated by forest fires .
I also believe that the measures adopted in this regard within the framework of the common agricultural policy have been positive , in relation to the areas which have had the greatest drought problems .
I would also like to acknowledge the work of the fire-fighters , forest guards and volunteers , who have contributed to tackling the problem of forest fires .
Just as we ask that in any project there be an environmental impact study , this environmental impact should be extended to the possible impact of forest fires which - I repeat - are an endemic evil in the countries of the south of Europe , the Mediterranean countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , quite a few European countries have indeed suffered throughout this summer from exceptional temperatures .
That is the subject of this evening 's debate and , indeed , time is now of the essence .
The consequences of this heatwave for our countries and their populations have been appalling .
In Portugal , as our fellow MEPs have pointed out , fires have destroyed 5 % of the country .
It is a national disaster .
Regarding France , I wish first of all to express my feelings , including my indignation , at the extent of the human drama we have experienced .
The French Government announced on Friday that more than 11 000 additional deaths in connection with the heatwave were recorded between 1 August and 15 August .
These figures are terrifying .
Certainly , they must encourage us to ask ourselves questions about each person 's duty of solidarity towards those who are most vulnerable .
National governments , and particularly the French Government , ought however , just like the European Union , also to ask themselves questions about the importance of public health policies , the requirement for high-quality emergency hospital services , accessible to everyone and in sufficient numbers , as well as about the requirement for retirement homes staffed by trained personnel and with the resources to ensure high-quality services .
In short , they must consider adopting an ambitious policy regarding the elderly and those who are most vulnerable .
All this requires budgets and , therefore , political choices that direct public expenditure towards the satisfaction of everyone 's needs .
Regarding the fires , which have particularly affected the Var region of France and , even more so , other European countries , we are faced with a certain number of questions .
What aid should there now be for these affected regions ?
How should such crises be dealt with more effectively in the future ?
Above all , how might they be avoided and through what policy of prevention ?
These questions also apply to the terrible consequences of the drought for agriculture .
Commissioner , you propose a certain number of answers to these questions , as well as guidelines for reflection , but , in both cases - those of fires and drought - emergency aid does indeed need to be organised - in the forms both of the European Solidarity Fund and of national aid - in support of the regions damaged by the fires .
For farmers , many of whom are faced by drastic situations , the European Union ought , as a minimum , to authorise the national governments to accord them exceptional short- and medium-term aid .
In France , the consequences for the affected areas are overwhelming : a loss of 50 % to 100 % of production is anticipated for non-irrigated cereals in the department of Lot-et-Garonne .
There is a lack of fodder , directly threatening livestock .
Everywhere , farmers are faced with a very large decline in revenue .
Alongside this aid , thought must be given to the mechanisms to be put in place , as well as to the efficient management of the crises linked to exceptional natural events .
This also requires public funds , which have no place in a competitive rationale .
Finally , I would turn to prevention and causes .
In line with other fellow MEPs , I really wish to emphasise the need to re-think current models of rural planning and of agricultural and also transport development .
Clearly , the tendency to make more and more profit out of available land , not to invest in fire prevention on the pretext of making savings , to accord priority to large farms and yield and to favour road transport , always to the detriment of rail - I could go on - is full of dangers .
Another model is in actual fact to be devised , based on genuinely taking account of the environment , of the public interest and of solidarity .
Indeed , we must show very much greater determination to apply the Kyoto Protocol .
In conclusion , however , I want all these dramas experienced by our fellow citizens over the last few weeks to enable us at least to become more aware . ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , summer follows summer , bringing disaster after disaster .
Last year , it was floods which plunged Europe into mourning .
This year , it has been a heatwave , bringing a health crisis in France and an environmental disaster in Portugal and on our Mediterranean coasts .
These worrying freak weather conditions may be the result of global warming , which , it is a well-known fact , is itself exacerbated by the greenhouse effect caused by CO2 emissions .
In any case , everyone is now aware that we need to be more careful in our dealings with nature .
We must also be more compassionate in our dealings with each other .
In Paris , it is said - and the figure is frightening - that over 800 people died whom nobody grieved for and whose bodies nobody came to claim .
The draft resolution tabled by our group , the Verts / ALE Group , contains a number of extremely positive recommendations , and I want to mention just a few of them here .
As regards health , in particular , the Commission must help the Member States to guarantee to all people the rights proclaimed by Article 35 of the Charter , namely the right to have access to preventive health care , even under exceptional climatic conditions .
Where Portugal is concerned , we ask , Commissioner , that the Solidarity Fund be applied above the emergency level to genuinely help the country to bandage all its wounds .
In order to reduce the greenhouse effect , we must encourage the Commission to ensure respect for the Kyoto commitments .
Transport policy has a substantial part to play in this field .
We must promote the most energy-efficient means of transport more .
As our fellow Member , Mr Dhaene , explained earlier , some of us came from Brussels to Strasbourg by bicycle , arriving towards the end of the morning .
The aim was , of course , to promote the use of bicycles .
Cycling must be provided for in the trans-European transport networks .
That would make it possible to help the authorities concerned to create or improve cycle paths which link the Member States of mainland Europe .
As part of the trip , during the final section of the route , we rode along the canal between the Marne and the Rhine .
The scenery is magnificent , but we noticed that the canal is underused for goods transport .
We must encourage this kind of transport more , for it causes less pollution than road transport .
Lastly , I would like to mention one last proposal made in our draft resolution . It is to create a European civil protection body : the ' casques verts ' .
Their intervention in environmental disasters would encourage the Member States to shoulder their responsibilities .
In short , we must stop beating about the bush where sustainable development is concerned and take practical action .
That is what our draft resolution is trying to say .
Mr President , 12 000 people died in 10 days .
That is three times as many as died in the Twin Towers .
A thousand people died per day , alone , abandoned .
The corpses were stored in refrigerated lorries , in army caissons , in a fruit and vegetable market in Rungis in Paris .
Not since Neanderthal man , long before Antigone , has the law of burial been violated .
Where is this Timisoara taking place ?
Under Milosevic ?
In Baghdad , under Saddam Hussein ?
In Haider 's Austria ?
In the camps under the guards mentioned by Berlusconi ?
In Somalia , in the Rwanda of 1000 hills ?
It is in France .
The France of the World Athletics Championships , the France of human rights , the France of gold medals , the France of Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , the father of the Constitution , the first article of which recognizes the right to dignity , including dignity for the elderly .
Where did all these deaths occur ? Sixty-six percent of the deaths occurred in old people 's homes , hospitals and specialised centres .
They were not given enough to drink .
They died of dehydration .
Why is that ?
Because there were no nurses , no staff , no doctors .
Why ?
Because the budgetary Stability Pact demands savings and cuts have to be made .
As a result , cuts have been made to the detriment of the weakest , who cannot protest , to the detriment of the elderly .
Most of those who died were women .
They did not die from domestic violence , as the women 's rights committee believes .
They did not die from discrimination or unequal treatment , they died from dehydration .
That brings us to the causes , namely the cumulative effect of collective errors made over the past 20 years .
The collective error of ultraliberalism , economism - in the nineteenth century ultraliberalism produced Zola , Victor Hugo , the proletariat and millions of deaths , and ultraliberalism is starting to claim deaths once again .
The collective error of ' human rightsism ' , which leaves no place for Lenin among official rights and genuine rights , not to mention the hypocrisy which proclaims rights only to the extent that they are violated .
What , then , is to be done ?
Of course , Mr Barnier , we can announce funding , plans , a new economy and a new hierarchy .
The truth , confirmed by statistics , is that not one of those who died came from the middle classes or the great bourgeoisie .
It was those at the bottom of the heap who died .
It is just as well that we have banned meatmeal , for otherwise they would have ended up minced in battery pig farms , although it is true that pigs are not abandoned , unlike the elderly people of France .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Commissioner Barnier , who has addressed the tragic events of this summer with his usual clarity and illustrated what the Commission is doing with his customary great skill .
There is just one point which leaves me somewhat perplexed : I find it difficult to make a distinction between the drought and the fires , particularly when it comes to the environmental and economic consequences .
If there is a distinction , it is at the level of the causes , for I am afraid that many of the fires were caused by man 's folly , by a pyromaniac , while it would be extremely difficult to blame anyone for the drought .
Commissioner , I would now , if I may , like to look at what has been an absolutely dreadful summer for Europe from a farming perspective because , in my view , the scale of the problem is truly huge .
The drought of recent months is yet another indication of how the indisputable change in the earth 's climate is having irreparable effects on the environment and on our farming in particular .
I am afraid that extremes have become the norm : drought , rain , cyclones and floods are the effects of a process of desertification which I am sad to say is affecting Europe , in particular southern and eastern Europe , and , ultimately , taking a very heavy toll on farming , for these disasters are generating an economic crisis , opening up a bottomless pit of production costs and sharply reducing the market margins for farm produce , in such a way as to jeopardise , in a summer such as this , even the pursuit of entrepreneurial activity in large areas of Europe .
I am not trying to paint a picture which is all black : I am merely describing a situation and I would like to identify ways of assisting and supporting farming .
In this case , it is important that , generally speaking , the Commission carries out a careful assessment and adopts practical instruments to analyse and address the quantity and quality of European water resources for the coming decades , with particular focus on ways of conserving them .
Then there are the immediate requirements .
I feel that , although the scale of the damage caused by the drought , which will become clear when the growing and harvesting operations are over , could or will lead to the activation of the European Solidarity Fund , at the same time , it would be essential to be able to take advantage , as at other times of declared crisis , of the option of bringing forward the payment of Community premiums to farmers .
In this sense , it might be useful to set up a European summit coordinating all the parties affected by disasters , which is necessary to support measures to improve the situation , particularly the state of the farming economy .
Not immediately but soon , a damage estimate , which may be difficult to carry out but should certainly be close to the threshold for benefiting from the solidarity instruments I mentioned just now , could call for careful reflection from the Commission and a Commission proposal to achieve a multi-risk reform tailored to respond to the new climatic conditions of our continent .
This would certainly be a very useful , wholly innovative instrument to support our farming .
Mr President , allow me to begin by expressing my condolences at the deaths which have taken place .
I believe our first duty is to express our condolences to the families .
But , while this is correct and essential , we cannot restrict ourselves to this expression of immediate human solidarity .
People have been lost - in fact , in my country we still do not know how many - and this is unquestionably the most important thing ; but we have also lost homes , landscapes , flora and fauna .
Fire weakens the soil , and sooner or later the usual traditional storms , which we always expect on the Mediterranean coasts in September and October , will arrive , taking advantage of this weakened soil to erode these areas even further .
Let us keep this in mind .
There is no doubt that the heat wave and the drought have contributed to this disaster , but heat is not a new phenomenon in the Mediterranean .
As has already been said , we have had heat for centuries .
What is exceptional here are these temperatures which exceed anything we have known and , therefore , those people who were sceptical about climate change should perhaps give this some thought and governments , companies and individuals should take the appropriate measures .
People are wondering what the European Union is doing in this respect .
The Commissioner proposes mobilising the Solidarity Fund , and I agree - I am rapporteur for the Committee on Budgets , and there is therefore no doubt that I will be sympathetic to this proposal - but the Solidarity Fund , Commissioner , relates to natural disasters , and these are not just natural .
There are arsonists and huge numbers of criminal cases , and we should also be asking ourselves what we are doing with the directive and with other legislation on environmental responsibility , how we apply them , how we transpose them and how they are implemented , and how we demand those responsibilities .
I began in this Parliament in 1986 .
I believe my first action was a motion for a resolution calling for programmes for the prevention of forest fires in the Mediterranean .
We went ahead with such schemes five years later , in 1992 , and we had a ten-year programme running from 1992 to 2002 .
Why have appropriations always been left over , Commissioner ?
You have given us several good examples , but I , as rapporteur for budgets , would say to you that every year on the ramassage transfer there are appropriations which originate from that fund .
Why ?
Because the governments have not used them ?
I believe this is very serious , because if they are not used , next year we will once again be in the same position .
We must take action at Community level .
The Member States have their responsibilities , but I believe the European Union has a duty here to take the lead and to impose measures ; otherwise we will have to trust , as we do every year , that the winters put out the fires of the summer .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as Commissioner Barnier said , it is important that the Union confirms its solidarity with the countries whose forestry resources and agricultural productions have been affected .
In view of this , it would be a very serious mistake to reduce the environmental disaster of this summer to the economic losses it involved .
It is , first and foremost , a huge humanitarian disaster , equivalent for the whole of Europe to 10 times the scale of the attacks of 11 September .
In effect , it is the first major disaster which is both economic and humanitarian caused by the climate shift in the temperate zone .
This climate shift has coincided with another equally disastrous trend : the increasing isolation of a section of the population which is also increasingly dependent because it is elderly .
I will leave my colleagues from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance the task of expounding on the absolute priorities resulting from this shameful experience , from this condemnation of our development model : the need to speed up Kyoto , the rejection of an endeavour to boost the economy based on a motorway programme , the discrediting of the nuclear sector as an alternative for fossil energies , the obligation to adapt our flora and our habitat to the changes which have already occurred .
However , it is just as important to adapt our health system and our social security networks to protect our elderly people against climate shocks .
The loosening of family ties , including the links of geographic proximity , due to the individualisation of our societies and growing mobility , is a largely irreversible phenomenon which is not wholly negative .
Our elderly people , we , ourselves , in the future , will be able to cope with the situation provided that services of general interest are developed to offset it , both in the public sector and in the third sector , the associative and cooperative sector .
Is the fact that France has been particularly affected not due first and foremost to the fact that , for two years , grants to the associations managing old people 's homes have been halved , in the same way as care allowance has been cut ?
That is why we are calling upon the Commission to draw up a Green Paper on the protection of elderly people and combating climate and , more generally , health risks , on the basis of European best practice .
Mr President , Commissioner , once again , unfortunately , forest fires have desolated the forests of the Mediterranean , and they have been particularly devastating this summer as a result of the climatic conditions we have suffered .
As well as the loss of human lives , which we have to mourn , as well as the Dante-esque images left behind by the fires and the economic losses they have caused , the magnitude of the disaster which year after year hangs over the forests of the south of Europe and the consequences it has for the European Union as a whole demonstrate the need for a Community policy for protecting the forests against fires , with its own funding , which takes account of the specific nature of Mediterranean forests and which provides for prevention measures as an integral element in the management of forests , as this Parliament had requested at the time .
We must not forget that the Mediterranean forests and the forests of the north develop in completely different ways , and are therefore governed by completely different laws .
As well as soil , the growth-restricting factors are water in the Mediterranean forests and light in the northern areas .
In the Mediterranean forests , where there is no shortage of light , the higher trees , shrubs and grasses have to compete for water on the ground and , being a restricting factor , there comes a time when every drop of water which falls must be distributed at ground level .
The water table is therefore reduced , the roots do not reach that level and they die , and then the above-ground part becomes denser and finally - unfortunately - fire returns repeatedly and we are sent right back to the beginning .
This differing development also requires differing forest management and requires that , in the Mediterranean forests , management and prevention form part of an inseparable whole , which is the only way to prevent these waves of fires every summer , the seriousness of which depends on the weather conditions .
The Mediterranean forests are part of the common heritage of all Europeans . It is for this reason that forest fires are not just the responsibility of the Member States or regional governments with competence in this field , although there is no question that the correct application of the principle of subsidiarity is essential in order to increase the effectiveness of the measures to be taken .
Community competences in the environmental field as well as the commitment made by the European Union in Kyoto require greater budgetary contributions and greater involvement by the European Union in the fight against fires .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , I should first like to call to mind with sorrow and not a little horror all those whose deaths were associated with the health crisis which so cruelly affected the older generation in our country , France , but also in other countries .
I believe that they have to be our prime concern .
I shall , however , be speaking mainly about the problems of forest fires .
Every year , unfortunately , we are accustomed to expressing our sympathies : this was the case last year with the floods in central Europe and this year it is the same with the fires .
We usually find the appropriate words and our sincerity is not in doubt , but very often we feel powerless to come up with an adequate response at European level .
Moreover , for a long time words were all we had until , following debates that crossed all political divides and on your initiative , Commissioner - and I congratulate you on this - we are setting up this Solidarity Fund , which today meets a widely felt commitment , that is to ensure that the European Union is as close as possible to its people , in particular when they are in great distress .
You have reported on how this new instrument is being used .
I believe that it is doing a great deal of good .
It is alleviating the effects of serious crises , but strangely , by a bizarre twist of history , we are in the process of reliving the same situation with forest fires .
We used to have a specific policy , a specific instrument and a specific budget .
This was mentioned by Mrs Ferrer and it is not old ; it dates from 1992 .
It was a European regulation , directly accessible to all foresters or public authorities that owned forests , enabling them to invest as a preventive measure - because as you said , Commissioner , prevention is better than cure - in specialised fire-fighting equipment : firebreaks , water supply points , access tracks and so on .
In fact we saw fit to abolish this regulation at the beginning of the year .
The regulation had a budget of EUR 52 million from 1992 to 1997 and EUR 77 million from 1997 to 2002 .
Today another regulation is being proposed to us which serves an entirely different purpose and which does not mention or budget for protecting forests against fire , and that is ' Forest Focus ' , with a budget of EUR 41 million .
If we were to continue down this road , the conclusion people would draw would be that in 2003 , a catastrophic year in terms of fire , the European Union took the decision to abandon its policy of forest-fire protection .
I believe that we should spare ourselves the public ridicule and the public rejection .
Commissioner , there are quite a number of us here , on all of the benches , who consider that EUR 60 million is a high price to pay to damage Europe 's image if , on the day when a disaster of this magnitude were unfolding , we were to abandon a tool which is a preventative tool , which works , which people are happy with , and which foresters the length and breadth of Europe are calling for .
I would therefore ask you to repeat the strange acrobatics that we performed on the Solidarity Fund in the face of very strong opposition .
It took the floods in Germany for people finally to recognise the need for a Solidarity Fund .
It will perhaps have taken the tragic fires in Portugal for us to return , as I hope we will , to this regulation on protecting forests against fire , which has done us good service and which to abandon would , it seems to me today , send out a very bad signal .
Mr President , Commissioner , at this very moment fire is continuing to ravage part of the Massif des Maures in France .
Desolation , helplessness and anger : that is how you feel when you cross these areas that have been burnt to a cinder .
I know that you proposed the Solidarity Fund on behalf of the Commission , but what can the Fund do faced with the extent of these disasters and the consequent costs ?
It is whole swathes of the economy that are wiped out .
Furthermore , nature , which is already weakened , never stops paying the cost of our inconsistent policies .
Who will pay to restore nature , to rehabilitate the Natura 2000 areas that we have so much difficulty in designating , as they are too greatly coveted by frenzied tourist development ?
And have we not only narrowly avoided further catastrophes , when you think of the water in our rivers that was no longer cooling nuclear power stations ; the waters in those rivers into which the French Government , for example , authorised even warmer water to be discharged ?
It really is high time that this stopped , Mr President , Commissioner .
You yourself reminded us of our Kyoto commitments in terms of global warming .
What is the Union doing , though , to impose an alternative transport policy or an alternative energy policy ?
Because this heatwave , as we all know and we have stated this again and again , is a foretaste of the problems we will have to face in the future .
Meteorologists are unanimous : we can expect more heatwaves .
After these disasters , now is the time for action , Commissioner .
Furthermore , as we all know , that is when it comes to the crunch .
Even here we do not use the same terms to mean the same thing .
Sustainable development , sustainable transport , the sustainable economy : all European policies today are sustainable .
In fact , to confront the ecological crisis we need a change of policy , and our policies need to be ecologically sustainable .
We need to put in place an environment policy that is not forever seen as an optional extra , as it is today .
The environment has to be a priority in the political choices that we make .
This is still not the case , as we know .
Moreover , we also have the technical means in the Commission - it is not worth describing them here ; you know full well - to meet the challenge , but it is the political choices that are cruelly lacking , and this is true no matter what our governments say .
Consequently , Commissioner , we really are counting on you to convince the politicians to make different choices .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking the Commission for its prompt and generous response to the Portuguese Government 's appeal for help in minimising the cost of the damage caused by the fires .
Although President Cox is not here , I hope that the President of the Bureau will pass on my thanks to him for his speedy responses to the letters written to him by my Portuguese fellow Members from all parties , including my own .
Our letter was drafted by my colleague Mr Coelho and signed by several of us .
I thank Mr Cox for his swift response to our appeals , and also the chairmen of the political groups for their quick decision to hold this emergency debate on the heatwave , in particular on its most visible effect , the fires , but also on its other harmful consequences .
I would like to make a brief appeal to the Commissioner and also to the goodwill of this House concerning what is at stake in Portugal .
Everyone knows that there is short-term damage here ? visible , immediate damage ? and also long-term damage , which is nevertheless just as important .
We have an objective assessment of the short-term damage , which runs to about EUR one billion .
On the basis of that assessment , which was drawn up and presented to the Commission , Portugal is eligible to claim almost EUR 100 million ( around EUR 95 million ) from the European Union Solidarity Fund .
The Portuguese Government submitted an application for around half of the amount for which it was eligible , and the Commission proposed an aid package of EUR 32 million .
We are not denying that this aid is useful and very important , but it is much less than is needed .
The first and principal reason for this is the scale of the disaster : almost 1 % of our gross national product is at stake and this year 's fires were as serious as those of the last ten years put together .
Dealing with this is beyond our capabilities , bearing in mind , on top of everything else , that we are having to conform to a rigid financial mechanism , namely the Stability Pact .
The second aspect to consider is that of the long-term effects , which will be key in the future , since the affected areas are poor regions in the interior of the country where forestry was the main source of employment .
We now have to think about setting in motion economic support mechanisms , both as part of this Community support , restructuring and reworking framework and , in future , within the next Community support framework , the common agricultural policy , regional development policy and rural development policy .
A key point , with which I will conclude , Mr President : it is clear here that something more than a forestry strategy for the European Union is needed .
It is also clear that Mediterranean woodland is at much greater risk than northern European woodland .
We must go much further , and the Commission has to reconsider its Forest Focus proposal , which is completely inadequate for preventing damage to woodland .
Mr President , Commissioner , I too , of course , would like to express my solidarity with the countries of the South , but I hope you will not mind if I , instead of repeating everything my fellow-Members have said , concentrate on the drought in my own country .
Those of us who cast our minds back somewhat further , Commissioner , know that very dry summers have been a frequent occurrence , and so I am not one of those who regard this summer of the century as a quite unique phenomenon , but , farms being as financially stretched as they are , we can hardly dismiss this summer of the century as nothing more than an occupational hazard .
Like the harvest report that has been presented , the Ministry 's official figures also confirm that the drought has brought on extreme losses to the harvest in Germany , but also in its European neighbours , and you have already pointed out that the European Commission has taken initial steps to enable the direct payments that are in any case due to farmers to be made more speedily and at an earlier date .
Although I see that as an encouragement , this does not add up to extra money .
It strengthens farms ' liquidity , enabling them to buy in feedingstuffs and sow new crops .
Let me ask you , though , something that has been briefly discussed in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , that is , whether there are indeed no uncontracted funds available in the EU 's agricultural budget .
I would have thought that resources were available .
Is it not conceivable that this is an area where help could be given more speedily - with co-financing at national level , which is what some of the German federal states are considering ?
Let me say by way of conclusion something that has already been mentioned very often - that the eventual consequence for forestry , including in our country , will be that many farmers ' own financial resources will be insufficient to permit reforestation .
If we are to talk in terms of rural development , this is where we should be giving really serious thought to how we deal with this problem .
Mr President , it is a crying shame , to my mind , that we are not legislating on climate change today , because , given the remarkable profession of faith I have witnessed here , I do not believe we would have as much trouble passing legislation as we have had in recent months .
I say that with the benefit of my experience as a rapporteur in this field , during which I have often detected a certain scepticism towards climate change .
Let us , then , learn the lessons .
First , by moving towards sustainable forestry management , laying greater emphasis on indigenous species and less on foreign ones ; laying emphasis on multiple uses of woodland , because the presence of people , through activities such as hunting , tourism , beekeeping , forestry , grazing and agriculture , is the best deterrent and surveillance tool .
Let us also learn lessons , however , about climate change : fires , which make an instantaneous contribution to climate change by producing large amounts of carbon dioxide and reducing our carbon sink capacity , are increasingly a consequence of climate change .
We are locked on a collision course with climate change .
The 1990s was the hottest decade for two hundred years .
Last summer , record high temperatures were reached in various parts of southern Europe .
Scientists suggest that temperatures will rise by 5.8 degrees over the next 100 years .
On the domestic agenda , first of all , we must therefore follow up the positive efforts we have already begun in the field of transport , through the trade in emissions and through reduction measures in the industrial and energy sectors .
On the world stage , however , we must also pressure the United States to adopt the Kyoto Protocol .
Kyoto is hardly a giant stride forward : a reduction of just 5 % , when the scientists are telling us to reduce worldwide emissions by 70 % .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to extend my sympathies to all of the regions in the south of Europe that have been devastated by terrible fires .
This is a true human , environmental and economic tragedy .
As you said , Commissioner , repairing the damage is more expensive than preventing it : we therefore need to give prevention the consideration and funding that it deserves .
In this respect , I can report that creating networks in the forests of Aquitaine by building tracks , firebreaks and ditches , by increasing the number of water supply points and by appointing fire spotters has made it possible to limit the spread of nascent fires very considerably .
These preventive measures were funded in particular by a European regulation dedicated to protecting forests against fire , Regulation 2158 / 92 / EEC , which unfortunately expired at the end of 2002 .
In spite of the indisputable beneficial effects of this regulation , the Commission - as many of us have pointed out - has transferred only the fire surveillance aspect to its ' Forest Focus ' proposal .
As for the prevention part , it has been incorporated into rural development , where funding is a great deal more uncertain .
This shows the Commission 's intention to abandon wholesale a European policy of defending forests against fire and to renationalise this policy .
To do so is , I believe , a political , economic and environmental mistake .
Well before the terrible fires of this summer - note , well before - and more specifically on 29 April , I wrote to the President of the European Commission , Romano Prodi , to tell him how astonished I was by the Commission 's position .
At first reading , the Commission had in fact spoken in favour of rejecting Parliament 's amendments integrating fire prevention in ' Forest Focus ' .
In response , all I received was a reassertion of this position , which I regard at the very least as surprising .
At a time when the European Parliament is preparing to reopen discussions on the ' Forest Focus ' proposal at its second reading , we need to do all we can to include fire-prevention measures in ' Forest Focus ' .
When it comes to the Community budget , this funding is a drop in the ocean , but , Commissioner , it is a drop of water that will enable many fires to be extinguished .
Commissioner , you told us that repair costs more than prevention . That is preaching to the converted .
Prevention is precisely what we are talking about here .
On presenting Forest Focus , the Commission is reducing its economic contribution from EUR 18 million to EUR 13 million , saying that the missing 5 million has been transferred to the Regulation on Rural Development ; but in the end it has had to tell us that this transfer has not taken place , which leads us to think that the money has been lost along the way .
As Mr Martin and many of my colleagues have said , and I am not going to repeat it , from a political point of view it is not acceptable that the budget set for the only regulation dedicated exclusively to the protection of forests , to pollution and to fires is being reduced by EUR 5 million , and to say that we are now going to combat fires , leaving out prevention , we are going to study pollution , increase biodiversity and also study carbon .
We cannot do many more things with much less money , because 5 million out of EUR 18 million is a very significant percentage .
I would prefer it if we did not have to talk about or lament or express solidarity with the families of the people lost in these fires , nor the landscapes , homes and everything else that has disappeared , but I believe it is a miserly policy on the part of the Commissioner responsible for the environment to try to reduce the only funds we have had and to say that they have been transferred to rural development when , firstly , the countries have not had any opportunity to introduce these funds into their programmes and , secondly , the funds are not even in rural development .
Thank you , Commissioner . I would ask you to communicate what I have said to Commissioner Wallström , so that at second reading we can approve the amendments which Parliament has already approved .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after what has been said already , it will be impossible for me to be original .
The south of Europe - France , Spain and Italy - was , regrettably , plagued by fire this summer , but my country , Portugal , was hit particularly hard .
The fires , which affected 15 of our 18 districts , wiped out 5 % of our national woodland .
The effects of this tragedy are economic and environmental , but also human .
I can only pay tribute , therefore , to the 18 people who lost their lives , and express my condolences to their families .
I would also , however , like to express my sympathy with all those of my fellow-countrymen whose lives were affected by the fires and who are going through a time of anxiety about the future .
I am thinking in particular of those families for whom woodlands constitute the main - or , in some cases , the only - means of subsistence .
The scale of this tragedy calls for European Union support , which should be immediate and sufficient .
Consequently , I would underline what my fellow Members have already said here about the effective and immediate action of the Portuguese Government , which took measures and steps to minimise the social and human impact .
I would also highlight Commissioner Barnier 's words of support and his announcement of a financial package from the European Union Social Fund , made during his visit to Portugal last week .
You found the right tone for the occasion , Commissioner , and for that I thank you .
Furthermore , that tone managed to ease our burden .
As the Commissioner said , though , we also feel that the aid on offer does not meet our expectations .
This is a tragic state of affairs , particularly tragic in its broad sweep .
Allow me to insist : this is a completely unprecedented disaster , and such unprecedented cases must be granted a commensurate level of aid .
We hope , Commissioner , that the highly persuasive effects of the ash-blackened landscape which you saw with your own eyes in Portugal after the fires will provide the motivation that is lacking for an affirmative response to be given to the reasonable and adequate request made by the authorities in my country .
Mr President , I too should like to start by expressing my solidarity with my southern European fellow MEPs .
I am also pleased that the Commission has done so too , but it clearly demonstrates that the disaster that has struck there calls for European solidarity .
Europe should therefore show what it can do on the social front .
I should also like to highlight another issue in this debate .
It is unacceptable that the Commission should derive financial gain from the drought which is hitting European agriculture so hard .
This is a likely scenario , particularly in the area of potato growing for processing , to mention one example .
It is expected that the yield in the Netherlands , Germany , Denmark and Austria will be a few dozen percentage points down on the annual average .
In contrast to other products , such as ware potatoes , this scarcity will not lead to high prices .
The CDA delegation in this House would like to invite the Commission , in the short term , to take stock of the amount by which production is lagging behind the preset quota and of the financial gain this produces .
For example , a loss in production of 25 % translates into a saving for the Commission to the tune of EUR 30 million , because for this crop , as for a number of other crops , the premium is directly linked to the yield .
It is useful to bring this to your attention for these reasons alone , particularly since a 40 % decoupling is envisaged in 2004 for those crops .
This means that the premiums will then no longer be determined by the yield .
It is likely that precisely this system will to some extent be used as early as in 2003 .
In addition , the CDA delegation in this House is of the opinion that the Commission should initiate a European strategy discussion about quantitative water management .
Qualitatively speaking , European water policy has been a success , but given that floods and water shortages have followed each other in such quick succession for a number of years now , it is necessary for us to do what is needed in the area of effective water management with a view to a future strategy .
Mr President , I think this has been an exciting debate , and I wish to comment on just a few of the points .
We have discussed CO2 emissions and the way in which the climate depends upon the energy situation , and we have talked about the need for rather more sustainable energy .
On the hot days in Denmark , where I live , I looked at our many windmills and saw that they were motionless .
There was no wind , and we must therefore conclude that wind alone does not solve the problem .
What , however , there was enough of was sunshine , and we must therefore arrange for solar and photovoltaic cells to be developed so that we can really make use of the sun which sends so much energy to the Earth .
The fact that we had problems with some power stations , which were unable to operate when it was very hot , is something for which we must compensate by creating a proper and powerful high voltage system so that we can have a genuine exchange of energy between the various regions of Europe .
The forest fires we have had will have no long-term environmental effect , since the trees in any case would have ended up similarly emitting CO2 . The disaster has , however , been pretty huge in its extent , as we have all heard and as we all agree .
I find it incredible that such large areas can catch fire without it being possible to put out the blaze .
That leads me to concur with Mr Martin in saying that we must arrange for very large fire breaks to be established in the form of broad lanes or , better still , very broad corridors running through the land so that fires cannot spread to the extent that we have seen and so that we might , in this way , protect our countryside and rural areas .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you all of you for your attention and for being here today and , to those who took the floor , for their questions and observations .
I should like to say in particular to Mr Lage and his fellow Portuguese Members that I was very touched by their words of thanks .
Nevertheless , I feel that I was only doing my job , as were Mrs Diamantopoulou and Mr Vitorino when they also visited Portugal to express European solidarity by offering words and compassion , but also through tangible action , even though I understand that this can sometimes seem insufficient .
In any case , I should like to thank you for your comments .
Mr Coelho mentioned the speed of payment .
Last Wednesday , at the same time as I proposed these 31.6 million , Mrs Schreyer proposed the procedure necessary for the two arms of the budgetary authority , the European Parliament and the Council , to be able to make a decision very quickly , no doubt before the end of this month , so that the money is actually paid , in full , to Portugal in October .
It will therefore be usable from October .
On Thursday I met the Portuguese Finance Minister , who is making preparations to distribute this money to support or reimburse emergency expenditure .
Once again , I too was very struck by the solidarity , generosity and proactive response of the people of Portugal , but also of the inhabitants of other regions , other countries and , as Mr Coelho said , not only countries in the European Union .
Switzerland was mentioned .
Morocco has also contributed to the relief effort .
I think this is excellent and it needed to be pointed out .
Like many of you , Mr Figueiredo and Mrs Ferrer mentioned the restoration of the forests , which will take time .
It will take more time where cork oaks are concerned - 40 years - than for fir trees .
It is very striking when you fly over the scorched bare earth to see the number of forest roads .
You can clearly see that this was a site of genuine economic activity with people who lived from forestry development .
During the time that reforestation takes , these people need to live and must not be forced to leave .
Jobs will therefore have to be created , no doubt in other sectors , so that the people are not tempted to leave .
In any case , I can confirm that it will be possible to use the Structural Funds and redeploy them to this end .


Several of you , including Mrs Redondo Jiménez , Mr Martin , Mrs Ferrer , Mr Savary and Mr Vallvé , made rather forcible comments about prevention and protection measures and expressed regret for the amendments proposed by the Commission in ' Forest Focus ' .
I should like to avoid controversy and especially misunderstandings and remind you or tell you very strongly that the necessary protection and prevention measures are still and will continue to be funded under the rural development programmes .
The new ' Forest Focus ' Regulation is to be seen as complementing and supplementing these .
What the Commission has sought to do , even though there has clearly been a misunderstanding , is to avoid overlaps or redundancies between the regulations .
Mrs Wallström , I might add , will be meeting the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy very soon and will explain this to them .
I also wish to say - Messrs Rovsing and Hugues Martin mentioned this issue - that when we talk about reforestation , we may be referring to regions that have been ravaged by fires or to those that have been devastated by storms .
I remember seeing parts of our region , Aquitaine , with thousands of hectares of trees blown down by the storms .
Different reforestation methods therefore need to be adopted taking into account what has happened .
I am thinking in particular , as you said , Mr Rovsing , of firebreak areas .
Let me give you the following statistic : 10 % of expenditure under rural development for the period 2000 to 2006 is going to forest-related measures and a large proportion of this money is devoted to afforestation .
The money is , therefore , there .
It is not the money that is lacking .
We have the capacity to pay for all of these initiatives and I would repeat that where the structural funds are concerned , for which I have direct responsibility , or training under Mrs Diamantopoulou or rural development under Mr Fischler , we will be able to show a great deal of flexibility and accept all proposals to redeploy or reprogramme funds , as Portugal has by the way already proposed doing to the tune of EUR 182 million .
Mr Ribeiro e Castro , Mrs Bastos just a moment ago and Mr Cunha expressed regret that the figure was no higher than 31.6 million .
I myself said the other day that this amount was undoubtedly not enough to meet existing needs .
I would repeat that it is earmarked entirely for emergency measures , which would never have been supported were it not for the Solidarity Fund .
If this catastrophe had happened in Portugal two years ago , the amount would not have been 31.6 million but zero .
As Mr Savary reminded us just now , it was because the floods were so serious that we resurrected this Solidarity Fund , which had been abolished in the past .
The old Fund consisted of just a few dozen million euro ; we have recreated it with a billion euro , which does constitute real progress .
Having said that , all I can do is apply the criteria that were approved by Parliament and the Council , while observing , I might add , that the criteria that I initially proposed were substantially different .
We apply these criteria with the utmost impartiality and objectivity and it is the same criteria that are used for floods in Germany , Austria and the Czech Republic as for Portugal .
I would say to Mrs Bastos that I do not consider these criteria to be definitively good or ideal .
On the contrary , I see the Commission 's role as being to carry out an evaluation , once the Fund has been up and running for two years , and probably to propose changes or modifications .
I would like to thank Mrs Ries for her comments on the issue of civil protection and I will pass on her group 's support for this idea of a European civil protection force to Mrs Wallström .
I will say to Mr Mayol i Raynal , who is no longer present , that I was very interested in his idea , if I understood correctly , of a European cycle route .
As it happens , I have a longstanding and keen interest in the provision of cycle tracks and I will tell Mrs de Palacio that the European Parliament is determined to see progress made here .
On the subject of prevention , a number of you obviously mentioned the best prevention method , which is of course to keep men and women in the areas concerned to live and work there .



Mrs Grossetête spoke about desertification , as did Mr Vallvé , Mr Fiori , Mr Maat and Mr Figueiredo .
Now is not the time to mention the different aspects of the common agricultural policy , but whatever its imperfections and shortcomings and leaving aside the new course set by the CAP - and I have said myself that it would be better for doing what Mr Fischler in any case proposes and taking environmental requirements into account - it has to be said quite frankly that if the common agricultural policy had not existed , it would have spelt the end for many regions where there are still farmers today .
I would add that if we wish to maintain these activities , not only agriculture or forestry , but activities in rural areas where desertification is a real risk , we also need a regional support policy .
And this mitigates in favour of the idea , even if it needs to evolve further , of a new regional policy which is of interest to all the regions of Europe .
Mrs Roth-Behrendt and Mr Moreira Da Silva mentioned , as many of you did , the great international issue of Kyoto , the greenhouse effect and global warming .
I myself have said what I think on this subject .
Chance has nothing to do with it .
If we experience increasingly violent storms , if temperatures continue to rise , if global warming causes the increase in temperatures and if , all of a sudden , there are fires , floods and - as we will probably see over the next few weeks - further disasters due to rain , storms and erosion , it is no coincidence .
I therefore believe that the European Union has a joint , Community-wide responsibility to apply the Kyoto Protocol to the letter , as I said earlier , and to persuade as many countries as possible , including Russia , to ratify this protocol , which seeks to organise prevention at global level .
Over and above the efforts that we need to make to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , there are clearly all of our other policies which , as I see it - I am saying this to Mr Turmes because I agree with him - need to be implemented with this in mind .
This applies too to the policies that we support through the Structural Funds or the funds for transport .
Personally I am anxious for us to tip the balance of European transport policy more towards rail .
Moreover , I would remind you that under the Cohesion Fund , for which I am responsible , half of the appropriations are allocated to the environment and the other half to transport .

In this context I am going to pay close attention to the new countries that are entering the Union , Mr Turmes , because we have to avoid these countries , where reconstruction is in full swing , making the same mistakes that we have made on transport since the war : erecting high-voltage power lines in any old place , constructing roads in the middle of cities , building mainly roads and motorways , with more and more concrete , rather than developing rail transport .
I promise you that in the new Cohesion Fund we are going to ensure that we strike a better balance .
You forgot one subject , Mr Turmes , that is also a particular concern of mine , and that is urban public transport .
Through the Cohesion Fund we are going to help cities , Warsaw and others , to provide this public transport .
I would like these cities to make more space for urban public transport and to give it better support .
I would repeat that in the future regional policy , which I am reflecting on at the moment , my intention is to make this kind of risk prevention compulsory in all of the European regions that are in receipt of aid .
Mrs Ainardi and Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert mentioned the common agricultural policy in connection with the drought and I would also repeat that , as Mr Fischler has demonstrated , we will show a great deal of flexibility under the CAP so as to help farmers that are very seriously affected at the present time , working alongside and in addition to national governments .
Mrs Ries mentioned education .
Time does not allow me to go into detail now , but I think that where the environment is concerned one form of prevention is to explain properly what is at stake and to educate people , so as to limit as far as possible not only deliberate or criminal acts but also acts of carelessness .
I should like to support Mr Berthu , who mentioned the need to develop the research programme .
My colleague , Mr Busquin , also intends to increase the research effort in this field , as it is insufficient in Europe .
As Mr Colom i Naval said , the research effort is all the more necessary where this heatwave and global warming are concerned in the light of the fact that the last decade , from 1990 to 2000 , has seen the hottest years for a thousand years .
It is therefore necessary to increase our understanding of these phenomena so as to combat them as effectively as possible .
I have responded to Mr Fiori 's comments on drought .
He invited the Commission to consider the issue of coordinating water resources .
That is fine by me .
The problem is that responsibility for planning and water resources does not lie entirely at Community level , but is shared with national and regional bodies .
Finally , Mr Lipietz suggested a Green Paper on protecting the older generation from climate-related accidents .
I think this is an interesting idea , at least to see what has happened in all of the countries and perhaps gain a kind of overview of this crisis , of the way in which different countries responded to it , and so as to exchange good practice .
I will pass on this suggestion to my colleague David Byrne .
I would say to Mr Turmes that the letter that he mentioned , which was sent to Mr Prodi , will be scrutinised very carefully , not only by the President of the Commission but also by all of the commissioners who are interested in this subject and in particular by the one who has just addressed you .
That concludes the item .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is expected that the Basel Committee will , this autumn , come to a decision on the equity capital of banks in the future .
It is certain that we will follow with a very critical eye the USA 's plans for transposing this into law in the future , and that we will , of course , come to our own conclusions at European level .
If , though , the decision is taken in the autumn , it is envisaged that we will begin the lawmaking process next year .
This report concentrates on small and medium-sized enterprises , as Basel II has the objective of making the international financial markets more stable , an objective shared by all .
The fallout from Basel II must not , however hit those who had no part in destabilizing the financial markets - in particular the small and medium-sized enterprises in the European Union , who , as is constantly reiterated , form the backbone of our economy and are the only means whereby we may be brought out of economic crisis .
There have been calls for some considerable time for a study , and this makes it all the more important that it should be produced by the time a proposal for a directive is put forward , so that then the relevant conclusions may be drawn as regards the legislation .
I would now like to explain a number of the main points in my report that I see as very important .
The first is the issue of the legislation .
I take a very critical view of the way we are acquiring more and more ' soft law ' , by which I mean legislation in international bodies that enjoy no democratic legitimacy .
This is no criticism of the work they do , but of the way in which they do it .
If Basel II were the only one , one might be able to overlook this , but we are ending up with more and more bodies like Basel II , for example the one on international accounting standards , in which experts get together and formulate standards that are then put before Parliament and the Commission in the expectation that we will transpose them into law without much in the way of correction .
The only way we , as responsible politicians , can respond to this process is in the negative .
We have to turn our minds to a more transparent process , one that influences the way these bodies are composed .
Although I do not believe it to be necessary that we should , in the plenary or in committee , discuss every point of detail , we must , being responsible politicians , acquire greater influence .
In any case , the European elections are coming up next year , and , back home , they will be asking all of us why we took this decision .
This leads me to my second comitological point .
It is quite clear to me too that Basel II is not a typical Lamfalussy process , as the lawmaking process will find us sharing in decisions on the annexes .
The Lamfalussy process will , however , be used , as we will at that stage be determining which annexes will be amended by which procedure .
The same applies here too ; this is not to make a general criticism of the Lamfalussy process , but there are two points that must first be clarified .
One - the strengthening of the law , the right of recall - is a matter for the Convention on the Constitution , and the second is , of course , a critical observation .
Does Lamfalussy work in the way its creators thought it would , or is there still room for improvement ?
So much , for a start , for the fundamental principles !

So far , much has been achieved ; there is the million-euro ceiling , which we demand should be adjusted in line with inflation ; we have got internal and external rating - where we will certainly have to see to it that smaller banks do not have to face the hurdles of excessive bureaucracy ; the 0.2 % granularity criterion must disappear , and we have to consider procyclicality .
We are calling for a study to re-examine this point , and in greater detail , before the legislation enters into force .
How , in future , will start-up-companies in this area be treated ?
At European level , we will certainly have urgent need of partial use , which Basel II has hitherto rejected .
It is these things that we demand of Basel , and if the Basel Committee does what we want it to do , we will be able to adopt the rules without making major changes to them .
If , though , it does not do so , we will introduce the necessary flexibility at European level .
Basel does , though , present opportunities , such as rating for small and medium-sized enterprises to give them a clear idea of the state of their operations , although here it will be necessary for the banks to allow themselves enough time to explain rating , to work with small and medium-sized enterprises and to support their further development .
We will , of course , also have to do our homework at national level .
In my own country , people are always talking about small and medium-sized enterprises having a tradition of weak equity capital .
Please bear in mind that the weak equity capital of small and medium-sized enterprises is not one of the traditions that I , as a Bavarian , see as a good thing ; on the contrary , it results from a misguided fiscal policy over the last few decades .
It is now time for the appropriate corrections to be made back home .
Basel II is to be transposed in 2006 or 2007 .
This is a realistic goal if we work at it , but we do not hold to it dogmatically ; in other words , we reserve to ourselves the right to carry out the scrutiny on which a decision will depend .
( Sustained applause )
. Mr President , this is an important subject .
I wish to begin by saying that the Commission welcomes this own-initiative report drawn up by Mr Radwan and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Parliament 's interest in this issue is most welcome .
Together with the intensive consultation process that has taken place on the Commission 's draft proposals , this debate will contribute strongly to meeting the challenging timetable to adopt a new framework in the European Union at the same time as the new Basel Accord is implemented globally .
I fully share the view expressed in the report that the current rules on capital adequacy need to be revised .
They have become outdated and no longer reflect the realities of the financial services sector .
I am also pleased that the report supports the view that the new framework should apply to a broad range of banks and investment firms .
That ensures a uniform standard of supervision and also fair competition .
A key objective of the Commission is to ensure that the new framework is suitable not only for large banks but also for less complex banks and for investment firms .
We are now very close to achieving that objective .
For bank lending to SMEs - which has been of particular concern in the rapporteur 's own country - the report states correctly that numerous improvements have been obtained .
The results of the recent impact study indicate that capital requirements for loans to SMEs are now very fair and that they are likely to be reduced as compared with the rules currently in force .
That is another important reason not to continue the current rules .
The report calls for even further reductions for SMEs and for reductions in the bank capital requirements for venture capital and equity investments in start-up companies .
I am duty-bound to tell Parliament that the Commission has very strong concerns about this matter .
Venture capital is risk capital .
If we use the prudential rules to reduce artificially the capital requirements for risky investments , we will be jeopardising the very interests that we are trying to protect - that is , the safety of consumers ' savings and the stability of the financial system .
The report also identifies the very important question of the potential cyclical effects of the new rules : what if , in an economic downturn , the risk sensitivity of the new rules results in less availability of credit ?
The key lies in striking the right balance between risk sensitivity - and its benefits - and potentially negative cyclical effects .
The Commission thinks that the new rules currently proposed strike a good balance .
However , this is an aspect that must continue to be closely monitored .
We must be ready to act quickly and modify the rules if developments suggest that the balance is not correctly struck .
Let me finish by repeating what I said when the Commission published its third consultation paper in July .
I believe the new capital framework will be good for financial stability , that it will be good for financial institutions and that it will be good for their customers .
I therefore welcome this report - for which , once again , I thank Mr Radwan - as a further step towards ensuring that the new European framework will be the best it possibly can be , and in ensuring that it is introduced on time so as not to disadvantage European institutions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as well as thanking Mr Radwan , the rapporteur , there are five aspects I would like to address .
The first is that we are discussing an own-initiative report that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has adopted unanimously - my colleague Mr Rübig will have something to say about what went on in the Committee on Budgets .
By this we are clearly showing that we are alongside the people and that we act when necessary , that is to say , when it is time for us to speak up and get things done politically , rather than waiting until draft directives are on the table .
Secondly , this parliamentary initiative is being taken before the Basel Committee adopts any resolutions and before the presentation of the draft equity capital directive to stabilise the financial markets , and it should have just as much long-term influence on these two events as what we have done to date in the aftermath of Mrs Villiers ' report .
My third point is that we have indeed achieved much already for small and medium-sized enterprises such as banks , and much towards greater transparency in the political debate on this chapter , and much to reinforce European self-confidence in the Basel Committee .




Fourthly , though , the fact that we have not yet reached our objective means that we have no shortage of demands to make : first , for the adjustment of the one million retail ceiling in line with the annual inflation rate ; secondly for the deletion of the 0.2 % granularity criterion ; thirdly , for the recognition of physical collateral ; fourthly , for acknowledgement of the specific financial situation when enterprises are set up or businesses are taken over .
Fifthly , an unwarranted administrative burden , with resultant additional costs , devolving upon banks , must be avoided ; our sixth is that the transparency of rating criteria should be guaranteed ; our seventh , that rating should assess research activities and expenditure on investment in a positive light , and , finally , we call for the study on the effects on small and medium-sized enterprises to be produced and for it to be incorporated in the Commission 's proposal .
The fifth area demands something of us .
There is still work for policymakers , banks and businesses to do as we prepare for Basel II and the directive .
A transparent partnership must be created or extended .
All three of them need better framework conditions , and so I am also glad that the Austrian tax reform reduces the tax burden when profits are not withdrawn , as this strengthens equity capital .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Radwan on his report , which really does get to grips with all the issues raised since the first drafts from Basel , which demand that the special economic and social circumstances in the EU be taken into account .
The international bank supervisors and issuing banks in Basel , and the Commission in Brussels , have already met many of the demands made by us in Parliament , but there are still a few major stumbling blocks to be dealt with .
In particular , the Commission must take our concerns into account in its deliberations , even though , formally speaking , we are not involved in the process and it is only next year that we will be dealing with the directive to incorporate this agreement into the acquis communautaire as a whole .
The consequence of this is that we MEPs find the process of working through this rather complicated ; of the Commission , it demands a willingness to cooperate , and that to the utmost .
We MEPs take the view that there are two principles that must be adhered to .
Firstly , we take the view that any banking supervision law must , in the final analysis , serve to protect creditors , by which is meant savers , and ensure the functioning of the financial market , and , secondly , as we in the EU are endeavouring to create an internal market for financial services , transposition should be by means of a directive that leaves room for special rules at the national level only when , in really objective terms , there are special circumstances .
The first principle demands that the risks entered into by the banks be defined and assessed in an objective way .
Banks calculate equity capital on the basis of the risk of loans being defaulted on , and this , in its turn , of course , has an effect on the interest charged to the borrowers .
The Basel II system - for that is what I am talking about - must maintain a balance .
It must not lead to extra burdens that banks and borrowers will find unfair , disproportionate and uncontainable , nor must it hamper employment and innovation .
I know that is a bit much to ask for , but that is the basic precondition for the whole thing being acceptable .
When the directive for a large and liquid internal market is prepared , account must be taken of the need for special rules at national level not to be allowed to increase unchecked .
Consumer protection , too , needs to be harmonised across frontiers if competition is not to be bounded by national borders .
One of the distinguishing characteristics of our social structure is the co-existence of enterprises run as private businesses alongside those that perform services of general interest .
Private / public partnerships are a case in point , and it is only in such cases that it is appropriate to permit rules at national level on banking supervision law .
If the same yardsticks are applied to all these borrowers , the system of evaluation will become more expensive , or the banks will be hindered from giving credit .
I would like to conclude by again pointing out that credit given in the future must not be allowed to restrict the labour market , and nor must Basel II be allowed to serve as a pretext for the cancelling or restricting credit .
We already have uncertain growth , and we must not allow matters to be made even worse by banks passing on debts to Basel II .
What business management requires , and what is economically desirable , is simply an objective approach when assessing the risks of individual borrowers , calculating the interest rate for the credit , and when agreeing to give it .
It is this principle that reinforces my positive stance in relation to Basel II .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it goes without saying that precise assessment of risks when giving credit is of crucial importance to the stability of the banking system , and so , whilst supporting the Basel II agreement 's objective of strengthening the banks ' hand in evaluating risks , we nevertheless have a number of critical observations to make .
For a start , the Basel Agreement should primarily be directed at internationally active banks , which could represent a risk to the stability of the financial system worldwide .
In many Member States , small local banks play an important role .
There is a need to ensure that the costs imposed on these institutions by new supervisory rules remain manageable and do not lead to credit becoming more expensive .
This is where the Commission has chosen a more flexible basis than did the Basel Committee , but it remains an unsatisfactory one .
Secondly , nothing has been done to dispel the fears that this compromise will worsen the situation as regards the financing of small and medium-sized enterprises .
The million-euro threshold is to be raised in order to prevent the cost of credit granted by small banks becoming too expensive for SMEs .
It is quite incomprehensible that no detailed analysis has been presented at European level of how the new equity capital rules will affect the conditions under which SMEs raise finance .
It is for that reason that we must support the rapporteur 's demand for such a study of SMEs to be presented before the proposed new directive enters into force and for its findings to be taken into account ; failing that , the development motor that SMEs represent in their regions may be throttled .
Thirdly , what appears highly problematic about the new equity capital regime is its effect on macroeconomic stability , as it will very probably result in procyclicality .
When the economy is in a downturn , it is normal for there to be greater credit risks , so that the banks can limit their lending , hamper investment activity and consequently accentuate the downturn .
This is where I believe changes need to be made to the rules , or else this needs to be examined in greater detail .
The fourth point is one to which the rapporteur has already alluded .
The comitology procedure that has been chosen reflects only inadequately Parliament 's concerns , as , at the end of the day , it is not clear which issues are of political principle and which are technical in nature , so that Parliament could , under certain circumstances , be prevented from making amendments at a later stage .
We should therefore endorse and support the demand for a formal right of recall .
Mr President . If Basel II were to be implemented as it has been drafted by the Basel Committee , then it would be easier for businesses that do not need money - that is , loans - to have access to credit .
Vice versa , businesses that do need loans - that is , money - would find access to them drastically more difficult .
In Austria , for example , some 65 % of businesses are financed by bank loans .
The EU average is only 46 % .
For the most part these businesses have little equity capital .
The building , tourism and gastronomy industries are particularly affected .
In Austria , for example , the equity capital of the gastronomy industry is only 1.75 % .
Since , however , it will be equity capital that determines the allocation of loans in the future , then , according to Basel II , these businesses and industries will receive no or very few loans .
The consequences would be disastrous .
Businesses would no longer be able to invest and modernise and would have to close .
We would lose thousands if not many thousands of businesses and jobs .
I have to agree with the rapporteur 's call for these repercussions to be analysed to reveal the negative effects of Basel II and to allow counter measures to be introduced at the same time to prevent them .
Mr President , I would like to add my congratulations to the rapporteur , who has worked very hard on this and produced an excellent report which has my firm support .
I agree over the need to move to a risk-sensitive framework which rewards prudent lending and penalises imprudent lending .
I also agree with the aspiration to implement the accord in as near parallel with the United States as possible , to prevent the banking sector in the European Union from suffering a competitive disadvantage .
I am pleased that Mr Radwan 's report recognises the importance of proper cost benefit analysis and of tailoring the framework to the needs of different sectors affected by the capital adequacy directive .
That includes both small and large banks , investment firms and firms which have a mix of investment and credit business .
In the future we may have to amend the directive to take into account the needs of commodities firms , if they are brought into the framework .
I congratulate the Commission on its progress in dealing with the issue of small business lending .
It is absolutely right that the framework should not penalise small business lending unnecessarily .
Many small businesses have nothing to fear from a risk-sensitive framework because there are many small businesses which are very good risks and which therefore can expect to get cheaper finance as a result of Basel II .
There are , however , some small start-up businesses which are high-risk and I agree with the Commissioner that they should continue to attract a high capital charge .
On the whole , with regard to SMEs - particularly in the light of reforms to the definition of retail which embrace a lot of SME lending - we are working towards a framework which is a fair and balanced solution on the SME lending issue .
I would like to see the framework take a light touch on operational risk .
Operational risk is something that is not yet easily calibrated and we should be very cautious before we impose a large charge .
We should be flexible in reflecting developments on how that charge is measured .
It is also vital for the framework to recognise the important risk mitigation role played by collateral , both financial and physical .
That is another very important part of the Radwan report which we , as MEPs , should recognise .
We should also recognise the importance of insurance and indemnity insurance as a way of mitigating risk .
This is particularly important in relation to investment firms .
Finally , the framework should try to go with the grain of professional practice .
It should encourage good practice and work with the best of industry practice , rather than perhaps impose a wholly different framework on top of good industry practice .
Mr President . The rapporteur quite rightly stated in his report that the changes made in past years have all been in the right direction .
Our committee has clearly said , as I would also like to do , that Basel II is right to aim to make banks more stable , and that aim of Basel II is a very laudable one in view of what we know about the costs associated with bank crises .
The fact is that risk sensitive loan pricing is a key requirement for a stable financial system .
Basel II still needs to be discussed .
The debate has already lasted more than four years and I must say that it is positive that , in particular under the first pillar , the risk weighting function has been lowered and made significantly shallower .
This avoids possible problems relating to access to credit , above all for SMEs .
Furthermore , it is also positive that the appeal of shorter loan periods has lessened .
From a European perspective , it is also certainly important that there should be no discrimination against tangible collateral . It must be dealt with in the same way as financial collateral .
We should , however , finally realise , that Basel II will have an impact , not only on small and medium-sized banks , but also on SMEs .
The extremely varied funding framework in the EU , which is nonetheless indispensable for business , must be kept .
An increase in capital demands for loans secured by the economy 's promotional bodies and self-help institutions that are not covered by risk considerations must be excluded .
A few further questions : I believe that it should be justified why only ten banks in the USA have to use Basel II and a further ten institutions use Basel II on a voluntary basis , whilst in Europe all credit institutions must implement the models .
It is quite right that small European banks are not in direct competition with US institutions excluded from the Basel obligations , but instead with these institutions ' corporate customers .
This could potentially mean that , in terms of competition , European businesses would be put at a disadvantage on the world market .
I think that this needs to be clarified and I also count on the opinion sought by the Commission discussing this point , and in sufficient time for it to give rise to some amendments .
I would also like to emphasise that it is very important that the crucial points that have been brought up by Charles Goodhart 's research group from the London School of Economics should also be clarified , in particular those referring to the procyclicality of Basel II , to which reference has already been made .
I would like to formally give my support to Mr Radwan in his reasoning that Parliament should tackle in good time the problems of SMEs and their employees , that we should continue to do so , and that above all we should also ensure that Parliament 's voice continues to carry weight and will be heard at the end .
Mr President , I am happy to express my satisfaction with Mr Radwan 's report concerning the forthcoming Basel II accord .
Developing a new framework for capital adequacy will maximise the effectiveness of the capital rules in ensuring overall financial stability , maintaining confidence in financial institutions and protecting consumers ' and depositors ' interests .
This would benefit not only the banking industry but the whole EU economy .
However , structured dialogue between supervisors , regulators and bank and investment firm representatives is crucial for creating a viable capital framework .
A central element - that of democratic control - has been lacking .
Therefore , Mr Radwan 's objective to involve the European Parliament in the capital adequacy debate and to add democratising elements to the decision-making process is most welcome .
The principle of taking into account corporate risks in loan pricing is a sound one .
Risks should be treated the same , regardless of the legal nature and level of complicity of the institution in question .
Nevertheless , concerns relating to SME lending , highlighted in the report and by many colleagues , are well-based .
For example , in Finland only the larger banks and a dozen companies have external ratings .
Therefore the exclusive re-use of external ratings is not a viable solution for us in the short term .
Instead internal ratings based on some agreed key ratio criteria could be developed in order to avoid unreasonable costs for SMEs .
I am worried about a large number of national options .
I fear that there might be divergences in the interpretation and application of the new framework by national supervisors .
These national discrepancies could give rise to competitive inequalities in the single market .
I should also like to mention mutual recognition with the US .
EU banks and investment firms operating in non-EU countries should not be penalised by the potential burden arising from divergent requirements between their home and host supervisory authorities .
This is a question of the utmost importance for us , especially in the US delegation of the European Parliament , where we have debated these financial security rules .
Mr President , Mr Radwan , ladies and gentlemen , what is Basel II about ?
It is about credit standing and the collateral needed for it .
Therefore , our main interest is in how this affects SMEs .
After all , they account for two thirds of employees in Europe and pay 80 % of taxes .
Therefore , we would also call for preparation for the implementation of Basel II with a stability pact for SMEs .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy commissioned STOA to carry out a study .
One of the most important findings was that , according to rating procedures , banks required up to 400 % more deposit for venture financing and start-ups .
This , I believe , should show us that we in the Committee on Budgets should also get involved .
As a member of the Committee on Budgets , and jointly with Mr Mulder , the rapporteur , I submitted a proposal for starting a pilot project in this area , which , through the European institutions and the European banks , would support guarantees for SMEs .
In particular , guarantees of up to EUR 25 000 should be available for SMEs .
We want a package that amounts to tens or hundreds of millions so that we can help small businesses .
We also want a training package , especially for finance ministries .
Here , as with the Lisbon process , we need to look into what repercussions the tax law will have on various equity capital structures , reserves , funds , depreciation , corporate income tax , provisions on non-profit activities , for example .
There is a lot to be checked and I call upon the Commission to look into these issues in their report , which is long overdue , so that the Member States and their ministers can adopt and prepare for Basel II as best as possible .
.
Mr President , Mr Radwan referred to comitology ; I should like to stress that one of the key comments which the Commission has received is that the new framework should be capable of being updated speedily .
The Commission agrees that this is very important , and it is also recognised in the report that we are discussing here today .
The Commission recognises Parliament 's concerns about the use of comitology : it is an old subject that has often been discussed in this House .
This concern is also reflected in the draft report presented by Mr Radwan .
All of the proposed provisions , both Articles and annexes , will be contained in the Commission 's proposal and all will have to be agreed according to the codecision procedure .
Therefore , Parliament will be fully within its rights in making all the comments it wishes to make .
As I have said a number of times in this House , the Commission supports Parliament 's desire to have Article 202 of the Treaty amended , as Mrs Randzio-Plath knows very well .
The second point I would like to raise is the matter of SMEs .
It was mentioned by a number of Members - Mr Karas , Mr Markov , Mrs Villiers , Mr Ilgenfritz and others .
I should like to point out that numerous improvements have been made in order to ensure fair and proportionate capital requirements for bank lending to SMEs .
Examples of this are the lowering of the requirements for riskier borrowers ; a discount of on average 10 % for smaller borrowers and allowing SMEs to be included in the retail portfolio when the loan is for less than EUR 1 million .
Mr Karas asked whether that could be indexed according to inflation .
I would have absolutely no objection to that , but it is one of the issues that should be developed according to the comitology procedure .
Impact studies have been carried out and the results indicate that the new rules would result in fair and proportionate capital requirements for exposures for SMEs , so SMEs stand to benefit , and therefore I cannot agree with Mr Ilgenfritz .
I would refer him to Mrs Villiers ' very pertinent comments which directly opposed his views .
I would suggest that these two Members of Parliament have a short debate on the matter , but certainly the Commission agrees with Mrs Villiers .
Then there is the matter of venture capital , which Mr Ettl in particular referred to .
The Commission shares the view that venture capital and equity investments in start-up companies are important .
However , the purpose of prudential legislation , and that is what we are discussing , is to protect the financial system and the interests of depositors and savers .
Indeed , Mr Ettl himself drew attention to the need for consumer protection .
Therefore we must be sure that we do not treat riskier investments , for example in venture capital firms , on a basis which is too lax , therefore running the risk of damaging consumer protection .
As I mentioned earlier , however , I am happy to clarify that the small firm discount - i.e. the reduction of up to 20 % for lending to smaller firms - will also apply to equity exposures to venture capital firms .
A number of Members have asked for further studies .
The Barcelona European Council asked for further studies to be made on the impact of Basel II on the European economy .
In the light of this request , a study is being carried out by PricewaterhouseCoopers .
The draft report is due at the end of this year , with the final report available at the end of March .
Results of the study are due to be delivered to the Commission early in 2004 .
As I said earlier , we have now carried out impact studies and next year PricewaterhouseCoopers will carry out further studies as a result of demands placed upon the Commission by the Barcelona European Council .
Mrs Randzio-Plath drew attention to the fact that only a limited number of banks will have to comply with the Basel II rules in the United States .
However , according to Roger Ferguson , the ' number two ' at the Federal Reserve , the fact that Basel II will apply to the ' ten plus ten ' American banks - the ten biggest and the ten next biggest - means that more than 99 % of US foreign banking assets will be covered .
Therefore , we can accept that there will be fair competition between European and American banks when they meet internationally .
Mrs Randzio-Plath and others mentioned the matter of procyclicality .
As I said earlier in my introductory speech , increased risk-sensitivity is an important fact .
It is my view - and I hope that of Parliament - that the report strikes the right balance in this regard .
Modifications have been introduced to reduce the procyclic effects of the draft rules , which is a good thing .
We also hope that better risk management as a result of the whole Basel II procedure will enable banks to be better prepared to deal with the effects of economic recessions .
In his introduction Mr Radwan raised an important point concerning soft law .
I well understand the concerns of Parliament on this matter .
Soft law means that Parliament may be circumvented .
I accept the point of view of those who say that soft law must be kept within bounds so that the democratic contents of law cannot be adulterated .
I accept that view but find it difficult to accept that the whole soft law concept would apply either to the accounting standards or to Basel II .
Mr Radwan also drew attention to accounting standards .
Both areas - the accounting standards and Basel II - are hideously complicated .
I think Mr Radwan would agree with that .
Therefore it is reasonable that experts in those fields should be called upon to formulate rules , as is happening with the International Accounting Standards Board and the Basel II Committee on which the Commission is an observer .
When all that has been done , the results will be set out in the form of directives .
There will be a directive on Basel II and on international accounting standards .
Therefore , Parliament will be within its rights to make any complaint it wishes to and to raise issues .
Once again , while accepting Mr Radwan 's point of view on soft law in general , to apply it to Basel II or to the accounting standards is not the right thing to do .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0180 / 2003 ) by Mr Koukiadis , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on legal bases and compliance with Community Law ( 2001 / 2151 ( INI ) ) .
. ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market did me the honour of asking me to draft an own-initiative report on legal bases and compliance with Community law .
The title of the report is not accurate .
I would say it is slightly misleading .
It is in fact about the huge issue which is troubling the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament with contradictory positions and which has to do with investigating potential legal bases for the jurisdiction of the European Union to make provision for criminal sanctions for certain serious violations of Community law .
There is a large divergence of opinion about if and to what extent this sort of activity can be legislated .
In order , therefore , for us to have a substantiated report , I proposed and the Commission agreed to hold a public hearing with rapporteurs expressing the various tendencies .
I should like to express my thanks for their contribution and to inform the House that the report was based on the points on which we appear to more or less agree .
The common objective of all of us must be the effective application of Community provisions , but with solutions which will be reliable , because our main concern is to create legal certainty .
I would also remind you that the issue of criminal sanctions for serious infringements of Community law was also raised in the past in connection with legislative proposals concerning environmental protection , protection of the Community 's financial interests , safeguarding intellectual property rights , pollution at sea and pollution offences in general .
This is a rather complicated issue from a legal point of view .
It is further complicated by the distinction between the three pillars .
The report concentrates on the issue of legislating criminal sanctions in the first pillar .
In order to make the problem understandable , I have confined myself to raising the basic question to which the report gives a positive answer , in other words the extent to which the Community can impose an obligation on the Member States to make provision for criminal sanctions for serious infringements of Community law .
This is the so-called mixed method , whereby the Community imposes an obligation on the Member States to make provision for criminal sanctions for this specific issue .
We confined ourselves to this method because it appears to attract a great deal of agreement .
By contrast , the purely Community method of making direct provision for criminal sanctions under Community law , a sort of communitisation of criminal law , comes up against serious legal objections which start from the fact that there is no clear legal basis in the Treaty for this issue , that criminal sanctions form part of the national sovereignty of the Member States and that criminal justice is an integral part of national culture .
In addition , the objection is also advanced that criminal sanctions are linked to restrictions on individual rights , which presupposes a fully constitutionally coordinated state , not an imperfect legal order with the obvious financial elements and democratic deficit of the European Union .
In all events , even if the purely Community method were accepted , it would be confined to making provision for one criminal sanction .
It does not appear to have jurisdiction to impose the sanction in this specific case .
As regards the so-called national method , which means the right of the states to make provision for criminal sanctions for cases of infringement of Community law , this does not create problems .
The states are at liberty to follow this method .
However , the sanction needs to be of an effective , proportionate and deterrent nature .
It would even become clear that it was not thus concerned with the issue of the harmonisation of criminal law and sanctions , for which only the third pillar can be used and only in specific cases .
With the constitution being drafted , these issues will have a new basis .
The position of the report on the basic question I referred to above , in other words if the Community can impose an obligation on the Member States to make provision for criminal sanctions , is that the Community legislator has the legal capacity to demand this of the Member States .
To be specific , it accepts the principle of safeguarding the law formulated in Article 10 of the EC Treaty ; in other words , the obligation of the Member States to ensure that violations of Community law attract effective criminal sanctions .
Consequently , as we acknowledge such an obligation on the part of the states , we should also acknowledge the Community legislator 's capacity to make provision for similar obligations , at least for serious infringements of Community law .
Thus , the report clarifies that , in order for such a Community initiative to be legal with the law as it stands , it must only be exercised in cases in which this is the only way to safeguard effective compliance with Community provisions .
Finally , the report also proposes that the European Commission , in its capacity as guardian of Community interests , should be able to lodge complaints or bring civil actions , at least in cases where the Member States are accorded an equivalent right .
It is encouraging that the Constitutional Convention is on the same wavelength , with final proposals from the motion for the resolution , as can be seen from articles ? -13 , ? ? ? -65 and ? ? ? -172 .
Once the new Treaty applies , we shall have to re-examine this issue .
Mr President , the Commission wishes first of all to acknowledge the high quality of Mr Koukiadis 's report , which constitutes a valuable working document on the sensitive relationship between criminal sanctions and Community law .
Furthermore , this report has the merit of being the first institutional document to give a complete overview of this problem which , admittedly , is nothing new .
The Commission services are moreover keen to approach it through various different working documents when each , or almost each , of the proposals mentioned in Mr Koukiadis 's report is tabled , in particular those on the protection of the Community 's financial interests , the protection of the environment through criminal law , racism and xenophobia , subjects which had never before been dealt with as systematically outside the world of academia .
The second cause that I have to be glad on the Commission 's behalf is the fact that , reading the report , I see that many of the views expressed in it overlap with the position held by the Commission .
Like Mr Koukiadis , the Commission does not consider the Community to have a general competence in criminal matters as the treaties currently stand .
On the other hand , the Commission believes that the functional competences that it has for the purposes of meeting the objectives set out in Article 2 of the EC Treaty do make the Community competent to impose an obligation on the Member States to lay down sanctions , and if need be criminal sanctions , if this proves to be necessary to reach a Community objective .
This approach is based , as Mr Koukiadis has noted , on the case law of the Court of Justice , according to which Article 10 of the Treaty - and I quote - ' requires the Member States to take all measures necessary to guarantee the application and effectiveness of Community law ' .
Nevertheless , as the treaties currently stand , the harmonisation of Member States ' criminal law can be governed only by the provisions of Title 6 of the Treaty on European Union .
Moreover , this is the position that the Commission , supported by Parliament , is defending before the Court of Justice in the action disputing the legality of the framework decision on the protection of the environment through criminal law .
Finally , as I see it , Mr Koukiadis 's report and , in particular , its conclusions have the enormous merit of illustrating perfectly the extent to which the interweaving of the policies in the first Community pillar and the courses of action that are said to come under the third pillar is a source of constant difficulty .
Furthermore there is an inherent risk in this situation of blocking the decision-making process .
The price that we pay to overcome these difficulties is to make artificial divisions between legislation that has the same purpose , which can often render the Union 's activities largely incomprehensible to the public .
Furthermore , it is important that the European Parliament and the Court of Justice are recognised as playing an identical role to the one that they play in the first pillar ; in this way our concern to be effective can go hand in hand with improving democratic and legal checks and measures .
That is why the Commission welcomes the proposal to bring Title 6 of the Treaty on European Union within the Community system as such , as recommended by the Convention .
The Commission will do its utmost to ensure that this major step forward survives the Intergovernmental Conference , which will be starting next month .
I know that in this regard Parliament is entirely in agreement with the Commission .
Mr President , I must begin by congratulating Mr Koukiadis on his excellent report .
This report takes real care to specify the details of such a delicate issue .
The report quite rightly separates the specific notions from what is the essential notion for the Community 's action by asking the Member States to establish penalties , where necessary .
That notion is the duty of loyalty enshrined in Article 10 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
It also takes care to stress - as the Commission has just done - the peculiar ( to put it mildly ) situation represented by the twin possibility of using , on the hand , Title VI and , on the other , the first pillar .
It insists , furthermore - as Parliament has always done and as is quite right - that , wherever possible , the first pillar should be used .
This is , moreover , without prejudice - as the Commissioner has also just stressed - to the great progress represented by the establishment in the European Constitution of the disappearance - formally at least - of the pillars and of an approximation of the third pillar to the characteristics of the first pillar .
This is an issue which - and I fully agree with Commissioner Bolkestein - we must try to maintain during the Intergovernmental Conference .


My group supports this text by Mr Koukiadis which , furthermore , has been very flexible by stipulating two of the points on which we asked , definitively , for an application of the principle of proportionality . In other words , application of penalties is not demanded if the same end can be achieved by means of other legal instruments .
In certain cases it will be necessary to use penalties , but we must always try to ensure that the law does not apply the most serious penalty if the objective can be achieved by means of the least serious one .
This has been suitably taken up by Mr Koukiadis in his report and I would like to thank him for that .
I therefore believe we are left with a balanced report , a report which reflects the constant concern of the Commission and of this Parliament that Community law should not be a flatus vocis , that it should be an effective law , and there can be no effective law without penalties , without the possibility of demanding compliance with the law by means of relevant actions in the event that it is violated .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur once again and I am confident that a vast majority of this Parliament will vote in favour of the text of his report .
Mr President , I too would like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur .
It is a very timely and well-produced report on what , as has already been said , is a very complex and sensitive issue .
Although it is complex it is an issue to which we have to take a practical approach .
There have been times in our committee when we have been presented with initiatives from the Member States , where they want us to introduce penalties , but we find ourselves in a situation where we cannot respond as they would like .
Bearing that situation in mind , when it comes to the IGC , the Council and Member States will appreciate the good sense of what is being proposed here .
I was also struck by the idea presented to us - at the enlightening hearing with experts when Mr Koukiadis was preparing this report - that the Community should and must have the wherewithal to protect its own property in the widest sense .
That is what we are talking about : property in its widest sense .
But there is one point I would like to make and underline .
If we are to give the Community power in this area of competence - and we should - then it should also be underpinned by the sort of balance achieved by the Community itself signing up to the European Convention on Human Rights .
If we are to have some competence , albeit limited , in the criminal field , this must be balanced by measuring that legislation against something fundamental and basic that guarantees our citizens ' human rights .
Mr President , at this late stage of the evening there is not much to be said , especially since we all agree on the virtues of the report and its underlying point .
I just want to quickly address three principles .
First of all , it is obvious that criminal law and criminal sanctions touch the liberty of citizens more closely than any other branch of the law and therefore , being absolutely certain that there is a valid constitutional basis for the use of criminal law is vital to liberty as a fundamental matter of the rule of law .
One of the things that the report and its explanatory statement do is to show exactly to what extent there is a basis .
Secondly , in a democratic Community , it is essential that the citizens ' representatives get to vote on the question of whether the criminal law should be extended .
That alone would cause us to regard Pillar III as a very suspect basis for any kind of intervention in the criminal law .
It effectively excludes the democratic representatives of the citizens in this Parliament beforehand and in the national parliaments afterwards .
Therefore it is excellent to discover , as Mr Koukiadis shows , that it is a matter for the Community Pillar .
I should to like to underline the point in paragraph 7 about subsidiarity and proportionality .
Again , it sends a message to the Member States to improve their criminal law in an appropriate way and to allow sensitivity to local traditions in law .
That is absolutely vital .
Those are three important principles in an excellent report .
I welcome Mr Bolkestein back from his brief sojourn in Scotland , where he was very welcome .
.
I will be brief .
As Mr MacCormick said - and I welcome him back to Strasbourg after our two meetings in Edinburgh - we all agree .
Mrs Wallis raised the issue of the signing up to the European Convention on Human Rights .
That is a very good point .
Some have proposed that instead of having this Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is now in existence and which will probably be part of the new Constitution - although some disagree about that - we should merely have signed up to the European Convention on Human Rights .
There is a risk in the present situation that there is a sort of competition between the two instruments .
That debate has taken place , but the decision - as Mrs Wallis knows - was finally taken to have a Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The question now is whether it would be useful to sign up to the European Convention on Human Rights , in addition to having that charter .
I am wary of duplicating instruments , so I wonder whether Mrs Wallis ' suggestion is a good one .
However , it is certainly worth considering .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Bolkestein .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 9.10 p.m. )
Cohesion policy
The next item is the joint debate on the following two reports on cohesion policy :
A5-0267 / 2003 by Mr Mastorakis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the communication from the Commission ' Second progress report on economic and social cohesion ' : regional trends , debate on future developments [ COM ( 2003 ) 34 - 2003 / 2095 ( INI ) ]
and
A5-0188 / 2003 by Mr Pomés Ruiz , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on structurally disadvantaged regions ( islands , mountain regions , regions with low population density ) in the context of cohesion policy , and their institutional prospects [ 2002 / 2119 ( INI ) ] .
Mr President , I can represent Mr Pomés Ruiz , if you wish , and speak on his behalf .

I should like first to thank the two rapporteurs , both Mr ? astorakis and Mr Pomés Ruiz , and congratulate them on their work and then make a number of comments on the two reports .
As far as Mr Mastorakis 's report is concerned , I should like to comment on three points .
First , on the fact , as stated in the report , that we cannot fall below 0.45 % of GDP in future cohesion policy .
As Commissioner Barnier has also pointed out in the past , Parliament considers that if Community funding falls below this point for cohesion policies , these policies , especially in view of enlargement , will cease to be reliable and efficient .
My second comment concerns Objective 2 , which will obviously have to be simplified so that actions have greater visibility and better results for citizens , which is why we prefer a new Objective 2 with thematic actions .
And finally , a third comment to do with Mr Mastorakis 's report and Structural Fund procedures .
They need to be simplified .
It is becoming clear and I think it has also been understood by the Commission , which has from time to time organised seminars with local and regional authorities on the subject , especially in the run up to the new programming period , that we need to pool our thoughts as to how these actions can be made more efficient by simplifying them .
Now to the report by Mr Pomés Ruiz on regions with a permanent structural disadvantage , such as island regions , mountain regions and the ultra-peripheral regions with low population density in the north .
I should like first of all to welcome the recent development in the Constitutional Convention , which has extended the concept of economic and social cohesion by adding the term ' territorial cohesion ' .
Hopefully , this added term will form an adequate legal basis so that we have something more specific and more tangible in the future for these areas .
Nonetheless , Parliament feels there is still a need to clarify Article 158 of the Treaty on island areas .
As you know , there is a division of opinion as to how this specific article should be translated . It is translated in different ways in different languages .
It needs to be clarified once and for all so that the provision for island areas is valid .
Parliament also feels that , over and above structural actions , the article referring to state aid , namely Article 87 , also needs to be amended so that the areas we are talking about today are also included in the areas needing special treatment .
Apart from all this , Mr President , Parliament - I think absolutely rightly - maintains in the report by Mr Pomés Ruiz that , within the framework of the new Objective 2 , about which I have already spoken with reference to the report by Mr Mastorakis , a special thematic action is needed to cover these areas .
Parliament also adds that , for these areas with a permanent geographical handicap , there can and should be a higher percentage of Community co-financing in future through the Structural Funds .
Debates on these areas have been held in this Parliament for a great many years .
The Commissioner recently ordered studies on the subject .
It started with mountain areas and then moved on to island areas .
I truly hope that today 's debate , and in particular the report by Mr Pomés Ruiz on structurally disadvantaged regions , really will give us the opportunity we have been seeking for years to change something and to send a message to the residents of these regions that we are taking a substantive approach to their problems , because these regions , as the Commission studies have , I think , demonstrated , are indeed at a permanent disadvantage by reason of their geographical position , which prevents them from enjoying the same competitive conditions as other regions in the European Union .
The time has therefore come , Mr President , for action rather than words .
Mr Hatzidakis , I did actually allow you to speak for longer just now .
The speaking time would of course be deducted from Mr Pomés Ruiz if he were to appear .
Mr President , may I point out that it is pronounced Duin , as in Duisburg .
I know that it can sometimes be problematic , but I will take the liberty of pointing it out at this stage .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to echo the words of thanks voiced by previous speakers to the two rapporteurs .
I believe that we have now taken another major step forward in this ongoing debate , thanks in particular to Mr Mastorakis 's report .
I should like to comment on the two reports together .
It will be clear to the Commission too that there are several demands that Parliament repeatedly underlines - including in the report - and I assume that a consensus could be reached here on the following : that we do not want renationalisation ; that 75 % of GDP is a good yardstick and that 0.45 % of GDP is a minimum if we are to be able to implement a viable European structural policy .
I should now like to say something on the outstanding points , which are also mentioned in the reports .
Many people believe that a new Objective 2 , whatever it looked like , could solve their problems .
We have to be more honest and cannot say to each region : you will also get in under Objective 2 , once it is restructured in some way .
That is why we wish to make various proposals , and these are also reflected in the reports .
The first concerns the regions that will suffer from the statistical effect , the current Objective 1 regions .
For these , we need to launch a new programme - let us call it a 1b programme - that is generously funded , but above all - this is very important to the regions and we must take it into account - that has a legal framework that is comparable to Article 87 , and which will enable them to use the aid to meet their region 's specific needs .
The second concerns the disadvantaged regions , which take centre stage in Mr Pomés Ruiz 's report .
Here we do not need a new Objective 2 , but a very special instrument for these regions , which properly takes into account the special problems that we of course wish to acknowledge .
We should not try to lump everything together here .
The third proposal is for a real Objective 2 for those areas undergoing structural change .
Here I would , however , make a strong plea in favour of ensuring that in this case the Member States are given as much freedom as possible to use the funds as they see fit .
This triad is important .
It is conveyed clearly in the Mastorakis report as it stands , which is why we will of course be voting in favour of it .
A few changes are probably needed to the Pomés Ruiz report to achieve this , and we hope that we will be adopting those today .
Thank you , Mr Duin .
When Germans have French names or names that look French , they are often pronounced quite differently in Germany .
I would therefore apologise , Mr Duin , for my earlier mistake .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as early as the year 2000 I expressed regret in this House that , although the poorest regions and Member States had been catching up thanks to EU support for regional development , the gap between the least and most developed regions in the Community had barely narrowed .
The inequalities in regional development continue to exist .
This conclusion can also be drawn from the report by Mr Mastorakis , whom I should like warmly to congratulate .
Despite the best efforts of those responsible for regional policy at European and national level , the challenges that we face today in the year 2003 are not diminishing .
They are becoming even greater if you consider the stagnant economy and the sharp increase in unemployment in many European countries .
A very great burden is placed on economic and social cohesion even today .
The enlargement of the European Union to include ten more countries from central and eastern Europe will not only increase regional disparities and thus place an even greater strain on cohesion , but , as the expiry of the current support period from 2000 to 2006 approaches , the debate on the shape of future regional policy from 2007 is also coming to the fore .
In my opinion , the assessment of the criteria for measuring the development status and thus the eligibility of a region is a priority issue .
Factors in regional development such as the rate of industrialisation , the level of poverty and social exclusion , the level of unemployment , the potential for research and development , the training capacity , the sustainability of development and the development of environmental protection , all need to be taken into account in the assessment alongside the present single criterion of GDP per head of the population .
It is of particular concern to me , as it is to other Members from Objective 1 areas , that these special regions do not fall out of the highest support bracket because of a change in the arithmetic due to the accession of the new Member States .
For them the principle should apply that they can claim the same financial support and rights to subsidies as they did before enlargement .
I also support Mr Mastorakis 's statement in his report about the shape of future Objective 2 areas , that is how they and the Objective 3 measures for disadvantaged groups are to be restructured , and welcome his comments on how eligibility for these measures will be determined .
Mr President , this year 's Athens Treaty is being hailed as historic , but we all know that it is only now that the work of integration begins .
Integration means establishing social and economic cohesion in an EU of 25 and , if you will pardon my saying so Commissioner , you still have not given us your blueprint for achieving this , although it is high time that you did so .
There is no trace of even a strategy in the Second progress report on cohesion .
It seems to me that you think that distributing money here , there and everywhere will somehow keep everyone happy .
No , Commissioner , we cannot afford to do that anymore , because if we do not manage to bring about economic and social cohesion in this EU of 25 the whole edifice will come tumbling down !
We need root and branch reform of the Structural Funds and we need clear guidance on what our aims are when spending the money .
Where those aims are concerned , we were of course taught a hard and painful lesson in the last two summers : last year we had floods ; this year it was fire .
Commissioner , I think it is clear that at long last we have to be guided by the Göteborg conclusions : that sustainable development has to be at the heart of the Structural Funds ; that social and employment policy aspects on the one hand and economic aspects on the other have to be given equal weight , and that EU money should only be deployed if this is the case .
In too many places we have simply squandered EU funds , and this is no longer acceptable in an EU of 25 .
It is true that specific geographical characteristics do bring with them particular development requirements , but unlike many Members of this House I do not think that geographical characteristics are a disadvantage in themselves , but that poverty in these areas is much more of a disadvantage .
I only have criticism for the attempts being made by many Members here to protect their vested rights and secure their own stipends , when surely the actual aim has to be economic and social cohesion .
I protest against any attempts to introduce new criteria here that do not relate to poverty and unemployment , which cause people real suffering .
That is why I believe that it is right for the Commission to stick to its goals and , particularly in areas where there are difficulties , for the poverty criteria to be the decisive ones and not the geographical characteristics .
Only then , with these sound principles , will it be possible to tackle different kinds of difficulties , for example the problems of restructuring in many areas , including in wealthier countries , the restructuring difficulties in agriculture , female poverty and the depopulation of urban areas .
These things too should be taken into account and we have a whole series of instruments to enable us to do so , for example phasing out and subsidies .
I hope , Commissioner , that you will finally table a clear blueprint for achieving sustainable development through the Structural Funds .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we must look at all the factors in the analysis that compelled both the European Commission and Parliament to discuss this major issue , and I am referring here to the processes that have led to enlargement .
A few years ago , I submitted a document to President Prodi on the relationship between enlargement and the repercussions that it would have in certain regions of our Community , in particular in southern Italy .
Since the war , we have witnessed a strange phenomenon : whilst , previously , history revolved around hostility between East and West , now , as if by a strange twist of fate , we are dealing with a European Community where the problems are between North and South , and always between a rich and prosperous North and a poor South .
Therefore , enlargement has been a factor in our considerations , and our conclusion is that a war between the poor must be avoided , given the consequences of such an occurrence .
I am writing a report on European public finances in 2003 and it shows that we are facing problems of increased GDP in some countries and falling GDP in others .
Even countries that , a few years ago , more or less balanced their budgets , now find themselves near to negative projections .
How , then , should we manage these Structural Funds ?
The rapporteurs do well to give broad guidelines in their reports .
I believe that we need to ensure that Objective 2 is not too all-embracing ; we need to ensure that the Member States can manage Structural Funds that have been obtained in the first stage properly and coordinate them more effectively in the next stage .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I see the Second progress report on economic and social cohesion as a valuable , up-dated analysis of the current situation and of the possible future direction of cohesion policy in the enlarged Union .
The compromise that was reached after lengthy discussions with the rapporteur and the adoption of numerous amendments in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism is to be welcomed , and as the report now stands it should achieve a majority in the House .
I am thinking here both of the budget for cohesion policy of 0.45 % of GDP and of keeping Objective 1 areas as the main focus of our support .
I welcome the threshold of 75 % of GDP per head at NUTS II level being retained as the main criterion for determining Objective 1 status , provided that at the same time the so-called statistical effect is neutralised .
We are all aware that at the end of the current support period those regions affected by the statistical effect will not of course have exceeded the 75 % threshold in the present EU .
Overnight , or to be more precise between 30 April and 1 May next year , a stroke of a mathematical pen will turn poor wretches into wealthy people , although they will not have a cent more to their name .
That is the so-called statistical effect .
These regions continue to require resources from the Structural Funds to consolidate and further the process of economic and social convergence , which they have begun so successfully in previous support periods .
That is why the report clearly underlines , on the basis of our amendments submitted in the committee , that particular attention must be paid to the regions suffering from the impact of these statistical changes , and that in the future too these areas should be treated as similar to Objective 1 areas with the equivalent level of support and with the aid administered in accordance with Article 87 , paragraph 3 ( a ) .
Existing transitional arrangements - phasing out - do not do justice to the specific problems of these areas caught by the statistical effect .
The report , as it stands , should also find the support of the majority of this House .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it seems clear to me , as it does to the rapporteur and to the Commission , that we cannot approach cohesion policies and Structural Funds in an ideological way . What is needed is a very pragmatic approach , as taken by the rapporteur and , undoubtedly , by the Commissioner , too , in his work .
The future of the European Union is firmly linked to the quality and future of cohesion policies .
Only if we do not have a three-speed Europe , which is the risk we are running , will we genuinely be able to talk about a process of political integration .
For this to happen , certain conditions have to be met : it is essential that we confirm our unequivocal rejection of any renationalisation of regional policies .
As many colleagues have said , it is essential to make the 0.45 % threshold a minimum threshold , in the sense that the European Union 's commitment in cohesion policies cannot fall below this percentage , and it is good that , given the decisions facing the European Union on the eve of enlargement , this is being established as a political principle and not merely as an arithmetic one .
As other colleagues have said and as I would like to reiterate , we need to avoid some regions suddenly finding themselves classed as rich because of the impact on the statistics .
Therefore , better phasing-out needs to be devised for Objective 1 regions , which will be excluded following enlargement , and , above all , the permanent geographical handicap of many regions needs to be taken into account .
To this end , I believe that these permanent geographical handicaps and the need for a Community strategy which can overcome them need to be recognised in the next Constitutional Treaty .
The declaration annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam on the structural disadvantages of islands has never been converted into specific measures .
I would also like to urge the Commission to make greater endeavours to simplify the regional policy implementation rules and to ensure clearer distribution of responsibilities and competences between all those involved in cohesion policy .
I would also like to call upon the Commission to continue with the endeavour that has been made thus far to lay down some priorities in cohesion policies .
Consider how important it is today to invest in the quality of knowledge , in the quality of innovation , in technological research and immaterial infrastructure .
We believe that the future of Europe should be viewed less in terms of concrete construction and much more in terms of the quality of knowledge we can offer .
In Europe , Mr President , the wealthy regions are not in danger of becoming poor . Quite the opposite : there is the danger that some poor regions will remain as such in the long term .
We want to avoid this .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , both reports focus on cohesion in Europe . In particular , they refer to structural issues that could foster such cohesion .
The reports refer to a geographical dimension that relates to mountains and islands , and also to a social dimension .
The latter represents a new approach , and relates mainly to depopulation . We would suggest that another new Europe-wide phenomenon should be taken into account also .
I refer to the ageing of the population and the shortage of productive members of the labour force required to develop the economy . This has been noted in all the inland regions of Europe .
It is especially true of areas like my constituency . I represent Aragon in Spain .
Two-thirds of the population of Aragon live in a single city . The region extends over 47 000 square kilometres and the whole of the interior is becoming depopulated .
The problem is not a lack of employment opportunities or a shortage of work .
It is that nobody wants to go there to work . Ladies and gentlemen , I urge you to consider how to overcome that obstacle .
This really is a structural problem , because it is a question of attitude . People simply do not wish to go and work in inland regions .
Yesterday Commissioner Barnier outlined the difficulties facing Portugal . What were the individuals affected by the problems resulting from the fires and the heat wave to do ?
Where were they to seek employment , in the large cities , on the coast ? Are we to plan for a coastal Europe , a Europe of large cities ?
Or should we be aiming at a balanced Europe ? We believe it is time to bring a new factor into the equation , namely the ageing of the population .
Furthermore , such ageing is inevitable . It is also important to tackle the shortage of productive members of the labour force and the difficulty of persuading people to seek employment in certain areas .
Mr President , I believe that economic and social cohesion will make or break the future of the European Union , the Union of 25 .
Enlargement will reveal dramatically once again the complete lack of practical responses to an objective on which the European Union and the Treaties preceding it were founded .
We need only to think of a survey conducted a few years ago , which showed that Lombardy was one of the top 20 wealthiest regions while Sicily , my homeland , was in seventy-seventh place .
This shows just how far we are in practice from the objectives of achieving a proper , sound , tangible economic and social cohesion policy .
There has been no strategy , no will to take practical measures , no polycentric Europe .
Southern Italy and the Mediterranean have been left on the fringe of a genuine growth and stability strategy .
The problems are not only due to geographical remoteness , which would , alone , be grounds for huge-scale , effective measures , but there is also an incredible lack of infrastructure , a lack of planning in the areas of training , technological innovation research and improving the universities in marginal regions .
Therefore , we need to preserve the European Union 's minimum intervention threshold , we need to stem the flow of people leaving mountain areas , we need to intervene in disadvantaged islands , which are disadvantaged not only because of their distance from mainland Europe but also because of inherent problems to which Europe must find an immediate solution .
Mr President , this initiative aims to drive the European Union forward by propagating the Community method to develop European policies for European regions , rather than nations , and to establish a legal basis for new structural support for enlargement countries under the proposed constitution .
However , even the rapporteur admits that on enlargement , Europe 's regional income disparities will increase dramatically .
The Commissioner stresses that in the EU of 15 , 48 regions - accounting for 18 % of the population - had a per capita income below 75 % of the average , whereas in an enlarged Union a total of 67 regions will fall below the 75 % threshold - representing 26 % of total population .
Yet instead of structural funds being granted to economically deprived areas , the rapporteur proposes that , on enlargement , money should be channelled to disadvantaged mountainous , remote or island regions - a much narrower definition for distribution .
So a system that is already inherently bad becomes even worse .
Individual nations know precisely where help is needed within their own domains and yet the European Union is determined to exert its authority by controlling structural support for what it considers to be impoverished regions .
If control of funding were to be returned to national governments , I am confident that the UK Government would be aware of the serious need for funding in my own region - the South-West - where we have suffered tremendously from the effects of the EU 's disastrous common fisheries policy and common agricultural policy .
Funding administered by our own government would ensure that the whole transport infrastructure - rail , road and air - receives the attention it deserves for the benefit of all our small businessmen in the South-West , and all of those people involved in our vital tourism industry .
We know where funding is needed far better than the bureaucrats in Brussels .
Mr President , cher Monsieur le Commissaire , the report we are in a quandary about approving contains a genuinely fundamental change to regional policy .
Regions with permanent handicaps must be regarded in a new way in aid policy .
I believe this fundamental revaluation to be important .
There are handicaps that are ongoing .
We in sparsely populated Finland are familiar with such disadvantages , and these were also noted in the important accession treaty for Finland , Sweden and Austria .
Mountain regions and archipelagos may also be of relevance in this connection , however .
At any event , I should like to see islands and archipelagos given special treatment .
When Finland became a member of the EU , it was difficult for us to maintain important aid arrangements .
For example , certain general forms of transport aid were examined extremely critically by the Commission .
It is not large amounts of aid we are requesting for sparsely populated areas , the archipelago and mountain areas , but such sums may be crucial to it being possible to maintain services .
An important part of the policy may also consist of countries being given opportunities to receive certain smaller sums by way of general aid and of companies that maintain services of general interest being required to ensure that such services operate .
We also need rules within agricultural policy enabling small-scale agriculture in the archipelago to survive .
That is incredibly important for the archipelago as a part of our world heritage and as something that we are trying to administer as well as possible .
The European Convention proposes similar changes , something for which we are extremely grateful .
Finally , I wish to say that the concept of territorial cohesion was really originated by the CPMR under its then chairman , Stig Östdahl .
I am extremely pleased that , today as well , Parliament can contribute to new and important thinking that must be of use in enabling people to live and prosper in all parts of the EU .
Mr President , the failure of the stated ambition of the European Union 's regional policy to bring about economic and social cohesion presages even more unfavourable prospects for its application to the weaker Member States following enlargement .
Indeed , in numerous cases , not only has there been no reduction in the development gap , but also enlargement has widened the gap between the regions lagging behind and the developed regions .
This is true both of the island and mountain regions and of the towns plagued by mass unemployment and poverty .
For example , after 23 years of integration , Greece is still the poorest country in the European Union . It is becoming poorer and poorer , with regions in which the per capita income is falling .
The lack of resources and constant cutbacks have not helped to strengthen the widely broadcast concept of cohesion or stabilise the level of development .
On the contrary , they have resulted in shake-ups which have exacerbated the economic and social disintegration of the regions .
In addition , the poor regions have more than doubled since enlargement .
This state of affairs , Mr President , is such that we cannot accept the rapporteurs ' appraisal of the excellent results achieved during the course of the economic and social cohesion of the regions of the European Union .
Mr President , cohesion policy must take account of the special circumstances of the very small islands .
On an organisational and political basis , the EU at present deals with all the islands under the one heading , so that even very small and sparsely populated islands come into the same category as islands with many thousands of inhabitants .
I myself live on a small island , Endelave , which has 180 inhabitants and is situated an hour 's sail out into the Kattegat .
Clearly , we live under quite different conditions than those prevailing in , for example , Corsica or other islands with many thousands of inhabitants .
The challenges are quite different , and we cannot be placed in the same category as the large islands .
That also applies to the Commission 's analyses of the islands ' special circumstances and potential .
The small islands must be eliminated from this analysis and be given their own status , with different conclusions being drawn about them and their opportunities for development .
In that connection , it is important also to recognise the union of small islands that already exists under the name of the European Small Islands ' Network .
To the extent that structural development funds exist , the very small islands must also be allocated these , and national scope must be created for supporting development on the very small islands .
Their particular handicap necessitates support for development processes that can increase settlement and employment , that is to say the promotion of a year-round society on the small islands too .
The ferry connection is quite crucial in this connection .
First and foremost , it is important for the ferries serving the small islands to be exempted from the EU 's tendering requirements .
The tendering demanded by the EU and implemented in connection with the ferries serving Denmark 's small islands has led to large expenditure for the ferry companies , but no one has made them an offer .
It is quite grotesque that , on the one hand , we should have a set of regulations that inflicts unnecessary expenditure upon the small islands and their lifeblood , while we , at the same time , talk about development aid for these areas .
The ferries must be regarded as the islands ' only highway .
It is a question of creating equal conditions .
Mr President , once again , I am speaking in this House on a sensitive subject , one which myself and other Members , have spoken about at other times and one with which Commissioner Barnier is very familiar , not least because he has discussed it with us on countless occasions : the protection of islands , of some of the most disadvantaged regions in our European Union .
I notice with satisfaction that you have adopted an acceptable course , that the general approach of giving recognition to all geographically disadvantaged regions in the Union , with islands , of course , in first place , has met with broad consensus and success , and this seems to be the line taken by the Commission .
I have noted that , at least according to the intentions that have been revealed to date , this will not be restricted to a petition of principle but it will take the form of genuine aid , of the inclusion of these regions in one of the objectives and , therefore , of what is actually crucial aid for key areas .
A number of things must , however , be clarified : firstly , the rewording of Article 158 .
I have tabled an amendment as a reminder that , once again , there has been a long discussion on this subject relating to the infamous translations , that has now ended , giving recognition to all islands through Article 158 .
The text prepared by Mr Mastorakis could be considered to be ambiguous on this point and I have tabled an amendment to this effect .
Another point I would like to emphasise , particularly while the Commissioner is here , is that we have long been calling for the creation of a special unit for islands .
It was done for the outermost regions and I believe that such a unit would provide valuable information and , consequently , facilitate the implementation of strategic measures for this fragile sector .
I hope that the rapporteurs and the Commission will favour the amendments that I have tabled and that they can be incorporated .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to thank the rapporteurs for the worthwhile work they have done .
People must be able to reside throughout Europe .
It is important also to be able to live in those areas that are most vulnerable when market forces promote urbanisation in Europe .
European policy must , therefore , also promote cohesion .
There must be a regional policy .
At the same time , there must also be a regional dimension to national policy , for every country has responsibility for there being regional solidarity within the Member States .
We must now , in connection with enlargement , have a solidarity policy , and we must bind Europe together .
That must happen through regional policy , but also through transport policy and competition policy , which are at least as important if we are to be able to live throughout Europe .
We must also have territorial cohesion .
I am looking forward to a treaty in which territorial cohesion has an important role .
I think that , in the future , most of the funds from regional policy should go to the new Member States , but we must also look to the special conditions that exist in Europe if we are to be able to live throughout the continent .
I therefore find it extremely commendable that we have obtained the Pomés Ruiz report , in which mountains , islands and regions with low population density are highlighted and in which attention is drawn to the special role of regional policy in Europe when it comes to aid for these areas .
To summarise , aid for mountain regions , islands and regions with low population density is therefore important .
We must be able to live in these areas .
European policy must not place obstacles in the way of development in these regions .
At the same time , it is also important for us to have a regional policy involving decentralisation and people having to take responsibility for development in their own regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as part of this joint debate on economic and social cohesion , we are analysing the Mastorakis report on the Commission 's second progress report on European cohesion policy .
I would like to express my support for the ideas expressed by the rapporteur , and take this opportunity to thank him for the remarkable quality of his work .
Regional policy and cohesion policy have played and continue to play a vital role in the development of Member States such as Portugal and their full integration into the European Union .
I am delighted that some European regions , including some regions of Portugal , have left the Cohesion Fund through their own efforts .
That is without a doubt the best example of the success of this Community policy .
It should not be forgotten , however , that although major differences already exist between some European regions in terms of their levels of development , these disparities will become even more marked after enlargement .
In order to realise the full potential of its cohesion policy , thus reducing inequality in regional development , the European Union must maintain its support of current Member States at a constant level . At the same time , it must also develop the regions containing the future Member States in a balanced way .
Faced with this double challenge , the European Union 's duty is to make sufficient funds available to meet the new demands of this situation .
For that reason , the current threshold of 0.45 % of Community gross domestic product must never fall victim to budget cuts of any kind .
For that reason , and because the cohesion policy has proved to be a success in Portugal , I oppose the renationalisation of this development tool .
I welcome the Commission 's establishment of a transitional scheme for regions suffering from the ' statistical ' effects of enlargement , losing their eligibility as a result of Objective 1 being opened up to less-developed regions .
Finally , I have nothing but praise for the creation of a new Objective 2 , on the basis of regional competitiveness in accordance with the guidelines laid down at the Lisbon Summit .
Mr President , as other Members have already done , I too would like to express my complete satisfaction that , at the conclusion of the Convention 's work on the new Constitutional Treaty for the European Union , it was confirmed that all the effects of the cohesion policies , in terms of identity and Community strategies , would be recognised in the Constitution .
This means that we have to expect some difficulties and delays .
They cannot , however , be a pretext for giving up , still less for renationalisation or even a mere resizing of these policies ; that would be tantamount to trying to cure a headache by decapitation : I do not think that this is the route to take .
More efficiency and certainly not fewer resources are , therefore , the way forward for effective simplification , Community added-value for all interventions , together with coordination with other policies , beginning with transport and research policies as well as the common agricultural policy , so that the right hand does not deny what the left is doing .
The same should be true for the updated Objective 2 , which cannot become a source of indiscriminate compensation , indiscriminately granted to all the regions because of the temptations that I have just mentioned .

To conclude , a few observations regarding the two specific , additional problems that we are facing : as regards the statistical impact , on which much has already been said , I agree with the rapporteur 's proposals , but , regarding interventions in regions with structural territorial handicaps - islands and mountain regions - we should not forget that we are talking about structural handicaps .
In this case , cohesion policies should have a definition and objective instruments that are permanent and ongoing , not one offs .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as an Austrian who comes from a country with many border regions , a significant rural sector and mountainous areas , I welcome the reports that have been tabled .
I would like to comment on three areas .
Firstly , Europe is a Community of peace . This presupposes that we have a transparent , efficient democracy that is close to the people , that we respect freedom and accept responsibility , practise non-discrimination and show solidarity .
It is solidarity that we are talking about today .
For me , solidarity is not a question of charity , but of distribution and holistic thinking .
Neither is solidarity limited to the nation state .
If we want to make the internal market into a domestic market then we must not renationalise the Cohesion Fund .
My second point is that if you look at the Constitutional Treaty our vision has won through , because now it is actually a question of negotiating our statement of beliefs .
The policy areas mentioned are only the means of achieving those objectives .
I should like to quote Article 3 just briefly : ' The Union shall work for the sustainable development of Europe based on balanced economic growth , a social market economy , [ that is ] highly competitive ...
It shall combat social exclusion and discrimination , and shall promote social justice and protection ...
It shall promote economic , social and territorial cohesion , and solidarity among Member States ' Two of our fundamental values in Article 2 are solidarity and non-discrimination .
And in doing so it is all about putting definite measures in place to achieve the European Union 's objective .
My final and third point is that I would also ask the Commission to take into account the areas that we have mentioned today when it is drafting a framework regulation on services of general economic interest .
Mr President , we are currently dealing with the challenge of adapting cohesion policy and Structural Funds to an enlarged Union of 25 members in 2004 and 27 members by 2007 .
The Commission 's own assessment of the increased disparities within an enlarged Union suggests these will be twice what they are at present .
In mid-July , shortly after the end of our parliamentary year , summaries of research undertaken under the guidance of André Sapir , an academic , appeared in the press . President Prodi circulated the research to the rest of the Commission .
In their work , Mr Sapir and a team of experts openly queried the appropriateness of the current Community budget spending structure , notably as regards the CAP and the Structural Funds .
Commissioner , I do not wish to cast doubt on the usefulness of research of this nature . I realise it can prove very useful and lead to improvements .
I would , however , like to query the method adopted on this occasion .
I am particularly unhappy about the timing . This is because of the resulting uncertainty and the fear concerning the future of the cohesion policy and Community support for the most disadvantaged regions .
Enlargement is only eight months away .
Regions set to exceed the crucial threshold of 75 % of Community GDP as a result of the statistical factor need to know what provision the Commission intends to make for them . The aim of full employment and economic growth must apply in particular to the current Objective 1 regions .
That is where growth is slowest and unemployment highest , Commissioner .
I therefore ask you to confirm in the House that concentration will remain a valid principle in the future . Structural aid would then continue to be channelled mainly to the most disadvantaged regions of Europe .
As we understand it , cohesion is first and foremost territorial cohesion . Its purpose is to ensure that the most backward regions can also benefit from the effects of the single market .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall do no more in this debate than highlight the paradox confronting economic and social cohesion policy , a paradox which , moreover , is very much in evidence in both of the reports under discussion ; I congratulate the rapporteurs on their excellent work .
The truth is that while , on the one hand , enlargement is the greatest challenge which has ever faced this Community policy , it is easy , on the other , to discern a lacklustre and even reluctant political will to address the overwhelming need to revitalise this central plank of European integration .
Instead of revitalising the policy , the talk is sometimes of renationalising it ; instead of more resources and more solidarity , national self-interest rears its head .
Despite this atmosphere , however , I have not yet lost hope of seeing visionary and unified political responses such as those given to the great European challenges of achieving the single internal market and Economic and Monetary Union .
Back then , at the time of each of those challenges , the resources dedicated to the economic and social cohesion policy were doubled .
Now , at the time of enlargement , that ambition to deal with the enormous regional inequalities stemming from that enlargement is much needed , not least because cohesion policy will in future also have to confront the lack of cohesion still prevalent in the current fifteen-State European Union .
This lack of cohesion risks becoming even more serious as a result of the dynamics introduced by enlargement and by the probably unfair distribution of its benefits .
It makes perfect sense for the countries which will gain most from enlargement to contribute most to funding European solidarity .
This is yet another hope founded on the stance adopted by the Commission and , in particular , by Commissioner Barnier , who , I am glad to say , has never ceased to believe , come rain or come shine , in the feasibility of an effective European-level economic and social cohesion policy , endowed with a minimum level of financial resources : simpler , less centralised , more effective and with other Community policies making a greater contribution towards the aims of cohesion ; a cohesion policy which must improve the way it responds to the needs of island and mountainous regions , sparsely-populated regions and , of course , ultra-peripheral regions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I wish everyone a pleasant beginning to the working year and let us hope it gets off to a rewarding start .
Hopefully we all realised during the summer that there is life outside Parliament too .
Now is the time , however , to ask ourselves honestly whether current regional policy meets real needs .
I do not believe the policy should continue along the current lines with only minor changes being made .
Parliament has stressed that 0.45 % of the Union 's GDP should be used to finance this policy .
How on earth , though , did we arrive at precisely that figure ?
First we should survey the regions ' needs and the most cost-effective means by which those needs may be met .
It is not prudent to commit to any fixed sum in advance .
Obviously , you can pour however much you like into something like this , but is it wise ?
Naturally , we still need a responsible EU regional policy .
Is it sensible , however , to share out aid among all the regions with each one getting just a few crumbs , and at enormous administrative cost ?
We should consider Britain 's proposal that there should only be support for the EU 's poorest regions .
In practice this would mean that only the new Member States would receive aid .
Other regional aids would be nationalised , so that EU bureaucracy may be avoided .
I would nevertheless like to emphasise that the current Member States would not lose out under the reform , as , with enlargement , aids will diminish dramatically in any case .
Naturally , the contributions of the present Member States would be reduced by the amount of reduced aids .
Any major change such as this still unfortunately comes up against a brick wall regarding policy .
Politicians ' favourite occupation has always been to dole out other people 's money .
Funds of money held jointly , however , should be handled even more carefully than our own , as wasting money in any way is always taking it away from the most deprived members of society .
If we are going to make the EU a dynamic area , as we said we would at Lisbon , we should understand that money does not grow on trees , not even in this age of GMOs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we owe it to those who vote for us to act honestly and in accordance with their long-term interests .
Yes , Mr Vatanen , I am afraid that you are right there !
Mr President , Commissioner , I object to mountain regions being labelled as disadvantaged regions , at least as a generalisation .
The mountain regions are rich in a number of different kinds of resources - environmental , economic and human - but they need direct , practical aid to enable these resources to be successfully harnessed .
According to the statistics , 30 % of Europe is taken up by mountains and , with enlargement , this specific feature , this specific characteristic , will account for over 40 % of the territory .
However , the mountain regions are sparsely populated - inhabited by only 5 % of the Community 's population - which means that political pressure from that quarter is relatively ineffectual .
It is therefore up to us to lend a hand .
It must also be said that not all mountain regions are the same and that the reform of the Structural Funds , with the abolition of Objectives 5a and 5b , has created considerable confusion .
Objective 2 is too all-embracing and too flexible , it includes too many items and lumps together the needs of regions which are essentially different .
Simplification is not always the best path to take if the rigour of scientific accuracy is lost along the way .
In the mountains , there are areas which have priorities common to us all .
There has been an example of this just recently : it is in the mountains that we protect ourselves against floods and drought , by safeguarding water resources and territorial integrity .
This is an example of how the mountain regions are directly relevant to the interests and needs of all .
Well then , what can we do ?
Commissioner , we must have the courage to provide direct aid , with regard to which the rules governing state aid and competition must be made more flexible ; we need to have the determination to safeguard man 's life and presence in the mountain regions as a guarantee of genuine cohesion ; we also need to muster the courage to recognise this specific feature of Europe in practical terms , not just in words .
How ?
Maybe by extending the application of Article 158 on islands to mountain regions too .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteurs and I welcome the Commission 's second progress report .
The Cohesion Fund is an invaluable tool in helping less well-off Member States catch up , particularly in the development of infrastructure networks and upgrading of water supplies , in order to contribute to the long-term sustainable development of disadvantaged regions .
The enlargement countries will be greatly helped by simplification of the implementation rules .
It is undeniable that there are still marked disparities in existing Member States and I therefore support the proposal for transitional funding arrangements for Community aid in existing Objective 1 areas post-2006 .
In my own peripheral Objective 1 region , after a number of years of cohesion funding to my country , the Committee on Petitions of this Parliament recently acknowledged that Third World-standard unsafe water supply existed in communities such as Carraroe in my own constituency .
How could this happen ?
Whilst I acknowledge the argument for targeting major projects , when these projects skew funding away from Objective 1 areas , as has happened in my country , some pressure should be put on national governments to recognise their role and duty in the use of cohesion funding for balanced regional development .
I realise this is a domestic issue , but it helps to point out a failure in the existing cohesion policy .
The EUR 80 billion surplus in structural cohesion funding would be better used if it were returned to Member States in order to specifically target the internal imbalances in disadvantaged regions struggling with poor water supply or poor road infrastructure .
It could also fund other essential tools for job creation in areas where our agricultural and fishing industries are struggling to survive .
.
( ES ) Mr President , there are many values dear to the European Union as a whole .
Solidarity is one of these .
It was thanks to solidarity that the principle of cohesion came to be enshrined in our treaties . According to this principle it is not possible to take any decision that would reinforce the position of stronger citizens , states or regions at the expense of weaker ones .
This principle of cohesion has gained further relevance in the context of enlargement .
It is worth stating at the outset that the whole House is of the opinion that Objective 1 should remain unchanged , and that regions due to lose Objective 1 status as a result of enlargement should not lose their aid .
If these regions were to be deprived of their aid they would be losing out in order to make aid available to the new Member States .
Nobody wants that to happen .
The statistical effect should not therefore be taken into account so as to retain Objective 1 as it stood .
We must all help to support the incoming countries , in a spirit of solidarity .
We are currently witnessing a very significant change . Commissioner Barnier is well aware of it .
In the draft of the new constitution there are references to economic , social and territorial cohesion .
Consequently the question arises as to whether there will be a territorial policy or not . To put this another way , it is necessary to consider whether citizens resident in areas of low population density , mountain or island regions , and who therefore experience difficulty in competing with other Europeans on equal terms are to be covered by a Community territorial policy , regardless of their income .
The report I am presenting states that this should be the case . It argues that citizens resident in such areas ought to receive Community aid .
This is indeed significant .
It is important to bear in mind that when a farmer receives support under the common agricultural policy , that farmer is not required to declare his or her income . Similarly , when a company is awarded aid for research and development it is not required to declare its assets .
It is all quite straightforward . The policy on research and development is in place , and so is the common agricultural policy .
Aid is granted according to certain regulations .
The same should apply to territories . It follows that territories should receive aid regardless of whether they are above or below a specific GDP threshold .
I trust this will be the case .
Our report on the preparatory work of the Convention is unambiguous .
In it we state that policy must not be merely economic , dealing with money . Neither should it be simply a policy on cohesion , intent on avoiding exclusion .
It needs to be a policy on territorial cohesion . Mountain regions , regions with low population density and island regions must receive specific aid .
I am confident that the Council , the Commission and the Commissioner will heed the report by this House rather than the report by Mr Sapir .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , rapporteurs , I should like , first of all , to thank Parliament for this new debate on the future of cohesion policy .
Of course , my thanks go both to your two rapporteurs , Mr Mastorakis and Mr Pomés Ruiz , to whom I have listened attentively , and to each and every one of you .
A new debate - and it will not be the last - is therefore being held in this House at an extremely important moment , because we are just a few months away from that enlarged , reunified Europe in which - and I say it again - the economic , social and territorial divisions and the inequalities will be even greater than at present .
The Union will have one third as many additional citizens , one third as much additional territory , but only 5 to 6 % as much additional wealth .
That is the reality of the enlarged , reunified Europe that will come into being on 1 May next year .
That reality makes it necessary for us to ask ourselves about the policy which we are pursuing at the moment , and which I have the honour to be moving forward together with my colleagues Mrs Anna Diamantopoulou and Commissioner Fischler .
We have to evaluate it objectively and lucidly and imagine what it will be like during the new period from 2007 to 2013 or 2011 .
The Commission will be presenting its proposals for that period in the context of its third progress report on cohesion , which I am currently in the process of preparing .
Of course , at the same time the Commission has been thinking for some months now about the future financial perspective .
I should like to emphasise , in passing , the spirit in which we are working , and in which I have been working with you for the last four years , a spirit which is inspired by a desire for transparency .
We do not have any hidden agenda .
We do not have any cards up our sleeve when it comes to the Structural Funds for the next period .
Since January 2001 the Commission has adopted and publicly presented - in the first instance before this House - several documents , including the one that is the subject of the report by Mr Mastorakis .
In that second progress report , we set out the facts and figures , and we indicate certain directions for the future , without being so ambitious as to draw up a strategy for the future .
That strategy will be contained in the third progress report on cohesion , which is planned for the end of this year .
Since the forum on cohesion in May 2001 , the Commission has been frankly and openly seeking contributions from Parliament and from your committees , but also from local authorities , from associations of elected representatives and from Member States .
We have received many contributions , which are all available , in complete transparency , and are accessible via our website .
It is obvious , then , that we do not reject any proposal , any criticism or any debate .
Mrs Miguélez Ramos mentioned just now the Sapir report , which I have had occasion to refer to somewhat critically , not because I disagree with the diagnosis that it makes of the European situation and of our need to increase our efforts regarding competitiveness , innovation , research and education , but because I disagree with its conclusions , and in particular - as you quite rightly pointed out , Mrs Miguélez Ramos - with the senseless idea of abolishing the tool of regional policy .
That being the case , I am open to any constructive criticism .
Just now Mrs Scallon herself mentioned a few ideas which I have taken note of .
Cohesion policy is not a sacred cow that we do not have the right to disturb .
On the contrary , over the past two years I have held an ongoing dialogue with Parliament , and in particular with the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , which will continue to be inspired , for another few weeks , by the work of Mr Luciano Caveri , to whom I paid tribute here yesterday in a different debate , and also with the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
All this has resulted in real proposals for reforms .
Moreover , some of those reforms are already being implemented , even before the next programming period begins .
Nevertheless , even though we agree that cohesion policy needs revising , even revising somewhat radically , we do not agree that it should be abolished or renationalised .
I do not want only half a policy on cohesion .
Mr Karas was speaking just now about charity .
Yet cohesion policy , solidarity policy , which is something that Europe can be proud of , and which was one of the best and most practical policies of the European Union , is not a policy of charity .
Nor is it a blank cheque to be sent to the poorest countries and regions .
It is not merely a budgetary or fiscal transfer from one country to another .
This policy is the expression of something else .
It symbolises a certain concept of Europe .
For me , as for many of you , ladies and gentlemen , that concept of Europe consists of more than just a supermarket .
Cohesion policy ought to be symbolic . It is the proof of a community - and that word is important - a community of regions and of States which share with one another , while awaiting the day when it will become , I hope , a political power .
I share the opinion of Mr Markov , who was speaking just now about this concept of Europe .
He talked about a real policy serving both the needs of convergence , where convergence is needed , especially in the regions that lag behind the most , and the needs of competitiveness for everyone , while at the same time acknowledging the fact that the regions exist .
Mr President , the effectiveness of this policy has been emphasised by some Members , but it has also been criticised by others .
I should like to thank Mrs Guy-Quint for reminding the House how important it is .
By contrast , I disagree with Mr Korakas , who said that this policy was a failure .
The figures which I have , and which are at your disposal , do not prove that everything is perfect , but this policy has produced results for the four countries involved in cohesion .
The GDP per head of population increased by ten points between 1988 and 2001 , thanks to the efforts made by those countries but also thanks to European support .
On the basis of the figures for the Objective 1 regions which have been sent to us by Member States , I see that the average wealth per head of population in those countries increased by six points between 1989 and 2001 .
These figures prove that this is a useful policy .
Once again , we need to preserve it while at the same time renewing it .
We must recognise the importance of the fact that the regions are a reality , and that this reality is relevant not only in terms of governance .
In many regions , and particularly in Objective 1 regions , there has been progress in terms of partnership , parity , evaluation , programming and planning .
That is what this cohesion policy brings with it : not just money , but also the modernisation of the way in which we work together and administer our affairs .
This regional reality is also relevant at economic and social level .
Each territory has its own specific needs , and I am often astonished that anyone can deny that evidence .
I should like to explain to Mrs Schroedter , who spoke earlier and called for the definition of a long-term strategy , that all this will lie at the centre of my thoughts and of those of my colleagues when we define our proposals in the third progress report on cohesion .

That is the main political lesson that I should like to draw from the examination of the reports by Mr Mastorakis and Mr Pomés Ruiz , in other words the agreement which unites our two institutions on the fundamental ambition of a policy for everyone , a policy that is territorial and visible and which serves the interests of Community priorities .
We do not have the time to go into detail regarding the proposals of your rapporteurs .
I should simply like to mention , briefly , six points which to some extent constitute the backbone of any reform which we might , together , envisage and desire .
First of all there is the priority - which will be confirmed and accentuated - given to regions whose development is lagging behind .
Naturally these least developed regions are concentrated in all the new Member States , but not only in those States .

I should like to say to Mr Berend and to his neighbour Mr Cocilovo , to Mr Markov or to Mrs Wenzel-Perillo , that I shall find a fair , Community-based solution for those regions which will suffer from ' statistical ' effects .
At the moment I can envisage an Objective 1a which would respond to the special problems of those regions .
Secondly , there is agreement on the need to support the competitiveness of the regions wherever such support is necessary , with a limited number of themed priorities which are related to , and create a synergistic effect with , the major European objectives set at Lisbon or Göteborg .
On this subject , since I am talking about competitiveness in all the regions , I should like to say to Mr Duin that the new Objective 2 , as I imagine it , will be well-targeted , and properly decentralised , towards the priority objectives of Göteborg and Lisbon .
In other words , some of you have criticised the ' sprinkling effect ' which is still allowed by this aspect of regional policy , on the basis of regulations or policies defined in Berlin .
I believe that this ' sprinkling effect ' should be limited , or even abolished , by targeting , in the context of the new Objective 2 , if we retain it , the objectives and priorities of Lisbon .
Having said that , ladies and gentlemen , many of you are aware that in developed regions which are not lagging behind in their development , situations may develop which are sometimes , indeed often , extremely serious , sometimes tragic , and sometimes shameful , particularly in poorer areas , as a result of illegal immigration .
This is also true as regards the industrial restructuring linked to the market as a whole , which may have a drastic effect on industrial areas .
It also applies , sometimes , to disasters caused by the weather .
Earlier , Mr Ferrández Lezaun referred , as I myself did yesterday evening , to what is happening in Portugal following the forest fires that have occurred there .
It will be necessary to create jobs in those areas which have been entirely destroyed by fire , because , for the people who live there , if there is no forest there is no work .
We are well aware , then , of the need for the European Union to show active solidarity in regions which are not necessarily covered by Objective 1 .
A third point on which we agree is the substantial strengthening of cooperation , which is also symbolic of the European Union , particularly as regards cross-border work and projects .
A fourth point which Mr Pomés Ruiz defined in his report concerns the territorial dimension of cohesion policy .
Just now , Mr Pohjamo and Mrs Kauppi gave excellent descriptions of the real situation in the northern regions - which I have actually visited - in Sweden or in Finland .
Mr Santini did the same for mountain regions .
Moreover , Mr Santini , it is not necessary to explain to me what the situation is like in the mountains : for twenty years now I have been elected to represent a mountain region .
As for Mr Segni , he spoke about islands .
All this corresponds to the territorial realities in regions which have structural handicaps which mean that , in those regions , the success or even the implementation of Community policies is more difficult than elsewhere .
We must therefore take this fact into account , perhaps in the way that Mr Hatzidakis suggested earlier , or by means of an amendment , by increasing the subsidy rate .
Once again let me say that I am taking all these ideas into account , and in particular the proposals by Mr Pomés Ruiz .
I am also aware of the fact that , when the new proposals are being drawn up , I shall have the support , not only of this House , but also of the new European Constitution .
I have had the honour of taking part in the work of the Praesidium of the Convention , and I was very keen on the idea of introducing the concept of territorial cohesion into the European Constitution .
I hope that the Heads of State or Government will retain it .
This concept has just been added to the concept of , and need for , economic and social cohesion , a concept which it also reinforces .
Finally , the last point on which we agree is that there should be a programming , management and control system that is simpler and more effective , so that people do not always call into question , as Mr Virrankoski did just now , the Brussels bureaucracy .
I am well aware of the fact , ladies and gentlemen , that there are undoubtedly bureaucrats and technocracy in Brussels .
However , if you look hard enough you will find bureaucracy in many other places apart from Brussels .
If you find that there are difficulties in implementing the Structural Funds in your regions and in your countries , it is highly likely that the reasons for those difficulties lie partly in Brussels and in the complexities of Brussels .
Yet they are also found in the Berlin regulations which I am responsible for applying .
There are also objective reasons .
I cannot submit accurate figures on the management of the Structural Funds or submit accounts - and accurate accounts at that - to Parliament and the Court of Auditors , unless I have the means of carrying out controls .
You are also well aware , however , that some of the difficulties are due to the complexity of the national management systems .
We can , of course , simplify all that , and on this subject as well I am ready to propose substantial changes , including the submission of new ideas .
Earlier , Mr Bradbourn criticised the idea of the tripartite contract .
It is not a question of bypassing the nation states : the tripartite contract is an idea for bringing together , in the context of regional programming , Brussels , the national capital and the region .
Those are the points on which I am able to signal my agreement , in addition , of course , though the time has not yet come to talk about it in detail , to the budgetary ambition which will make this policy a reality , with a credibility threshold which I have personally set at 0.45 % of the Community GDP .
There are many points that have been raised by one person or another , and even if I do not quote all of you , I have carefully taken note of your remarks .
I shall end , therefore , by referring , as Mrs Sudre , Mr Fruteau and Mr Marques have done , to the special situation in the ultra-peripheral regions .
Here again , I have ensured that the Commission reproduces , in its new Article 326 , what is guaranteed under Article 299 , and at the same time strengthens it .
I have also noted the concern expressed by Mr Karas and Mr Esclopé , a concern which I share , about services of public interest and the question of whether they really exist , particularly in those regions which are in the greatest difficulty .
Finally , and this is my last word , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have another concern regarding my forthcoming presentation of the third progress report on cohesion : I hope that the debate will get off the ground very quickly , despite the European elections next year and the change in the Commission .
Let us not lose too much time in reaching decisions based on the Commission proposals .
What is at stake here really is very important .
We must try to speed up the timetable so that regions and Member States know fairly quickly where they stand .
If possible , they should be aware of the policies and the rules before the end of the current programming period .
Negotiations with the regions will then be able to start before the end of 2006 and it will be possible to launch the implementation of projects and programmes in each of the regions , particularly in those that are in the greatest difficulty , as soon as the next programming period starts in 2007 , and not two years later , which I observed to be the case after Berlin .
We are not there yet , but it is a prospect that I was keen to point out to you .
For the time being , we have to carry on the debate , which is difficult because cohesion policy is being called into question and sometimes condemned .
Personally , I shall never tire of explaining it and defending it in an open and constructive manner while at the same time accepting criticisms and proposals .
In this spirit , I have paid close attention to the conclusions of your two rapporteurs and to the - generally speaking - constructive support shown by Parliament for this policy , a policy which is , and I say it again , one of the best and most practical policies of the European Union . It is not a policy of passive solidarity , but rather a policy of active solidarity which is a credit to the European Union .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be at noon today .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are actually debating a regulation on the negotiation and conclusion of air service agreements .
This heralds the end of a dispute that has exercised the Commission and the Member States for years , a dispute which unfortunately was not resolved politically at a time when this would still have made sense , but which finally had to be as it were set aside by virtue of a ruling of the European Court of Justice .
In the past , the Member States continued to conclude bilateral air service agreements , which led to the internal market - which we had already made a reality in 1992 - being annulled in the air transport sector , ultimately reducing and restricting the opportunities and possibilities open to the Member States ' airlines .
It is therefore logical - and I fully agree with this - for our finally to have a Community agreement between the European Union and the United States , so that , competing as a European continent , we can use the opportunities that the USA has already been using for years in our Member States .
I do not quite follow the Commission 's comments and have also made this clear in my report : the Commission referred , no doubt partly out of annoyance and partly out of frustration after years of trying to persuade the Council to give it a negotiating mandate , to illegality , and in so doing it may now have thrown the baby out with the bathwater !
If Commissioner Barnier said that the Council had already more or less accepted that in the future Member States would have to present the results of their bilateral negotiations for approval , then I think we are a long way from what we have discussed so intensively in the past and have also written in the Constitutional Treaty , namely from the principle of subsidiarity .
Even allowing for the annoyance and the exuberance , I certainly cannot go along with the Commission 's approach here , that it is now trying to treat the Member States like small children in what is after all an important issue for the national airlines .
I am not disputing the fact that in the future the Community will have to lead the negotiations in certain areas , that is right and proper , not least because of the equivalence that needs to be established .
As you rightly pointed out , however , there are over 2000 national bilateral air service agreements and these air service agreements will have to be developed further , they will have to be maintained and new ones will have to be added to their number .
I think it is right and proper , where there is no obligation and no need for a Community agreement , to leave these in the sovereignty of the Member States .
That these national agreements obviously have to be in accordance with Community law is , as I see it , not in question , but it is unacceptable for the spontaneity and sovereignty of the Member States to be restricted in such a way that , for each agreement , they not only , as it were , have to report that the negotiations have started , but also present the results and have them approved by the Commission .
I will say again very clearly that I have tried to put this in a slightly different way in my report , and I have not gone along with the Commission 's proposal , which has been made once again clearly by Commissioner Barnier .
I think that the Commission should restrict itself to those areas where there is a need for the Community to negotiate , and that otherwise the Member States should continue to have the right to negotiate , obviously subject to Community law and the Commission 's right , if need be , to intervene .
I am confident , when I say a dispute is drawing to an end , that at the latest at the second reading a solution will be found that is acceptable to the Council , the Commission and Parliament .
Until recently talks were still being held to achieve this , because there is a willingness on all sides to give a little more ground .
The Member States are prepared to accept committing themselves to incorporating certain standard clauses in future air service agreements , and I therefore think that we will be able , despite our still differing starting positions , to settle this in good time to the mutual satisfaction of all parties .
I would like to address one final point , because of course next we will be moving straight on to the vote , and that is Amendment No 17 .
This amendment , which unfortunately - and I use the word advisedly - received majority support in the committee , states that the ' polluter pays ' principle should play a role in future agreements .
I wish to point out once more that the negotiation of air service agreements is concerned exclusively with which traffic rights are retained and which can be used and I have absolutely no idea what the ' polluter pays ' principle is doing in an air service agreement about these traffic rights .
Obviously we can write a great deal in regulations , but anything that does not belong there should be taken out again , because it is irrelevant in this context .
That is why I would earnestly request that when the time comes you do not vote in favour of Amendment No 17 .
( Sustained applause )
Mr President , Commissioner , my group obviously supports the rapporteur 's approach of proceeding gradually , because it is right to do so .
If I understood Mr Barnier correctly , he has also swung a little in the direction of the rapporteur , because originally it was still the case that the Commission wanted to say : the Member States will have to terminate all of their air service agreements and we will make new ones .

If I understood Mr Barnier correctly , he is falling in with our line , because there are two things that we need to consider : we need to implement the ECJ ruling , and underlying that is also that we need to create fair conditions of competition for our European airlines in relation to third countries .
That is an important task .
But we also need to bear in mind that the airlines need legal certainty .
They need legal certainty in their air service agreements with the countries of the world , and that is why we cannot terminate everything and say that we will stay in a state of flux .
Instead we first need to restrict ourselves to those things for which the Commission has the manpower .
That is why , Mr Barnier , it is right for you also to take the path that the rapporteur has proposed , and proceed on a step-by-step basis .
The most important agreement is the agreement with the USA .
We want a transatlantic market in air transport with reasonable access rules and reasonable competition rules , and I hope that the Commissioner for transport will brief us very soon in the committee on the extent to which preparations for the negotiations with the USA are already in hand and when negotiations will start .
I think that from an economic point of view this is the most important agreement for all of our airlines , whether it be Air France , British Airways or Lufthansa , which is why we need to find a reasonable settlement , and it is also of great significance for competition between them .
I therefore hope that we will make speedy progress here .
Once we have produced such a model for an open , fair airspace with the USA , we will have to ensure , as the rapporteur said , that we apply it to those countries that either already have a similarly liberalised market or are striving to create one .
Allow me to say in closing that , irrespective of this , we also urgently need to talk to Russia , because the Russian conditions for our airlines are fundamentally such that we cannot accept them .
We should therefore proceed cautiously , start with the USA , but not lose sight of Russia .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work that he has done on this report .
The basis of the discussion that we have had so far is the importance of these bilateral agreements within the aviation sector .
Quite rightly the issue of the United States is being singled out as probably the more important one .
But I would not like us to become obsessed with an agreement with the United States to the detriment of an agreement with the other third countries .
Australia , New Zealand , Singapore and Japan are all waiting for agreements .
So whilst it is important that we stress the importance of the United States agreement , we should remember that this is a report about relations with other countries , not just the United States .
My concern is that the United States will see this as a golden opportunity to cherry-pick , as they have always done , the best routes into Europe .
It is what the Americans call ' an early harvest ' , where they get all the goodies and we in the European Union are left with the crumbs off the master 's table .
That is why it is important that we have a report that prevents this happening .
We have some concerns with a number of the amendments that have been passed , in particular Amendment No 16 , which deletes Article 4 .
We also have problems with Amendment Nos 6 , 7 and 14 .
We agree with Mr Schmitt with regard to Amendment No 17 , but this is what happens when you allow the Green Group to hijack transport reports as they have a habit of trying to do .
The ' polluter pays ' principle is an important one , but it is not the right approach to a technical decision that comes out of a European Court judgement .
Finally , I would like to say on a personal note , that whilst my group will be supporting Amendment No 4 , both the British delegation and I have difficulty in supporting it .
With those provisions that I have outlined , we will support Mr Schmitt 's report , but we have reservations on those six amendments and in particular Amendment No 16 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Schmitt for his contribution , which gave guidance on the report on which we will be voting today .
In principle , I think that it is important for us to only regulate on a European level things that actually have added value .
These are things that we really need to organise properly in a European context .
I am therefore very critical of the turn of phrase Mr Schmitt has chosen , and with the direction of this report , which is , I think , doing too much damage to the authority recently obtained by the European Commission with the intervention of the European Court .
I myself would like to see the Commission have ample authority in this area in order to ensure that all bilateral aviation agreements between the EU and third countries are concluded according to the same principle .
This would prevent the unnatural fragmentation of the European aviation market and ensure that the many bilateral agreements are consigned to the scrap heap from now on .
The oldest open skies agreement in Europe , the one between the Netherlands and America , is not covered by this decision as it dates back to 1991 and therefore precedes the setting up of the internal market .
This agreement , however , will not remain tenable if all other similar bilateral agreements are no longer considered permissible .
I remain so critical of some of the amendments in this report , however , that if these are adopted here , I can imagine that the Dutch Government would insist on a new decision by the Court , as a result of which the current arrangements with the United States would be delayed for a couple of years .
I am very worried about Amendment No 13 , which allows Member States to disregard a comment from the Commission on bilateral agreements with third countries .
Amendments Nos 2 and 15 permit the monopoly rights of specific airlines to remain unaffected on certain routes .
Furthermore , Amendments Nos 3 and 16 entirely deprive the Commission of the verification procedure which enables it to object to bilateral agreements between the EU Member State and a third country .
Amendment No 5 also gives the Council the power to overrule the Commission by way of the comitology procedure .
Furthermore , Amendments Nos 6 and 7 give Member States the opportunity to allow national interests to play a major role in the conclusion of new bilateral aviation agreements .
The airlines themselves will also be the victims on account of Amendment Nos 4 and 18 as they will be poorly informed about any new negotiations or the transparency of what has been agreed .
In short , I had the feeling that we would have to put up with the decision of the European Court , but it now seems that real , honest , open competition in the European aviation market is not yet so important and that we apparently want to curb this authority .
So I am sorry but I hope that we do not accept the amendments , otherwise I will be compelled to vote against them .
Mr President , firstly I would like to thank my colleague , Mr Schmitt , for all his hard work concerning this proposal .
It has been nearly four years since we completed our report on the single market worldwide challenge in Parliament which favoured general support for a transatlantic common aviation area .
I support the granting of a mandate to the Commission to negotiate an open aviation area with the US , replacing the current bilateral agreements and the ownership restrictions which prevent the industry from developing on a global basis .
However , we should not underestimate the difficulties which may arise .
I welcome therefore the Commission 's comments on the following points .
Although Mrs Palacio is not here today , I would be grateful for a response in writing .
Firstly I should like to begin by asking the Commissioner for an assurance that current bilateral aviation agreements with third countries will neither be renounced nor frozen for an indefinite period while Community agreements are hammered out .
It is vital that normal business be allowed to continue .
Secondly , can the Commission give us its assurance that during the negotiations it will not be lured by the US negotiators into agreeing , as a first step , to a so-called ' early harvest ' which , whilst satisfying the current US negotiating requirements , would make the achievement of full liberalisation much less likely ?
Thirdly , how will the Commission address the major issue of the massive cash injection to the US industry of USD 11 billion since 11 September and in addition the Fly America and CRAF programmes with a combined value of USD 775 million ?
These schemes distort competition and are incompatible both with existing bilateral regimes and any future liberalisation between Europe and the US .
Fourthly , can the Commissioner also assure us that the airline industry will have a direct role to play in these negotiations , as is the current international practice ?
Finally , given that a successful EU-US agreement would be a template for further liberalisation on a global basis , can the Commission assure us that no further mandates will be sought by it until a successful agreement is reached with the United States ?
Mr President , further to what a number of Members have already said , I think that it is important to underline that what we are doing today is the start of an important process in which the European Union and the Commission will play an important role in the area of aviation negotiations .
This is , in itself , a significant breakthrough which will also mean that the Commission will now have a mandate to enter into negotiations with the USA , for example , on behalf of the whole of the European Union , and that could be extremely beneficial , but only if this mandate is so clear that the European Union can in fact speak and negotiate with one voice .
We know from other areas how often this turns out to be extremely difficult to do , particularly when we have to do business with the USA .
In the meantime , the Member States must be able to continue to negotiate with bilateral partners , and it is therefore necessary for the internal process in the European Union to be properly organised .
That is why the rapporteur 's proposal is in favour of not doing everything at once but concentrating on the United States to begin with , at an initial stage .
The experience gained in this way will naturally come in useful at subsequent stages .
This will also avoid the confusion that would arise if the Commission suddenly had to accept responsibility for all bilateral matters and negotiations or exercise complete control over these .
I support what my colleague Brian Simpson said about this .
It is naturally difficult - that is clear from the amendments - to find a good formula for the role of the Commission on the one hand and the role of the Member States on the other , who naturally also have to take the interests of the aviation industry into account in order to achieve a proper balance in that area .
I do , however , think that it is important for Parliament and the Member States , but also the airlines , to be able to play a role in this process , but also to be able to exercise their influence in the execution of their new rules .
This is a major operation which can create more opportunities for European aviation , but there is also the risk , and I would like to emphasise that , of an outcome that will bring with it undesirable changes and will thus have a deleterious effect on jobs in some countries .
I think that this point about jobs and the interests of our own airlines must remain firmly on the agenda in the process .
I should like to thank Mr Ari Vatanen for having succeeded , at the end of his speech , in giving a poetical dimension to this discussion .
Naturally I have listened to all of you , and I shall pass on to Mrs de Palacio all your comments . We have also , Mr President , sent to Parliament 's Secretariat the Commission 's position on each of the proposed amendments .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be at noon today .
Mr President , Commissioner de Palacio , Commissioner Barnier , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats welcomes and approves the conclusion of the maritime transport agreement between the European Union and its Member States on the one hand and the People 's Republic of China on the other .
This agreement is intended to guarantee fair and non-discriminatory treatment of European and Chinese shipping companies in each party 's respective ports and thus enable trade between the European Union and China to be carried on even more smoothly .
This is all the more important in view of the fact that the People 's Republic of China is now already the European Union 's third largest trading partner .
This agreement is important because it not only governs maritime cargo transport , including the intermodal transport associated with it , but also guarantees that wholly-owned subsidiaries can be founded in either State party to this agreement .
Such subsidiaries shall be entitled , among other things , to employ key personnel irrespective of their nationality .
I see this as amounting to a definite gain in terms of legal certainty for our European shipping companies .
You are probably just as well aware as many others among us that we have many agreements and dialogues with China , but that it is the local authorities - and that is what the port authorities are - who sometimes have other ways of doing things .
It is for that reason that it is of quite crucial significance that we should now be concluding an agreement intended to secure non-discriminatory treatment in all Chinese ports for our European shipping companies .
It is , of course , for the Commission to ensure that this agreement is promptly and properly implemented throughout China , and you , Commissioner , and also Vice-President , de Palacio , can perhaps say something about why this is so .
This is particularly the case as regards the non-discriminatory use of port infrastructures and maritime services by European shipping companies in Chinese ports , but it also applies to the case of European shipping companies , who have to pay duties and charges , doing so in the same way as others , without being put at a disadvantage or discriminated against , and as regards customs formalities , which must not handicap our trade and our shipping companies in Chinese ports .
We also appeal to the European shipping companies to come to us and to the Commission if there are problems , so that we can follow them up .

Let me now turn to the amendment to the motion for a resolution tabled by Mr Simpson and Mr Watts , the latter of whom and I know each other so well .
This amendment is quite simply superfluous .
In the course of the proceedings in committee , there was some correspondence with the Commission , which said what you , Mr Watts , have yourself confirmed , namely that this is an agreement for Europe 's and China 's shipping companies .
What flags their ships sail under is a matter for them .
This is a matter of international custom , and so you cannot behave as if European shipping companies ' use of the flags of third countries were a crime or something highly dangerous .
The Commission itself has given assurances that it will see to it that European seafarers are not put to any disadvantage by this agreement .
We trust the Commission .
The amendment is superfluous !
The debate is closed .
The vote will be at noon today .
The next item is the report ( A5-0152 / 2003 ) by Bernard Poignant , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending European Parliament and Council Directive 2001 / 25 / EC on the minimum level of training of seafarers ( COM ( 2003 ) 1 - C5-0006 / 2003 - 2003 / 0001 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal we are debating recommends establishing a European quality system for third country seafarers with certificates of competency issued outside the Community working on Community ships .
The purpose of this proposal is to ensure that foreign crews working on ships sailing under the flag of a Member State of the Union have been trained and certified in all cases in accordance with international requirements .
The proposal is particularly important if examined in the light of the maritime disasters involving the Erika and the Prestige .
The human factor is a very serious aspect of safety at sea ; at the same time , however , it safeguards the marine environment .
Thus , all types of crews serving on Community ships must be adequately trained .
Allow me to comment briefly on the main elements of the proposal .
First , the proposal introduces a harmonised European system for recognising at Community level third country maritime training and certification systems which meet all the requirements of the S ? CW Convention , the Convention on Standards of Training , Certification and Watchkeeping for seafarers .
My second point concerns the provision of an efficient procedure for direct action as regards changes to the training and certification system of third countries .
The tactic of monitoring and possibly withdrawing recognition , where there is cause to do so , are two vital elements in the text .
More importantly , the proposal makes provision for the tactic of re-evaluating all recognised countries every five years .
Thirdly , the key to the proposal is the new European Maritime Safety Agency , the expert opinions and professionalism of which will assist the Commission in these vitally important duties .
This new legislative practice will improve the quality and efficiency of the system for recognising seafarers ' certificates under a single Community system .
The Ministers for Transport unanimously reached political agreement on this proposal in March .
The examination on the part of the Council allowed us to introduce certain amendments which improve our initial proposal .
For example , the recognition of a third country will remain in force unless there is evidence of non-compliance by that third country , in which case recognition will be withdrawn .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is the essence of our proposal , the primary concern of which is to ensure that third country crews are professionally competent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , further to the questions already raised by many of the Members in their speeches , starting with the Commissioner , the rapporteur and Mr Ojeda , I believe that this is a proposal for a directive which has technical content but cannot be reduced to just technical points .
I would stress , and the reasons for this have already been emphasised , the importance of being able to recognise the qualifications of seafarers from third countries on the common bases of established qualifications , without fear of fraud ; the need to simplify the procedures adopted thus far and turn to account the work of the Commission and the European Maritime Safety Agency , overcoming the difficulties and unilateral aspects of the procedures underway relating to individual certificates of capability .
Against the backdrop of these factors and the solutions proposed , which we support - and in doing so pay tribute to the excellent work of the rapporteur and the conclusions which have , at last , been reached through consultation with the Council and the trialogues held - stands the essential need to reduce by some means the level of human error contributing to risks of disaster , of maritime accidents which , as we know , have taken place in the past .
There is something else , however : we are dealing with the adoption of a proposal for a directive related to the opening up of the market in port services , for example , which is intended to regulate competition opportunities linked to this development too , while rigorously safeguarding the requirements of safety , environmental protection and social protection and , therefore , in this case too , the indispensable requirements of training and professional qualifications for crew members , requirements which must be taken as the basis for authorisation procedures and also for private supply and self-handling measures .
For these reasons , it is of crucial importance to be able to depend on guaranteed minimum qualification requirements for crew members , whatever their country of origin .
For the same reasons , I will make just one last point regarding the proposals that have been illustrated by the rapporteur .
I refer to Amendment No 10 , which gives crew members from third countries employed on ships flying the flag of the individual Member States equal conditions of access to qualifications and lifelong training processes .
I believe that we must not waste this opportunity and that we must insist on a solution which I feel to be appropriate , which is that proposed by the Commission .
Mr President , it is as a completion of what is already in place that this report is particularly important .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work he has done .
This revision of an existing regulation for the recognition of seafarers from countries outside the European Union is , in particular , an improvement on the current situation .
The assessment of training by the European Maritime Safety Agency against the training requirements laid down in the IMO treaty , under which approval is given to the third country in question for five years , is a good thing , as it will improve maritime safety in and around European waters enormously .
We are making direct use of the agency that we have just set up .
It is extremely important to think the same things , to have recognisable rules , to have a recognisable language as far as possible .
Many of the accidents at sea are , after all , not only the result of technical defects but are often the result of inattention ; human error that could have been avoided if people had been more alert .
Amendments that will allow us to use languages other than English as languages of communication in the maritime world seem to me to be undesirable .
We need to try to follow other examples of uniformity in international language use .
In aviation , for example , English is the right language of communication .
Language was said to have been a problem when the Tricolor sank in the Channel , for example .
One of the causes of the accidents that occurred after the Tricolor sank was a breakdown in communication between an English-speaking captain and the French pilot services .
It is therefore vital that we apply the same recognition in the same language and that we are dealing with the same rules throughout the European Union , and indeed throughout the entire world .
Mr Poignant , I think that it is a very good thing that you have formulated your report in these general terms and it is also in general terms that I will support it .
Mr President , I hope that all my fellow MEPs are paying attention and listening to what is being said , for it is actually very important .
Generally , it is a good idea to do what is stated in the rapporteur 's report and simplify the procedures for recognising certificates of competency from third countries .
I nonetheless believe there are a number of things it is important to bear in mind .
Firstly , we must be 100 % certain that the certificates to be approved in the EU come from recognised training institutions .
The certificate must be a guarantor of the fact that the seafarer really has in actual fact undergone practical training .
It must not just be a piece of paper printed in any old vending machine in some banana state .
Next , we must take a thorough look at the employment situation within the EU shipping industry .
We must ascertain that satisfactory capacity has been built up in the training area so that we have the opportunity to offer basic and ongoing training to our seafarers .
We must also be able to guarantee that there is no social dumping from outside whereby European seafarers lose their jobs because of wage pressure .
In that connection , it is important for seafarers in the candidate countries quickly to be put on a level with their peers in the present Member States so that they can receive proper wages for their work and so that we can avoid unfair competition .
I shall give an example of the way in which the subject we are discussing might have been significant in my own country .
In the area I come from , a very serious accident occurred in which a ship leaked following a collision with another ship . It emerged that the crew members could not understand each other 's languages and could not therefore communicate .
All in all , a disaster for the whole area . That is something we could have avoided by means of sensible rules , so I hope my fellow MEPs are paying attention .
They are busier , however , having their cosy chats and what not . That being said , they may well be able to read what is subsequently put down in the Minutes .
Mr President , in the North Sea , along the Flemish coast , people are hard at work clearing the wreck of the Tricolor .
There have been almost sixty accidents this year , something that is almost inexplicable .
Last month we were shocked to hear of no fewer than three serious collisions on the River Schelde to Antwerp .
This is no longer a coincidence .
It is clear that one of the main ways to prevent shipping accidents is to have a well-trained crew .
All steps aimed at improving the quality of crews therefore deserve the support of this Parliament .
My group was extremely satisfied with the speed with which the Commission launched the proposal to create a standard system for the competencies of seafarers .
My group has also urged that an aspect of equal opportunities in terms of career development on board be included in this proposal .
The Commission 's proposal must ensure that non-European personnel do not become second-class personnel .
Much has been said about the quality and the social standing of crews and the impact that these factors have on the safety of shipping .
We hope that an assessment report after the adoption of the amendments in the directive in question will clarify the relationship between crew training and the nature and number of shipping accidents .
This could be the first step on the long road towards a truly European flag .
International shipping has been in trouble for decades .
Globalisation has increased pressure on various parts of the sector .
The cost of both building and operating ships has had to come down .
Because of the impact of ' cheap ' ships ' registers in particular , flag countries in the European Community have revised their package of conditions .
In addition , the Western fleet has had to contend with a declining number of ' indigenous ' qualified seafarers .
In order to be able to meet the need for crew , a considerable number of seafarers are being brought in from outside the European Community .
Each country has been handling this separately , resulting in a great deal of duplicated effort and a burden on the official apparatus .
That is why , in principle , we are in favour of this proposal .
Coordinating the recognition of training and the associated certificates of competency centrally is a step in the right direction .
There are , however , a number of things we must not lose sight of .
Firstly , it is important to make proper use of the maritime knowledge and workforce that is available in Europe .
A change to the current arrangements must not result in personnel from outside the European Community excluding labour from the Member States from the market , with all the consequences that brings with it for the recruitment and training of new seafarers in the European Union .
This should be properly taken into account when recognising certificates of competency from a third country .
Secondly , permits should not be the be-all and end-all of the operation .
Training is the work of men and is susceptible to change .
At regular intervals , both before and during the recognition period , it must be determined whether all criteria for the recognition have been met .
If they have not , withdrawal of the licence must follow without mercy .
It seems to me that there is an important role for the European Maritime Safety Agency in this process .
In short , this proposal can eliminate a great deal of superfluous work but we must proceed with caution in enforcing and developing it .
We can therefore support this proposal provided the abovementioned points are adequately covered .
The debate on this report is suspended .
It will continue at 3 p.m.
The next item is the vote .
Request for consultation of the Economic and Social Committee on health and safety at the workplace in the accession countries
( Parliament approved the request for consultation )
Report ( A5-0255 / 2003 ) by Giuseppe Gargani , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the amended proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to carcinogens or mutagens at work ( Sixth individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16 ( 1 ) of Council Directive 89 / 391 / EEC ) ( Codified version ) ( COM ( 2003 ) 127 - C5-0127 / 2003 -1999 / 0085 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0250 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the Council common position with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Regulation adapting to Council Decision 1999 / 468 / EC the provisions relating to committees which assist the Commission in the exercise of its implementing powers laid down in instruments subject to the procedure referred to in Article 251 of the EC Treaty ( 11253 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0223 / 2003 - 2001 / 0314 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Monica Frassoni )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0252 / 2003 ) by the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council regulation relating to fertilisers ( 12733 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0224 / 2003 - 2001 / 0212 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Kurt Lechner )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0231 / 2003 ) by Helena Torres Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 218 / 92 on administrative cooperation in the field of indirect taxation ( VAT ) as regards additional measures regarding supplies of travel services ( COM ( 2003 ) 78 - C5-0145 / 2003 - 2003 / 0057 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , the draft resolution we are about to approve by codecision takes account of a profound change in the VAT system for travel agents .
The urgent need to approve this legislation results from profound changes in the travel industry over the last 30 years , and the innumerable exemptions and derogations currently applicable in a sector where profit margins are very slender .
The principal changes relate to the possibility of companies deducting VAT when they deal with conferences or incentive tourism and on-line bookings , areas where European travel agents must be protected from competitors from outside the Community .
I only hope that the unanimity achieved in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs can also be obtained in the Council .
. Mr President , I remember that when my first report was voted on a few months ago , the Commission memorably stated that when it took decisions under the comitology procedure it would be willing to give information to Parliament , but not full information .
This caused great hilarity in the House at the time .
Also , if Parliament objected to a decision it would ' possibly ' take account of Parliament 's objection .
As you can imagine this caused consternation in the House .
That is why the report was referred back to committee .
I can now report that we have looked at the matter further .
We have had intense discussions with the Commission and what is before you today is a result of those contacts .
The Commission has agreed to forward to Parliament all the information laid down in the interinstitutional agreement that we already have in principle with the Commission .
If Parliament objects to an implementing measure adopted under comitology , then the Commission must either withdraw it , amend it or take account of Parliament 's objection in some other way , or come before the House to make a statement to explain why it is taking any other course of action .
That is a significant step forward .
It is not ideal , but it is suitable to tide us over until the new constitution comes into force , which will introduce a new category of delegated legislation giving us further powers under the terms of the constitution .
I commend it to the House .
Clearly it marks considerable and appropriate progress from the point of view of Parliament .
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0253 / 2003 ) by Diana Wallis , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the Initiative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands with a view to the adoption of a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 44 / 2001 on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters ( 14363 / 2002 - C5-0590 / 2002 - 2002 / 0824 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
After the vote :
Mr President , I have a small oral amendment .
The committee still addressed its demand to the Convention .
We should change this to ' Intergovernmental Conference ' in order to demonstrate that we are up to date .
. ( PT ) I decided to support this report , which aims to replace several previous directives on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to carcinogens or mutagens at work .
Indeed , as the advisory group from the legal services department noted , this proposal respects the spirit of the texts codified , simply compiling them into a single document and incorporating the formal changes demanded by the codification process .
I believe this ' codification ' to be an appropriate measure for promoting better safety regulations for workers , which is indispensable in the European context .
Dangers such as those dealt with in this proposal , which are so often hidden , must be avoided ; that is beyond dispute .
In other words , circumventing them is much better than making amends for them .
Prevention is better than compensation .
This proposal clearly moves in that direction . In accordance with what was laid down at Lisbon , it aims not only at more employment , but also better employment .
. ( PT ) I applaud the unanimous approval of this recommendation by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
As has been pointed out , care should be taken to ensure that the use of ' comitology ' does not detract from our full compliance with Parliament 's legislative procedure and powers of colegislation . This will prevent any consequent adoption of legislative provisions through implementing measures other than the codecision procedure .
The task is above all to establish a system permitting Parliament properly to exert the powers of control entrusted to it and , if necessary , to contest any implementing measures with which it disagrees , providing those measures originate in the codecision process .
Indeed , Parliament has always come out in favour of greater transparency in the work of the various committees , emphasising in particular the need for the agenda and minutes of committee meetings , attendance registers , drafts submitted to committees in relation to implementing measures , provisional timetables and results of votes to be passed on to Parliament .
Furthermore , all committee documents - except classified documents - should be made available to Parliament and the general public .
. ( PT ) Over the last few years , every aspect of the travel industry has undergone profound changes .
Indeed , observers have noted a growing rise in the number and range of services on offer , and a parallel increase in numbers and types of customers .
Given these historical changes , a rapid overhaul of the special VAT scheme for travel agents , in force since 1977 , has become imperative .
I therefore wish to express my full support for Parliament 's report and congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Torres Marques .
I agree unreservedly with the approval of the changes to the VAT scheme for travel agents , which involve taxing tour operators based outside the EU when they offer their services to European consumers .
This measure will eliminate the unfair competition affecting the European travel industry . It also strikes a blow against tax evasion on the part of European companies falsely claiming to be based outside the EU and not charging VAT to consumers .
Once these adjustments have been made , the European travel industry will be able to compete on fair and even terms in the highly competitive world travel market , inaugurating a state of affairs which can only have favourable repercussions for our consumers .
Tourism in the Algarve , therefore , can only benefit from this new system .
. ( PT ) The massive transformation of the labour market we have witnessed over the last few years requires us to alter our information-gathering procedures .
The labour force sample survey proposed in this report will allow us to take ever-more effective steps to create jobs .
The features of this survey , which includes six new variables and the option of differentiating structural variables , will allow us to understand the labour market better and define future economic and employment policies .
In order to achieve the aims of the Lisbon Strategy especially in terms of employment and labour flexibility and in view of the entry into force of so many provisions linked to the European employment strategy , I voted in favour of this report , which approves the Commission 's proposal to strengthen this important surveying tool .
. ( PT ) In voting for this report on the organisation of a quarterly labour force sample survey for the Community , I want to highlight the six new variables introduced : continued receipt of wages and salary , supervisory responsibilities , involvement of the public employment services in finding the current job , overtime hours , contract with a temporary employment agency , and lack of care facilities as a reason for non-participation or part-time work .
All of these will improve the availability of comparable statistics on employment and unemployment trends and describe the structure of labour-market participation by individuals and households .
This deeper understanding will undoubtedly help completely to fulfil the aims of the European employment strategy , and more effectively to adopt measures implementing the Lisbon strategy . These measures are anxiously awaited by the citizens of Europe .
. ( PT ) As I said in my explanation of vote on the Frassoni report , I agree with this reform of what is known as the ' comitology ' procedure .
Greater transparency in the exercise of the Commission 's implementing powers , as well as proper Parliamentary control , will undoubtedly allow Community intervention measures to be adopted more effectively and appropriately .
Greater participation at this stage , rather than mere control , will provide better guarantees for citizens that the aims and principles prevailing when the basic instruments were conceived and took shape are being pursued . That participation will also ensure greater convergence with the legislators ' intentions .
. ( PT ) In the interests of satisfying the political desire expressed at both Tampere and Laeken to put into effect the principle of mutual recognition of decisions in criminal matters ( ' ... which ? should become the cornerstone of judicial cooperation in both civil and criminal matters within the Union ' ) , we have , in the course of this plenary , approved various proposals containing measures whose aim is to implement the principle of mutual recognition of decisions in criminal matters .
In this context , the ne bis in idem principle is undoubtedly one of the urgent prerequisites in order for mutual recognition of decisions in criminal matters and a strengthening of legal security to take place within the Union .
This is a general principal in the criminal process , one which helps to strengthen citizens ' rights and freedoms , particularly with regard to procedural guarantees . It is recognised both at international level and within the various legal systems of the Member States ; it aims to safeguard the right not to be tried or prosecuted twice for the same offence .
The aim of this framework decision is to provide the Member States with common legal provisions in relation to this principle , so as to ensure uniformity in the interpretation and implementation of those provisions .
This principle should , therefore , be applied horizontally across the Member States , so that citizens cannot be tried or prosecuted twice for the same offence .
. ( EL ) The Commission proposal forms part of the EU 's overall strategy to regulate aviation relations between the Community and third countries and to concentrate at Community level competences which have hitherto come under the jurisdiction of the Member States , thereby strengthening the process of swindling the Member States out of their capacity for independent negotiation and reducing their national sovereignty .
Following the referral by the ? U to the European Court and , essentially , the conviction of the eight Member States who have signed ' open skies ' type bilateral air service agreements with the USA , the ? U has found a first class opportunity to force the Member States to consent to its intervention and participation in what was hitherto the strictly national matter of negotiating and concluding or renegotiating existing bilateral air service agreements .
In this way , the ? U is literally ' butting into ' negotiations between Member States and third countries and this is fostering European integration and the interests of the European aviation monopolies to the detriment of the Member States ' capacity to negotiate independently with third countries in accordance with their national interests in order to achieve agreements which are beneficial to them in the field of their aviation relations .
We shall vote against this report because , despite any efforts to mitigate the adverse arrangements , it moves along the same lines as the Commission .
.
( PT ) While noting with approval the restrictions introduced by the rapporteur on the European Commission 's sphere of competence and freedom of action , limiting and adjusting its capacity to intervene in the area under consideration , I abstained from voting on this report because I believe that its conclusions stem from a legal decision with which I do not agree .
Indeed , this report appeared after the decisions of the Court of Justice , delivered in judgments of 5 November 2002 , were made public . These judgments resolved the positive conflict of jurisdiction between various Member States and the European Commission .
Observing the imprecise , even deficient nature of existing legislation in this area , the Court of Justice decided , as is becoming its custom and practice by force of repetition , to confer on the Commission the jurisdiction it claimed .
While this is nothing new , it is nevertheless deplorable that the principle of subsidiarity is for the most part interpreted in a concentrationary , upward-looking way by Community institutions , limiting the ability of Member States to draw up contracts independently , and thus running counter to its own aims and origins .
Mr President , Mr Watts ' report concerns an agreement on maritime transport between the European Union and China .
Of course , I voted for the motion and I support this extremely important agreement between Europe and China , but I still wish - and I would like to voice this desire once more - that , in promoting the trade and economies of other countries , Europe would concern itself with monitoring respect for human beings and democracy in these states .
China is still a communist state and it still has a long way to go : let us help it along the path of European democracy .
I voted in favour of this report because I feel that the European Community and its Member States will benefit from deeper and more varied trade relations with the People 's Republic of China , particularly as regards maritime transport .
In this connection , I applaud the undertaking to ensure non-discriminatory treatment of vessels flying the flag of the other party and to authorise the establishment of subsidiaries , branches or representative offices .
These measures will promote the strengthening of trade relations , as well as greater contact and understanding between civilisations , which could ultimately benefit both parties .
It is important , moreover , to retain the bilateral agreements previously concluded between Member States and the People 's Republic of China in all areas not covered by the agreement that is now proposed , as well as to retain such agreements in their entirety wherever their provisions are more favourable .
Mr President , when I think of Mr Radwan , who drafted this report , I see him as I saw Walt Disney 's Uncle Scrooge when I was a child - sailing through a pool of gold .
I do not know whether , in the heat of this past summer , the pool of money in which Mr Radwan bathed was full of euro or dollars , but the fact remains that this report provides excellent protection for the money which the European citizens deposit in their banks .
Once again , however , I have to speak on behalf of many pensioners , who ask me when they will have rules forcing banks to give pensioners more money and to be more willing to give loans to the elderly who , having few years left to live , have trouble obtaining loans because they do not have much time to repay them .
. ( PT ) This important report has earned my support .
There can be no doubt of the need to carry out more accurate assessments of the risks involved in the granting of loans by banks , which is why adopting a new agreement ( Basel II ) is important . Furthermore , it has been proved that the existence of clear international rules governing minimum capital requirements ( Basel I ) contributes to the security of financial and legal trade .
For these reasons , conducting an assessment of the new system is of the essence .
Indeed , as the rapporteur warns , we may be about to enter a procyclical phase characterised by limited bank lending and even by economic downturn . This situation may put a stop to the granting of bank loans , especially to small and medium-sized enterprises .
This will penalise entrepreneurs setting up in business most heavily , and could threaten the future potential of the European economy .
Without playing down the positive effects of the new agreement , therefore , ( in particular the prospect of more opportunities for the use of collateral ) , the Commission must , in the directive which follows the Basel II Agreement , pay close attention to the current state of the European economy and to the rapporteur 's calls for a spirit of greater democratic legitimacy in the drafting of these rules , as well as to his warnings about the possibility of unfair competitive advantages over European banks enjoyed by US financial institutions not covered by the agreement but operating within Europe .
I voted for the Mastorakis report , Mr President , because it is genuinely important and commendable for Europe , and therefore for Parliament too , to help the poorest regions to become wealthy regions , which , in turn , will thus be able to help the regions which are currently rich regions but will in the meantime have become poor .
I must point out , however , that it would be appropriate for Europe to define what a region is .
We know , for example , that , in many countries of Central Europe - countries which will become European Union states as of 1 May - regions do not exist .
There will be territorial boundaries marked on paper which are figurative , invented , not uniform de facto geographical realities .
Therefore , greater consideration needs to be given to defining what a region is in Europe .
. ( EL ) The enlargement of the European Union is creating a new actuality in the regional policy of the Union , which is why there is a need , among other things , to :
continue to distribute resources to regions in danger of exclusion not as a result of their actual progress , but as a result of the change in statistical conditions following the integration of the 10 new Member States of the ? U ;
continue to provide transitional support to regions which have exceeded 75 % on an actual , not just a statistical basis ;
reject the development of the nationalisation of regional policy as a result of the freezing of the budget at pre-enlargement levels ;
concentrate on underdeveloped and other acutely structurally disadvantaged regions ;
strengthen inter-regional cooperation ;
include the regional dimension in all EU policies .
Finally , the Mastorakis report includes worthwhile special proposals .
Basically , the June Movement believes that the structural development funds should be phased out .
Only to the extent that we do in actual fact have the structural development funds should the very small islands too be given their place .
Their particular handicap necessitates support for development processes that can increase settlement and employment , that is to say the promotion of a year-round society on the small islands too .
The June Movement is voting in favour of the report but would point out how grotesque it is that , at the same time as providing development aid , the EU is imposing upon the island societies , through its demands for tendering , a situation in which transport , which is absolutely crucial , is made unnecessarily more expensive .
.
( PT ) The European Union 's central aim should be to promote economic and social cohesion . As the Structural Funds are one of the principal tools for achieving that aim , they should be retained at their current levels .
The rapporteur makes some important points , with which we agree , especially :
his opposition to renationalising structural policy , which is a central plank of European unity , and his defence of least-favoured areas , which should remain the Structural Funds ' number one priority ;
his assertion that regions no longer eligible for Objective 1 as a result purely of the statistical effects of enlargement will not suffer from those statistical effects .
Any pertinent measures should therefore be taken to avoid this injustice , without introducing funding cuts for these areas .
As for the rapporteur 's recommendation that the current minimum level of 0.45 % of Community gross domestic product continue to be dedicated to the Structural Funds in the next period , the only problem is that this figure is clearly not enough to ensure economic and social cohesion , especially given the fact that enlargement will embrace countries whose per capita income is , on average , about 40 % of EU levels .
.
( PT ) I voted for this report , welcoming in particular the judicious inclusion of a set of ' warnings ' relating to current Union cohesion policy . If these warnings are heeded , they will enable us to take safer and more effective steps forward in harmonising the levels of development of the different regions of Europe .
In other words , it will enable us to pursue the ultimate aim of cohesion .
I hope that the Commission will consider in detail the proposals presented here , from the special needs of the Union 's ultra-peripheral regions ( where cohesion policy has already proved a valuable spur to development ) , to the need to simplify the rules for implementing regional policy ( by , for example , reducing the bureaucracy involved in payments ) , to rationalising aims depending on their actual effectiveness .
A particularly sensitive issue is that of artificial increases in the gross domestic product of certain regions of Europe as a direct result of the current enlargement process .
Many , including myself , have asked the European Commission to pay great attention to this area , and I trust that the positive responses I have received from the Commission to my written questions on this issue will come to form part of official policy in future .
.
( PT ) Regional and cohesion policies play an important role in European integration . Objective 1 regions should therefore remain the political and economic priority , and be given greater emphasis .
The regional inequalities emerging as a tangible result of cohesion policies call for a redefinition of those policies ' priorities .
Community policies linked to the Cohesion Fund must be gradually regionalised , and their renationalisation must be opposed .

) I envy Mr MacCormick , who has succeeded in saying so much in one minute to illustrate his vote , while I can only manage to say a few words , as on this occasion too , to justify why I voted for Mr Pomés Ruiz ' report on cohesion policy in the islands and regions with low population density .
With regard to the latter , the European Parliament is doing well to treat this issue as a matter of importance . In this connection , I would like to recall , in particular , the Sami people of Finland and Sweden .
As regards the islands , which genuinely have low population density and really are inconvenient places to live , I propose that the Member States increase the pensions of pensioners living on islands .
Greece , for example - the native land of our Commissioner , Mrs Anna Diamantopoulou - would see the population of its islands rise again unexpectedly if pensions were higher there .
Mr President , I would like to say that my first explanation of vote was a compendious explanation of my two votes .
I am delighted that you carried these reports on regional funds and I need say no more .
. ( EL ) Like my group , I voted in favour of the motion for a resolution on structurally disadvantaged regions .
The enlargement of the ? U with 10 new members and the stagnation of the Community budget at the same levels are giving rise to serious concerns about Union action in island regions , mountain regions and regions with a low population density in the Union .
It is important to maintain and strengthen ' cohesion policy ' and not to create a programming and financing split and inconsistency .
The political principle of ' solidarity ' must be fully respected in order to reduce the structural disadvantages of these regions .
The facility to increase funding to disadvantaged regions , depending on the extent of their handicaps , is particularly important .
Finally , I wish to emphasise the urgent need to stop soil erosion in island areas , such as the Aegean , with an extensive drywall network conservation programme .
Basically , the June Movement believes that the structural development funds should be phased out .
Only to the extent that we do in actual fact have the structural development funds should the very small islands too be given their place .
Their particular handicap necessitates support for development processes that can increase settlement and employment , that is to say the promotion of a year-round society on the small islands too .
The June Movement is voting in favour of the report but would point out how grotesque it is that , at the same time as providing development aid , the EU is imposing upon the island societies , through its demands for tendering , a situation in which transport , which is absolutely crucial , is made unnecessarily more expensive .
- ( FR ) This society of ours , which is fundamentally unequal owing to the inequality between social classes , also hides a multitude of other inequalities .
Thus certain regions which , owing to their geographical position , do not offer every advantage from the point of view of capitalist profit , inevitably receive less investment .
The advocates of the liberal economy do not , themselves , have any means of going some way towards compensating for this inequality , other than to appeal to a state or to the European institutions , which boils down to the same thing .
We would not be against this type of compensation if it relieved , for the working classes , the handicaps resulting from the actual operation of the capitalist economy .
However , the destructive forces of the capitalist economy are more powerful than the derisory resolutions of the European Parliament .
Even if subsidies are approved for less-favoured regions , at the end of the day it will not necessarily be those regions and their working classes who benefit from them .
This has been proved precisely by the ultra-peripheral regions which the report presents as a model for isolated mountain regions .
In spite of aid and subsidies , both national and European , Réunion , Guadeloupe and Martinique , to name but a few , still have a particularly high level of unemployment and particularly low wages .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
.
( IT ) It must be clarified once and for all what is meant by disadvantaged when the term is applied to an island as such and not just to the outermost regions . This is a concept which has already been enshrined in Declaration No 30 , annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam , although I regret to say that the different translations of the document are extremely misleading .

One way of boosting the development of structurally disadvantaged regions could be to make greater and more effective use of the Structural Funds . This depends , not least , on the provision of much more information , a more streamlined , flexible procedure and a more rigorous assessment of the quality of projects and interventions .
I would therefore like to express my appreciation of the Pomés Ruiz report , which has the merit of portraying the light and the shade - more shade than light - of a situation which , with the basic premises having been identified , now calls for financial commitment , more courage and political will following specific recognition of ongoing structural disadvantages , the nature of which has thus far been wholly unclear .
Hence the importance of a substantial change , of acting upon this recognition through the convergence of other policies .
I would cite , in particular , the need to activate the appropriate derogations provided for in Article 87 of the EC Treaty on state aid , which are essential if we are to close an economic divide which has grown up and is the result , as well as of geographical handicaps , of the short-sightedness of the ruling classes , including the Community , over a number of decades .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the continuation of the debate on Mr Poignant 's report .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , like all the problems linked to the world of work in the European Union , employees in the maritime sector also constitute a problem which cannot be ignored .
Due to a lack of skilled labour at national and Community levels , shipowners are being forced to recruit crew members from third countries .
In the interests of making this process easier , the Commission has accordingly pushed ahead with a programme for training third-country crew members and for recognition on the part of Member States of qualifications issued by third countries .
In this connection , it should be said that more vocational training means enhanced safety at sea and less shipping accidents .
Bearing in mind that many shipping accidents are caused by human error , it is essential to ensure a high standard of training for the crews of European vessels .
The proposal now under consideration stipulates , for example , that English should be used as the working language when a ship 's crew and the authorities on land have no other common language .
I believe that before a request is made to recognise training in a third country , evidence should therefore be provided of a lack of European personnel available to perform the duties in question .
Without detracting from the merits of the proposed training scheme , I would like to take this opportunity to draw the attention of the Commission and of Parliament to the importance of continuing vocational training for third-country and European seamen .
I therefore agree with the rapporteur , Mr Poignant , on the need to make the maritime professions more attractive , as a means of combating unemployment and boosting human resources in a sector in crisis .
To my mind , the European Union lacks a plan of action designed to promote these professions .
Madam President , I should like to thank Mr Poignant and all the honourable Members who took part in the debate .
The amendments proposed confirm the Commission 's approach to the specific procedure for recognising seafarers ' certificates and coincide to a significant degree with the Council 's position .
The Commission is prepared to accept almost half the amendments passed by Parliament , which really do improve the proposal .
The Commission , however , cannot agree to the amendments introducing the possibility of withdrawing the recognition of individual maritime training institutes in third countries , namely Amendments Nos 3 , 12 , 15 , 17 and 20 .
This action would be neither practical nor productive .
The Commission is in favour of overall and comprehensive recognition of the systems and procedures of third countries which guarantee the same educational value of individual institutes .
The Commission greatly appreciates Parliament 's efforts to examine the withdrawal of these amendments .
On the same subject , the Commission can accept Amendment No 19 , which has been amended slightly by the Council , making provision for a mechanism for warning a third country if there are indications that an individual training institute no longer meets the requirements of the STCW Convention , which is the basic training and certification convention .
In all events , the Commission rejects Amendment No 24 proposing to annul the mandatory use of English for communications between ship and shore whenever the communicating parties do not speak the same language .
This provision , which has been endorsed by the Council , simply aligns Community legislation with the relevant requirements of the SOLAS Convention , which has applied throughout the world since July 2002 .
I believe that , in order to avoid ambiguities during communications between ship and shore , the parties directly involved in the communication should communicate in the language with which they are most familiar .
Thus , if the parties do not speak the same language , they must communicate in English ; otherwise they will not be able to understand each other .
In addition , I should like to thank Parliament for its very interesting amendments as regards the introduction of a European certificate of conformity for certificates of competency and endorsements and recognition by the Member States , namely Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 6 .
This is indeed a valuable suggestion and the Commission will incorporate it within the framework of a special legislative proposal on the Member States ' certificates of competency , which will call for the facility of recognition of certificates between the Member States and , at the same time , will safeguard compliance with the applicable requirements .
In addition to this , I should like in particular to draw your attention to the Council conclusions on improving Community shipping and seafaring professions approved by the Ministers for Transport in Luxembourg this year .
The Council called on the Commission to submit a legislative proposal on the recognition of certificates between Member States .
The Commission will submit a legislative proposal on this matter in the immediate future ; consequently , the amendments can be withdrawn because the subject will be specifically covered in the coming year .
I should also like to draw your attention to Amendment No 16 requiring the Member States to inform the Commission and the other Member States before withdrawing any endorsement confirming the recognition of certificates issued by a third country .
The Commission believes that , given the urgency of such situations , the Member States should be given the opportunity to withdraw their endorsement even before informing the other Member States .
The Council agrees with this view and we really do believe that it is important for Parliament to decide to re-examine this amendment .
Last but not least , I fully agree with Amendments Nos 7 and 13 , as amended by the Council , whereby third countries will be reassessed in order to verify if they have taken adequate measures against fraud involving certificates .
It really is of major importance to prevent fraud in connection with certificates of competency and several MEPs have already stressed this need in connection with this issue .
We are certain that the European Parliament will support the Commission 's views on the above amendments .
Madam President , honourable Members , if this directive is approved at first reading , we shall soon have at our disposal an effective and reliable system for receiving foreign seafarers on our ships .
Thank you , Mrs Scallon
The debate is closed
The vote will take place at 12 noon tomorrow .
Madam President , simplifying and updating this regulation is of major importance in promoting the mobility of workers in the European Union .
I would remind the European Parliament that , eighteen months ago , a specific action plan promoting mobility was agreed and a number of these important promotional measures concerned the need for coordination and cooperation between social security systems , but not just that .
The question of mobility is directly linked to competitiveness , to job creation and to social cohesion and it essentially forms the precondition to a real European job market .
During the previous years ' application of this regulation , its provisions have proven to be exceptionally complicated , long-winded and unwieldy .
Thus , the system no longer responds to new developments in the Member States ' social security systems or to the new mobility conditions in the European Union .
In other words , this regulation urgently needs to be simplified and updated and this is precisely the aim of the Commission proposal .
Simplification will result in Community legislation which is more comprehensible to the citizens for whose sake it is created .
As regards updating , I should like to highlight three basic amendments .
The first concerns the personal aspect of the regulation .
The proposed regulation will apply not only to workers who move but also to all citizens of the European Union covered by the social security legislation of a Member State .
Freedom of movement cannot only benefit workers ; it must benefit all European citizens .
The proposed regulation , and this is the second amendment , aims to broaden the material aspect of the application of coordination rules .
Thus , the social insurance sectors include new forms of benefits , such as early retirement benefits .
The third important amendment proposed by the Commission concerns unemployment benefits for cross-frontier workers .
The Commission proposes that cross-frontier workers should receive benefits from the state in which they last worked .
This is important in order to put an end to the complicated and unsatisfactory distinction between full and part-time employment of both typical and atypical cross-frontier workers .
Every year the Commission receives thousands of protests from workers who work in one country and live in another and who are frequently subject to discrimination due to the inefficient coordination of social security systems .
Thus , we believe that this proposal will help not only to update the system , which is necessary , but also to simplify it , so that it functions more smoothly both for the citizens and the Member States .
Madam President , today 's regulation is a milestone in our history .
We want to modernise , we want to simplify and we have been working on that for more than 10 years now .
It looks as if we are now nearing the end today , in the first reading .
Please excuse me , Mrs Lambert - I would normally thank the rapporteur first , but this time I would like to commend the Commission services , firstly Director Rob Cornelissen , who has not only convinced the Council but has also supported us with his advice and actions , and our other colleagues and in particular Herwig Verschueren , who also made a major contribution .
That is not all , Madam President ; I will be coming back to that shortly .
Amendments have been submitted by all groups in Parliament .
What we want is for this regulation to be ready in time for the coming enlargement .
That is absolutely essential .
Furthermore , the social security regulation is being established through the codecision procedure , while the Council is demanding unanimity .
The IGC changes that , and quite rightly so .
I am now going to list its blessings .
The scope of applicability of the regulation has been extended .
Everyone living in the territory of the Member State legally will now be treated equally .
In other words , they will have the same rights and obligations as citizens of the Member State .
Secondly , acquired rights will be preserved for all time .
The export of rights in the context of social security has now been established clearly and unambiguously for the first time , even if only certain periods are insured in some Member States .
Thirdly , the rules on pensions are being greatly simplified .
The arrangements for early retirement , which have caused problems for so many people , will also , where such problems still exist , be included in the coordination .
Fourthly , there is more clarity regarding the rights of people who fall ill abroad .
If acute help is needed abroad , then everyone has the same rights .
Furthermore , we would very much welcome an amendment in which the requirement for permission to go abroad for medical treatment is amended to reflect the most recent decisions of the Court .
In other words - incidentally , there is a grammatical error in the English text - no special permission is needed for outpatient care , although it would be needed for in-patient care .
Cross-border workers . The retired cross-border worker maintains his rights in the country in which he worked .
What is new is that cross-border workers ' family members are also getting rights .
Unemployment . Opportunities for the unemployed are being improved ; the unemployed will be able to look for work abroad under certain conditions without losing benefits .
Incidentally , my colleagues and I have submitted an amendment on that point ; I would like the Council to say a unanimous " yes ' to an amendment that gives Luxembourg a transitional period of five years , as it is particularly affected by the new regulation because of the large number of cross-border workers there .
They will then have the opportunity to adapt to the new benefits system in the country in which they are working and availability for the labour market there .
There are also amendments on the provision of living allowances , and so on .
The new text for Article No 55 - which Mrs Lambert has already mentioned - is much better and I hope that it will receive support .
The eighth point ; people with disabilities will no longer lose their benefits when they move to a Member State .
I am very pleased about that , especially in the Year of the Disabled .
The ninth point ; not immediately obvious but nonetheless of importance is the paragraph that establishes that where problems exist , the Member States can no longer drag these out but are required to find actual solutions within a specific time .
Two brief points ; the first is the question of homosexual marriage , an issue that has been much discussed .
Is the Commissioner of the opinion that the coordination regulation is the right place to compel the thirteen Member States that do not recognise the marriage of homosexual couples and have not incorporated it in their family law to do so via the regulation ?
Would Amendment No 20 not cause the regulation to run into problems ?
I do have sympathy for Amendment No 49 .
Moreover , we have not sorted out a problem that occurs where a social security system is subject to the country of employment principle , but tax legislation is not in step with it .
That is another point where I would like to see a logical arrangement .
All in all , however , I am very satisfied with the proposal .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , making the European labour market possible is in fact the goal of all the Member States , and , since 1971 , we have also had an instrument for this purpose , that being Regulation No 1408 .
How , though , do things stand in practice ?
A number of Member States have set up various obstacles and allowed them to remain in place .
That is why I am glad that the long-overdue reform of Regulation 1408 is at last on the table .
Had it not been for this nonsensical unanimity rule in the Council , it would have been there much sooner .
That notwithstanding , we have proved that we are capable of coping , shortly before the end of the parliamentary term , not only with enlargement , but also with giving a social policy reform greater depth .
The first thing to be said about it is that it makes everything simpler , which is what both the public and Parliament want , and it also incorporates rulings by the European Court of Justice on such things as the entitlement to medical services .
Secondly , there are also qualitative reforms , and this House and the committee have encouraged and emboldened the Commission to formulate these as such .
They include , for example , the right of unemployed people to remain in Europe for up to six months for the purpose of seeking work ; this involves family members and people who are no longer involved in economic activity being included in the scope of the Regulation .
It involves all these things , because we are of course inviting to Europe not only workers but also their families .
Like Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , I am especially glad that we have made a special arrangement for people with disabilities , something that the Council was initially unwilling to accept .
I hope that we will now be able to reach a compromise .
What is important is that nobody who wants to avail themselves of the mobility option and whom we wish to support in their desire to do so , should fall through the social security system 's net .
It is also important that we should reiterate that this is about coordination and about the acknowledgement of entitlements , and not about the transfer of social benefits from one state to another .

There were also , of course , a number of conflicts - not with Mrs Lambert , whom I thank for her cooperation , and nor even that much with the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , apart from the point relating to families , which Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has just mentioned .
Some Member States take a very narrow view of what constitutes a family - I would say they have a twentieth-century view of it - whilst others have a more modern approach in line with the twenty-first .
What we , in fact , regard as important is that this definition , when we decide on one , will have no legal significance in terms of the Regulation , and that we will not be enforcing some sort of acceptance of a lifestyle on any Member State .
For that reason , we should perhaps show a bit more tolerance .
My final point is that it matters a great deal both to me and to my group that we should now - great and important though this reform is - keep this Regulation open-ended .
There will without doubt be more cases in which we will have to get involved , particularly when we are joined by ten new Member States next year , when we will gain experience and perhaps have to make more changes .
It is for this reason that we also support the Commission 's idea of flexible action in areas that are left open and also of regulating those matters that have not been sorted out , such as taxation and the occasional possibility of double taxation - which will perhaps happen in the next legislative period .
Madam President , I too can say that I am delighted with the Commission 's attempt to simplify the promotion of mobility , for that is really what this is about .
We all want citizens to be able to really demand justice in the free movement of workers .
This has not been a success to date .
Just one look at the statistics shows us that only around 2 % of the citizens work in another country .
However , I should in this respect also like to deliver a few notes of discord which do not concern Parliament .
Once again , we have managed to work well with the fellow MEPs .
As Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has stated , work with the European Commission was also perfectly feasible .
I did , however , see it as a sword of Damocles that the European Council is threatening to call it a day after all if we do not bring our requirements under control .
I find this hard to take , certainly where frontier work is concerned .
I should like to underpin this with a few examples .
In my area , which is between the Belgian border zone - in which I live - and the Netherlands , the opportunity is currently presenting itself to deploy 800 workers at a large company , Volvo , just across the border .
People will certainly be recruited from my area .
I still , however , hesitate to advise people to actually do this unless 100 % guarantees can be given concerning sound and proper social security .
I find it impossible to explain to , for example , a 62-year old lady who has become disabled , that she will lose her disability pension in Belgium and will not qualify for old-age pension in the Netherlands until she reaches the age of 65 .
These are all situations that cannot be accounted for because there is insufficient coordination at the moment .
For that reason , we have all joined forces and tabled yet a few more amendments to avoid scenarios of this kind in future .
With these amendments , we want to force the institutions and the Member States to coordinate their efforts more effectively .
The amendments tabled by us , fortunately by a number of groups together , pertain to very specific cases which often affect frontier workers .
This receives my support .
In my view , it is unacceptable for the Member States not to be able , and willing , to acknowledge this problem .
Surely we cannot have a situation where a united Europe is being sabotaged because a number of national officials and politicians treat frontier work as a marginal issue .
I am therefore pleased that in its proposal , the European Commission is making every effort to enforce cooperation by the Member States .
As soon as this regulation has been adopted , I hope that it will actually be enforced , and I would urge the Commission to see that it is .
Madam President , first of all , I should like to express my thanks to the Commission .
Two names have been mentioned : Mrs Diamantopoulou and Mrs Lambert , sitting next to her .
I should like to take this opportunity to join in thanking them .
As Mrs Oomen-Ruijten said , if you want to assess something in a historical framework , this can be done in two ways .
Historically , we have been given a patchwork of provisions , a patchwork of adaptations , of a coordinating directive , No 1408 / 71 , with its later amendments .
We also have a catalogue of problems .
It is then very good if we can make a little progress .
This could represent a historical step forward .
The historical vantage point should perhaps be a next step , but I shall come to this in a moment .
I should first like to take stock of what we all have actually managed to achieve .
I think that it is quite favourable in itself .
It is clear , as Mrs Oomen-Ruijten stated before , that we have achieved a number of things that are already acceptable to the Council and to the Commission .
These issues concern , for example , the inclusion of stateless persons and refugees , or regulations , or improvements should I say , in the field of bureaucratic obstacles to frontier work , and we could go on like this for a while .
Quite a few problems nevertheless remain , as everyone knows .
Only 2 % of the European population carries out cross-border work in some form or other .
If you engage in conversation with frontier workers , as has already been mentioned in the form of personal recollections , they will tell you that the problems know no bounds .
We are also keeping a few issues open , and I think that we should take the following historical steps at some point .
If we only consider the definition of families , then we will not solve the issue ; we have to try to solve this by referring to the Santini report .
Or if we look at a number of other issues related to family reunifications and benefits , etc . , then one thing is very clear .
We are now talking about improving the coordination of these systems ; we are talking about modernising them and we are doing this against the backdrop of workers ' mobility in Europe and a better-functioning labour market .
In future , and this would be a historical step , we will still need to move towards some form of harmonisation , because we will otherwise fail to solve other problems , as the social security systems are under pressure in every Member State and , in actual fact , come into conflict with each other , which leads to the further development of this patchwork .
I would like to see an end put to this .
Madam President , of the four freedoms pertaining to the internal market , the free movement of persons , and particularly of workers , is the one that has been realised the least .
One can dream of greater labour mobility and of lifting internal borders for those looking for work .
For those who are actually involved in movement of this kind , the reality is often a nightmare .
Few feel up to the task .
Labour mobility in Europe is far too rare and far too little attention is given to those who do take the plunge .
To the politicians in the capital cities , these people are often treated as a marginal issue that takes place at the national fringes , away from the hub .
We , European politicians and policy makers , often hear the comment that we should not get involved in social security because it is a national issue .
We should only confine ourselves to Regulation 1408 / 71 .
This Regulation , as its name suggests , is more than 30 years old and has become more ambiguous as time has gone on .
Moreover , it took five years before there was some kind of agreement within the Council about the simplification proposal that the Commission submitted in 1998 .
This has been a laborious process and has not by any means reached completion , but , fortunately , clear guidelines have now been drafted for it .
Since these have already been mentioned by others , I will not repeat them .
I greatly value the work that the Commission and the Council 's working parties have carried out and , needless to say , also our rapporteur , Jean Lambert , who has entered into very extensive consultations with these other bodies .
Nevertheless , many problems still persist .
I have the impression that we have solved many of those problems thanks to our amendments that have often been drafted in line with the Commission and the Council .
However , there are two other important bottlenecks that affect the practical side of things .
First of all , it is important to know what Member States will actually introduce within the scope of the Regulation and what exceptions and excuses they will dream up in order to circumvent the provisions .
For that reason , the application regulation and annexes are of major importance .
These have not been presented to us to date , but are being prepared in the Council .
In my view , we should most definitely take this into consideration when we settle on our final opinion .
As far as this is concerned , the Member States have been warned and , together with our colleagues in the national parliaments , we will keep a close eye on our ministers and council representatives in the process .
Secondly , the problems in practice often touch upon other rules and regulations which do not strictly fall within the scope of the Regulation .
This is in the case where , for example , in social security regulations , age limits are used or definitions for people for whom derived rights exist , that are based on family law in the Member States .
Or something which is quite common in the Netherlands , combinations of general social security regulations which serve as a basis , alongside additional regulations that fall outside of the scope of the Regulation .
Fiscal regulations are another major problem area . European coordination rules are lacking .
There are only bilateral agreements between Member States , and these are often at odds with these fiscal regulations and fail to comply with the rules in the Regulation .
This is a huge problem , particularly for the frontier workers who live in one EU country and work in another .
The Commission has assured us that those problems cannot all be solved within the Regulation and this is why we have shifted a number of amendments from the articles to the recitals . This , however , does not mean that the Commission and the Council should take them less seriously .
I should like to add this quite emphatically .
On these points too , I expect the Commission - this may be a new Commission - to actually take powerful initiatives in the fullness of time , because it is at least as important to solve these problems as those in the current Regulation .
Madam President , I often visit businesses and people on the border between Denmark and Germany and hear again and again about the problems of living on one side of the border and working on the other side .
It means , indeed , that many people do not even try to do so . In actual fact , there are only 1 000 people who commute across the Danish / German border in spite of the fact that unemployment south of the border stands at 12 % , and north of the border is as low as 6 % .
There are obviously linguistic barriers to taking up work on the other side of the border , but the different ways in which the tax and social security systems are set up are also of very great importance .
What of course distinguishes Denmark is that we fund our social security systems across the border via the general taxation system , while in the rest of the EU more use is made of earmarked social security contributions . This has a role to play in creating part of the problem we experience .
I should not , in a way , mind it if we in Denmark were to obtain reforms whereby future payments were better at reflecting the individual 's responsibility for the common good and whereby the costs of social security arrangements were made clearer , that is to say through an increase in the number of earmarked contributions .
Such reforms could also reduce the problems posed by the Danish social security system in relation to other countries ' systems .
That is not , of course , at present on the agenda , however . We are concerned here with simplifying the coordination of the social security arrangements between the Member States , and there is a great need to simplify these very complex rules which , over the years , have become progressively more complex .
I should like to thank Mrs Lambert for the work she has done .
I am in favour of Parliament seeking to cooperate with the Council on these issues and seeking to work in tandem with it .
We must not delay the reforms unnecessarily .
I believe it would be easier to get the reforms through before , rather than after , enlargement . We must not , therefore , be so focused upon the ideal that we fail to obtain a workable solution right now .
Madam President , in order to safeguard the freedom of movement of persons within the European Union , it is essential to safeguard their social security rights .
The work done by the rapporteur , Mrs Lambert , is thus of the greatest importance , and I congratulate her .
The fact is that nobody should fall outside the existing social security systems of the European Union , including third-country nationals , though that issue has been dealt with elsewhere .
I also believe , however , that there should not be a comprehensive list of social security regimes covered by coordination in this case . This will give us room to make additions later on , as and when problems arise .
I would like to emphasise that the Commission 's own proposals and innovations , aimed at updating the regulation ( which , as we know , dates from 1971 ) , are to be welcomed . We must go further , though , without forgetting the regulation 's four principles , as the rapporteur points out .
I would lay particular emphasis on certain proposals aimed at improving the draft presented to Parliament , above all : the recognition that people leaving employment in one Member State for family reasons should not consequently lose the right to unemployment benefit in their new country of residence ; the extension of the provisions to refugees , stateless persons and their families resident in Member States ; definitions of frontier workers , refugees and stateless persons and their rights , although those rights should also be extended to their families ; recognition of the rights of retired frontier workers , the extension of the concept of the family and the inclusion of paternity leave ; the improved situation of people with disabilities , which has already been mentioned , preventing them from temporary loss of entitlement to disability benefits or from having to claim those benefits afresh ; the opportunity , also afforded here , for two or more Member States to conclude conventions with each other based on the principles and in the spirit of the regulation .
I can only regret , however , the various attempts to undermine the social security systems of different Member States , mine in particular . This could jeopardise the true reach of several of the rights we are upholding here .
That is why I am calling for these proposals to be taken into account , and also for all attempts to undermine the social security systems of the Member States be reviewed .
Madam President , I should like to extend a warm thanks to the rapporteur for the work she has done .
I have often thought that this report was going to outlast her mandate , for that is nearly how long it has been on the table .
This was not due to a lack of diligence on her part , for that was , in fact , immense , but rather due to insufficient diligence on the part of the Council .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten rightly pointed out that it was not as a result of any lack of diligence on the part of the Commission .
This suggests that we are dealing with a very difficult issue politically speaking .
Why ?
Because a great deal of money is involved . That is the first reason .
My second point is that , in everyday life , the Member States do not for one moment consider the people that might break out of their own mould from time to time .
They actually assume that everyone remains in their own country , from the day they were born until they die .
They , in fact , find it highly inconvenient if that status quo is upset when people move abroad .
They may be prepared to take certain measures , but as few and as little as possible , and they then try to snatch back as much as they can .
If there is any bother with the budget , then those are the people who are tackled first .
That is why the Regulation is also used to limit rights rather than to increase them .
Anyone who would like to study this more in-depth should come and have a look at what has happened in the Netherlands and Belgium on this score , where neither country is particularly blameless .
Finally , I should like to raise another matter , which is the issue over which there is still a difference of opinion , namely the issue of tax and social security .
In fact , I think that Mrs Jensen has already made a very valid point on this matter .
She also gave one of the best examples in Denmark , because all social security over there is covered by taxes .
What is annoying is that in some cases , people pay taxes in one country and social security contributions in another .
As , for example , social security contributions are relatively high in Belgium and non-existent in Denmark , at least in the form of contributions , you are extremely unfortunate if you pay tax in Denmark and social security in Belgium .
If the reverse is true , of course , you are extremely fortunate .
You then pay relatively little in taxes in Belgium and receive an awful lot of social benefits in Denmark .
That is therefore a matter which needs re-addressing and which remains an issue .
This is not harmonisation , but it is important that the two types of taxes should be treated in the same way , at least in one and the same country , and this is an issue which really deserves an all-out effort on our part .
If we do not solve it , we will never bring about a sound labour market in Europe .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot fail to congratulate and sincerely thank Mrs Lambert , who has succeeded in bringing to debate this document which we have been waiting to discuss for five years now .
For a long time now , thanks to a previous amendment of Regulation 1408 , many pensioners who are in financial difficulties due to illness or disability have been unable to draw their pension or illness allowance when they change their country of residence within the 15 Member States of the European Union .
Amendment No 42 to Article 27a of Mrs Lambert 's report is concerned with addressing this issue , stating that , until the new state of residence starts to pay the allowance provided for by its own law , it is the previous state of residence which is to pay this allowance until the disabled person starts to draw it from the new state of residence .

The amendment to Article 55 , however , tabled by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , Mr Pronk , Mrs Lambert herself , Mr Hughes and others , states clearly that , if the new state of residence - France , for example - does not provide for such allowances , the allowance is not to be paid .
I therefore fear that , although I do not believe this is the wish of the majority of the Parliamentary committee or of Parliament , if these amendments are both adopted , the citizens of any Member State moving within the European Union will continue to be without a pension .
I hope I have misinterpreted the intention conveyed by the Italian translation .
I reserve the right to clarify this point with the rapporteur and I hope that the regulation will be a genuine step forward in the protection of European workers who move within the Community .
Madam President , we have all of us said today that there is a sound basis for revising Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 .
We all know people who have run into difficulties because they have taken up work in two different countries , and it is therefore crucial to emphasise that people have not , as a matter of simple fact , been given the right promised to them since the Common Market was founded .
It is therefore quite natural that we should break down the barriers that exist .
On the other hand , we must also acknowledge that there is probably no regulation that has been more demonised than this one .
Over the years , opponents of the EU in my own , and other , countries have used it to give people the impression that our social security would be harmonised , that we should be forced to change our social security systems or even that our national pension schemes would be abolished .
I must of course deplore the fact that these people have not appeared in the House today to engage in this debate .
I should like to emphasise today that the Danish Social Democrats are not , in general , afraid of freedom of movement , and I certainly do not think that freedom of movement would undermine national social security arrangements , even if these would then apply to a wider circle of people .
Neither practical experience nor calculations show that there would be hordes of people suddenly wanting to migrate .
On the other hand , I also think it important for us to understand that , if unintended consequences arise - if , for example , too many contributions leave the country or if social security arrangements are shamelessly exploited - then we should definitely not look passively on but take action straight away .
This is emphasised by Amendments Nos 10 and 52 , in which we say that our countries can establish bilateral contacts - of the kind with which we are already familiar - and that we must talk to each other if someone runs into difficulties .
That would , of course , also prevent all forms of fraud .

It is important for the Commissioners also today to emphasise at least three things in addition to what has been said in the House : firstly , that there is no question of harmonisation ; secondly , that we shall not accept any form of deterioration whatsoever and shall step in if we see the systems weakened ; and , thirdly , that we shall not accept unintended consequences and fraud . A fourth thing also to emphasise , of course , is that we cannot accept , as a result of this proposal , any impairment of the schemes we already have .
I think that is very important . I do not myself believe that this will happen .
I do not for a moment believe that migration will be on a sufficiently large scale . I do , however , believe it important for people to have this emphasised to them by the Commissioner responsible , and I should be delighted , Commissioner , if you could do this for us today .
Madam President , I should first like to explain that I am speaking on behalf of my colleague Mr Manuel Pérez Álvarez , who has been unable to reach the House as yet .
I must congratulate the rapporteur on her report .
In our view , the principle of free movement of persons between Member States is as important as the principles like the free movement of goods or of services . It could even be deemed more important than the latter .
The free movement of persons differs from the other principles referred to in that it may be restricted , prevented or subject to conditions if the right to social security of persons moving within the European Union are not respected .
Article 34 in Chapter IV of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , entitled Solidarity , lays down clearly the right to protection in a range of cases . These include maternity , illness , industrial accidents , dependency , old age and loss of employment , in accordance with Community law and national laws and practices .
Article 34 also lays down that everyone residing or moving legally within the European Union is entitled to social security benefits and social advantages in accordance with Community law and national laws and practices .
We see the guiding principles of the regulation as being equality of treatment for citizens of other states and for national workers , regardless of whether the workers are self-employed or not , aggregating contribution periods in various countries if necessary , banning multiple payments and allowing social security to be transferred to other countries . This is what will promote freedom of movement and family reunification .
It follows that we believe the proposed regulation should be welcomed .
It will facilitate more widespread support and simplify earlier provisions .
In addition , it is not intended as a replacement for national legislation . Rather , it aims to coordinate national systems in order to provide a better service and improve the support available to the citizens of Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Regulation 1408 / 71 has been around for more than three decades and was created in order to coordinate Member State legislation in the field of social security .
Its main aim is to ensure that workers moving within European Union territory do not suffer disadvantages in their social security rights .
Over the years , various amendments have been made to this regulation that have made it extremely complex and some very positive developments have taken place in the social security systems of the various Member States , including my own .
These facts demonstrate the urgent need for this regulation to be reformed .
The Commission 's proposal , which is to be welcomed , clearly sets out the aim to be attained : to coordinate social security systems with the prospect of enlargement in mind .
This involves coordination and not harmonisation .
The intention is to modernise and simplify the regulation and , in this context , a significant step forwards has been taken in various areas , in particular with regard to the rights of the unemployed , pensioners and frontier workers and their families .
The list of types of social security covered by coordination has also been extended and measures are set out for solving the problem of double taxation .
The rapporteur has really shown great commitment to the work on reforming this regulation and I congratulate her on this .
I must state , however , that some of the proposals she has put forward raise difficulties , which meant that the PPE members of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs had to vote against the report .
I shall confine myself to discussing one of them , which concerns the definition of the family : Each Member State recognises a particular concept of the family in accordance with its national legal system . It would not , therefore , be legitimate to impose any type of family model on the Member States .
The next item is the report ( A5-0228 / 2003 ) by Mrs Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on a Commission communication to the Council and the Parliament : Mid-term review of the fourth fisheries protocol between the EU and Greenland [ COM ( 2002 ) 697 - 2003 / 2035 ( INI ) ] .
- ( ES ) Madam President , Greenland is an autonomous region of Denmark .
It was part of the Community between 1973 and 1984 . In 1984 a referendum was held in Greenland and 52 % of its inhabitants expressed their wish to withdraw from the Union .
Thereafter , relations with Greenland have been governed by the Greenland Treaty . This treaty accords Greenland a similar status to that enjoyed by 19 other territories , namely Overseas Country and Territory status .
As a result fisheries products from Greenland may be exported freely to the Community in return for a favourable fisheries agreement . The latter was originally intended to last 10 years but has been extended several times .
The 2002 fourth protocol provided for the mid-term review currently under way . The review is justified because of the lengthy period of time involved and the significant sums at stake .
The scope of the communication from the Commission extends beyond matters relating exclusively to fisheries . This is because relations with Greenland involve many other issues .
The Committee on Fisheries therefore believes Parliament must take the initiative and draft a general report dealing with political relations , development aid to Greenland and fisheries relations . The report should be set in the broader context of the Arctic dimension .
( Madam President , I must point out that I am unable to see on the screen an indication of the number of minutes elapsed since I took the floor .
I would like to know how much time I still have available . )
As I was saying , in addition to dealing with relations between Greenland and the Union , the communication from the Commission contains a review of the current state of the agreement . Any amendment would have to be approved by the competent local authorities in Greenland .
Consequently a thorough review is suggested , but only after 2006 when the agreement expires .
A mere adjustment is proposed for the intervening period .
Nonetheless , it is important to bear in mind criticisms made in the House and by the Court of Auditors . We therefore believe that even in the case of minor adjustments , the principles of good governance , transparency and optimal use of Community financial resources should be applied here and now .
There is no need to wait until 2006 to do so .
The conclusions reached by my colleague Mrs Langenhagen on the fourth protocol two years ago are still perfectly valid , as far as the mid-term review stage is concerned . There is a need to take issues other than fisheries out of the agreement .
It is also necessary to keep the European Parliament informed on the use of fishing rights and to promote the establishment of joint venture companies . In addition to promoting joint venture companies , the Committee on Fisheries is now calling for the promotion of temporary relationships between undertakings .
Such arrangements are more flexible .
In this case they are better suited also to the current situation of both the European Community 's fisheries sector , and the fisheries sector in Greenland . The Committee on Fisheries is also calling for the cost of the agreement to be shared fairly , as is the case for agreements for the southern regions where the cost is divided equitably between the shipowners and the Community budget .
I note , Commissioner , that the Commission has not even suggested this for the current adjustment .
Further , the reason adduced does not seem to me to be particularly convincing . The reference to the small size of the administration in Greenland does not really provide adequate justification .
The European Union pays Greenland a substantial sum each year in return for this agreement .
The amount involved is EUR 42.82 million per year . This makes it the second most expensive agreement of all , after that with Mauritania .
The price is actually exorbitant if it is also taken into account that at least EUR 14 million is not linked in any way to payment for fishing opportunities or the development of the fisheries sector .
The fishing opportunities relating to the remaining EUR 28 million have a very low take up . Only the German , Danish , British and French fleets have quotas .
No other fleets are allowed to make use of fishing opportunities paid for but not fished . This is certainly not the case under the southern agreements .

Commissioner Fischler , we are delighted that this taboo was broken in the agreement reached between the Commission and the Government of Greenland in June . We welcome the fact that other fleets will be allowed access to fish for certain species and for experimental fishing activities , even if access is restricted .
There is actually no provision for the promotion of joint venture companies or of temporary relationships between undertakings . Arrangements of this nature could prove very beneficial for Greenland , given that its economy is stagnating .
They could also be beneficial to the Community . EUR 6 million was set aside for this purpose under the previous agreement .
My fifth comment is that the agreement includes quotas for species such as cod and Norway haddock that are almost non-existent in Greenland waters . The Community pays for these although nothing is caught .
We welcome the fact that the negotiators agreed on more realistic quotas in June .
This means there will be increased opportunities for catching halibut , shrimps and queen crab . We are glad the negotiators made an effort to do away with the so-called paper fish .
My sixth comment is that the Community 's financial contribution has increased for each successive protocol . At the same time , the fishing opportunities have decreased .
Viewed in this light , the agreement is not sustainable . Further , the protocol is inconsistent , as Mrs Langenhagen stated at the time .
In conclusion , the Commission is certainly to be congratulated on reconsidering the current arrangements with Greenland .
It is encouraging that sensible steps have been taken .
I mentioned some of them .
They are part of the agreement reached with Greenland in June . Nonetheless , we believe that the Commission should be more ambitious and strive to introduce radical changes as of now .
I assume the hope is that this fisheries agreement will cease to violate the principles we hold most dear . I refer to the principles underpinning Community financial provisions , namely transparency and optimal use of financial resources .
More than a simple cosmetic review is needed .
There is every reason why the European Union should support Greenland .
A fisheries agreement is not the best way for the Union to do so , however .
I made this clear to the Fisheries Minister for Greenland at our meeting here in Strasbourg last July . Greenland is the key to the development of the Union 's Arctic dimension .
It would therefore be appropriate to consider financing areas of that relationship other than fishing with recourse to heading 4 of the financial perspective . Another option would be to finance them through the European Development Fund .
Be that as it may , Parliament is basing its position on this report by the Committee on Fisheries . The House trusts that the Commission and the Council will take its position into account as of now .
That would be the ideal .
If this is not possible , our position should be borne in mind when preparing for negotiations on a new agreement in 2006 .
Mr President , honourable Members , let me start by thanking Mrs Miguélez Ramos for her report on our communication on the subject of the mid-term review - and I emphasise mid-term review - of the fourth fisheries protocol between the European Union and Greenland .
I am glad , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , that you endorse the Commission communication .
It was on 30 June 2003 that the Commission and Greenland completed the mid-term review , which is provided for in Article 14 of the protocol .
The fourth protocol was signed yesterday , and it is hoped that all parties will ratify it .
It provides answers and solutions to the concerns expressed in our communication and in your report .
Let me set out just a few of the new elements in it .
There have , firstly , been substantial corrections to the quotas , in order to adjust catch possibilities in line with the scientific evidence .
There is no quota for cod , for Atlantic redfish in the western waters , or for blue whiting , in order to do justice to the EU 's fishing capacity .
There are , therefore , no more paper-fish .
Secondly , and in view of certain catch possibilities not having been used to date , we have now introduced the standard transfer clause , whereby we can transfer unused catch possibilities to other Member States not in possession of a quota .
The agreement with Greenland is thereby brought into line with other agreements with third countries making provision for financial compensation .
In July of this year , for the first time in the history of this agreement , unused quotas were transferred to other Member States that did not have them .
Thirdly , Mrs Miguélez Ramos , your report calls for the introduction of licence fees .
That will be happening with effect from 1 January 2004 as an equalisation of burdens between the Community and the shipowners .
That , too , brings this agreement into line with those with other third countries and also makes it possible for us to monitor the fishing effort .
Fourthly , we have responded to the lack of transparency by introducing a budget support programme , and Greenland 's regional government has consequently committed itself to a structural reform of its fisheries policy , aiming at greater privatisation and a reduction in subsidies .
Greenland has also undertaken to substantially replenish the budget of the Greenland Institute for Natural Resources , which should make it possible to expand the scientific capacity of that Institute .
Finally , we are also promoting exploratory fishing and extending it to include cephalopods and mussels .
Success in this area will make it possible to make Greenland 's fisheries more diverse and include new species in the next agreement with the country .
These changes have been made in dialogue with the authorities in Greenland and in accordance with the principles of the new partnership and fisheries agreement .
I believe that they make the agreement with Greenland more balanced and more transparent , as the financial compensation now corresponds to the catch possibilities actually used , and as reform of Greenland 's fisheries policies is supported .
Although , as I have said , this is only a mid-term review , the more extensive relations with Greenland post-2006 were dependent on this revision being carried out .
Our communication , and the endorsement given by your report , have made it possible for us to revise the fourth protocol in such a way as to remove all obstacles to a deepening of our relationship .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I was extraordinarily pleased to hear what Mrs Ramos and Commissioner Fischler had to say on this subject , which has been occupying us for such a long time .
It is my belief that we are now very , very close to a very , very good solution , and it is not all that often , in the area of fisheries , that we can speak in terms of an historic moment , as Commissioner Fischler has just done , but , for the first time since the fisheries agreement with Greenland was concluded in 1985 , unused catch quotas have been transferred .
As we have just heard , this happened a few weeks ago and explicitly refers to 2003 ; I am talking about 2003 !
One of the core demands formulated in Mrs Miguélez Ramos ' report has thus been met .
I am sure , however , that this is where the Commission would like someone to stand up for them , and that I am willing to do .
We are told that they had earlier not proposed a transfer .
That is indeed so , but the implementation of such a measure is quite simply not in their capacities .
The authority to do so resides simply and solely with the quota holder , and there is no transfer if they do not want there to be one .
This transfer of quotas on a voluntary basis , now approved for the first time , is an impressive demonstration of my country 's willingness to resolve the issue of quotas that have not been fully used up , and to do so finally , but in a spirit of partnership .
Contrary to what I have often heard said in recent months , Germany has not been engaged in egocentrically stonewalling European policy on these matters ; on the contrary , we are backing the European Community .
Let me point out , though , that this regulation will not work without effort .
I warn against interfering with the principles of European fisheries policy .
This rapprochement must not be allowed to erode the principle of relative stability .
I believe that we should have further serious discussions about this .
So let me repeat that today 's arrangement applies to 2003 and constitutes no kind of guarantee to other Member States that they will receive quotas that were - to take an example - formerly Germany 's , as Germany will in future be backing a fleet that will fish around Greenland .
I would like to follow this positive aspect by mentioning another weak point .
What we are dealing with here is what we term the mid-term review of the protocol , as agreed in the protocol itself .
Having been a rapporteur on the subject , I still remember it very well .
I wonder , though , what effect Parliament 's present opinion will have in future , as we know that amendments were agreed on as long ago as the end of June .
Have we been asked about them ?
Will we , in future , be allowed only to nod them through as we did in the past , or will we be permitted to express appropriate outrage ?
I am thinking not least of the effects of the fisheries agreement on the Budget , about which we have just again heard , when I emphatically demand - not only here and now , but also tomorrow - that Parliament be involved in the negotiating process .
We will end up having to amend the relevant treaties if that is to happen .
As a matter of principle , I regard anything else as an excuse !
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , I feel it would be appropriate to start by recalling that the main reason for the existence of this agreement was Greenland 's leaving the European Union .
I also think it is important to recall the reasons why Greenland chose to leave .
It left the Union because we wanted forcefully to remove this small and extremely remote community 's inalienable right to fish within the two hundred miles of its exclusive economic zone , which are today clearly protected under International Maritime law .
This is perhaps the greatest mistake the European Union has made to date ; it has already caused us serious problems in the past and still poses a threat for the future .
In small areas criss-crossed by national borders , such as the North Sea , having the European institutions jointly organise fishing for highly migratory surface fish species has been the right approach .
Moving from specific cases and solutions to common ownership of fishing resources under a supposed Community law is , however , no longer acceptable .
The same set of articles in International Maritime Law that defines the ownership of marine biological resources also defines the ownership of mineral resources , specifically fossil fuels .
The same European Community that sanctioned the application of these articles to delimit the ownership of underwater fossil fuel mines in the North Sea by various Member States claims that they do not apply to biological resources .
In other words , we would have a law that can only be used for protecting the interests of the States at the centre of Europe , where gas and oil is found , but which does not apply to protecting the interests of Europe 's peripheral States or outermost regions , which contain enormous maritime areas with substantial resources .
In the ten-year period that we feel must now be started in order to ensure that the European institutions discuss the status of the ' Western waters ' , a thorough review must be conducted of the issue of access to waters , European legislation must be adapted to the broad principles of International Maritime Law and the best ways of safeguarding sustainable fisheries in the Atlantic must be studied .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Greenland agreement differs from the other fisheries agreements that the EU has entered into with third countries because it secures the EU access to fisheries resources via financial compensation and offers of market access for Greenland products .
Nor shall I conceal the fact that , for me as a Danish parliamentarian , Greenland and the fisheries protocol with Greenland are of quite special importance .
This is the fourth fisheries protocol with Greenland , and one which is of great value to both parties .
The financial compensation amounts to EUR 900 per capita in Greenland and gives the EU access to Greenland fisheries products , which constitute more than 90 % of Greenland 's total exports .
The fisheries agreement with Greenland also makes it possible for fishing rights to be exchanged with Iceland , Norway and the Faeroe Islands , something that maintains an overall balance in the north-east Atlantic .
The fourth protocol contains clear improvements on previous protocols in the shape of increased transparency , so that the Community 's quotas now correspond to the real fishing possibilities in Greenland 's waters , and the EU has , moreover , a continued option on the quantities laid down in the third protocol in the event of the stocks improving .
There is good cause for acknowledging your contribution , Commissioner Fischler , to what you called ' the historic agreement ' .
The fourth protocol proposes that , upon expiry of the protocol , under-utilised fishing possibilities might be used up by countries other than those that derive direct benefit from the agreement in accordance with the principle of relative stability .
There is no doubt that the EU 's fisheries agreements with third countries are now a significant part of the common fisheries policy .
The general expansion of the coastal states ' fishing zones to 200 nautical miles in the seventies meant that 95 % of fishing stocks and 35 % of the sea was subject to the coastal state legislation .
Traditional fishing grounds were lost , and a need was created for cooperation with third countries in order to ensure the continued survival of the Community 's fishing fleets with a view to preserving the Community 's share of world catches and securing continued supplies of fish to the EU 's markets .
The fisheries agreement with Greenland came into force in 1995 in connection with Greenland 's withdrawal from the EU as a result of the self-government agreement with Denmark .
Unfortunately , the Commission neglected to inform the European Parliament of experimental fisheries and of the creation of joint ventures . Joint ventures are , in particular , something I expect a lot of , and I shall propose that we in the Committee on Fisheries initiate a discussion of their advantages and disadvantages .
I am able , in the end , to support Mrs Miguélez Ramos 's report , and I should like to commend the work she has done .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating our rapporteurs , Mr Ojeda and Mrs Miguélez , because they are both presenting us with fisheries agreements and our Committee on Fisheries has done its duties perfectly in these reports .
I am going to refer essentially to the issue of Greenland , because I believe it to be important .
We are seeing great unanimity here on the part of all Members and this seems to me to be very positive and very important .
We are in a good frame of mind !
Commissioner , I would like to congratulate you on your speech and the communication that has been made .
Parliament and the Commission are in agreement , which is very important and , with a view to the new Protocol which is going to be signed from 1 January of next year , I believe there is agreement already between the Member States themselves .
If you will allow me to say this , I believe the Commission has backed down , or if I may put it another way , the wise are ready to rectify .
As far as I remember , we in this Parliament have been calling for greater equity , greater transparency and greater justice in this agreement compared to the agreements in the south since 1994 and now this is beginning to be acknowledged .
I would also like to congratulate the new Director-General for Fisheries , Mr Holmquist , and the Director for Foreign Policy , because I know that they have made extraordinary efforts to make progress on the new line which Parliament is presenting at the moment and which - we all agree - is the line we must use for the agreement with Greenland .
The previous one , as has been said several times , was a scandal , and this is how the Court of Auditors saw it , as did this Parliament , because there were paper fish , there was wastage of quotas , which were not used by the States who could do so , as happens with the agreements in the south , and also there was non-payment of licences by ship owners .
Now this is being unified with the criteria of the agreements in the south and I believe that this is a truly positive step .
There is agreement in the Commission , there is agreement in the Council , as I understand it , and there will also be agreement in this Parliament .
Moreover , this is something we should all be pleased about for the sake of the interests of the European Union and all its Member States , naturally , and also in the interests of Greenland .
We are moving in the direction of mutual interest , and that is what is needed .
Experimental campaigns have been authorised since July , for new species , and there are possibilities for diversifying fisheries in Greenland , which is positive - I was in Greenland when I was chairman of the committee - and I know that there are other scientific possibilities and they must therefore be exploited .
I would draw your attention to mixed undertakings - I believe this is very important - and to temporary associations of undertakings .
The fishermen of Greenland themselves had asked me personally to help them achieve mixed undertakings , and therefore the issue is of interest to them , and I believe that by diversifying fishing opportunities in Greenland and by making it possible to use all the fisheries quotas , we will have done something very positive , as I have said , so that we can all be happy with the new Protocol which is going to be signed now from January and also in 2006 .
Mr President , I should like to open my speech by asking a question ; is there a common fisheries policy , apart from the one that is used to uphold the privileges enjoyed by some countries and fleets ?
According to the draft constitution now before us , which will be going to the Intergovernmental Conference , there is not .
In the third part of the common policies , in the section dealing with agriculture and fisheries , fish are called agricultural products , and no reference at all is made to the CFP .
In a discussion of the Union 's seas and maritime resources , this is as surprising as it is Kafkaesque .
It says nothing about the CFP , nothing about ensuring equal rights for all countries and fleets whilst , of course , preserving fish stocks for our children and grandchildren .
For this reason , amongst others , I support the report by Mrs Miguélez Ramos on the mid-term review of the 4th Fisheries Protocol with Greenland .
I support the report precisely because it represents a step in the right direction , calling for the fishing countries , fleets and companies unfairly excluded both by the incorrect application of the principle of relative stability , and by the current protocol to be given the opportunity of fishing in Greenland 's waters .
The rapporteur opens the way for the discussion which is necessary to improve the forthcoming protocols , whilst upholding , as one would expect , Greenland 's rights and its decision-making process .
Mr President , very briefly , I wish to start by congratulating Mrs Miguélez Ramos on her magnificent report , which we all acknowledge to be extremely well thought out and sensible and which , as a matter of fact , follows on from a previous piece of work undertaken by Mrs Langenhagen , who was rapporteur when this fisheries protocol was first drawn up and who has also made some suggestions that represent a step in the right direction and which are in line with the Communication that the Commission is now presenting to us .
I believe that with this Commission statement , together with this declaration of intent , if it is put into practice - and we all hope that it is - we will finally put an end to the somewhat bizarre situation in which we have been operating until now .
First of all , as has already been said , we have been paying out compensation under the common fisheries policy that is worth almost twice the real value of catches - and this is no small matter ; we are in fact talking about a straightforward doubling of the figure , which amounts to a tidy sum .
Secondly , we are finally seeing budgetary transparency , something that was previously lacking , as pointed out recently by the Court of Auditors .
Furthermore , there has been discrimination as regards access to resources in this area .
I would recall the specific case of my own country , which has historically always fished in these waters but which , after joining the European Union , because it had no agreement with Denmark , lost those historical rights .
We have a great deal of respect for the principle of relative stability but we feel that there must be flexibility so that quotas that go unused in any given year are taken over by those that can actually use them , without this , of course , preventing us from continuing to seek to divide up these quotas equitably , and consequently ensure relative stability .
This is why the Commission 's document represents a step in the right direction and I hope that it is put into practice , together with the appropriate legislative measures .
Mr President , I am sorry to sound a note of disharmony in this debate , but this report needs to be taken in two respects .
First of all we have to isolate the fact that European taxpayers ' money has to be spent with transparency - and at the moment it is not .
Clearly we are overpaying for the fishing rights and we should pay for the amount of fish that is caught by European fishermen , but if we wish to pay for Greenland development aid then let us pay for it separately .
I am not against it but it cannot be paid for with paper fish through a fisheries agreement .
I am very surprised at the Commission 's attitude to the idea that we should now open up the number of species that can be caught in and around Greenland .
Anyone would think that the common fisheries policy has been a great success , when in fact we see fish stocks in European waters as a whole declining more and more .
The idea now is to open up more quotas for more species .
I have often said in this Chamber that fish unfortunately do not swim separately and very often , when one species of fish is caught , others also swim into the nets .
If the fishermen do not have quotas , these fish are discarded .
We all know that a disgraceful amount of fish is discarded in the European Union every year .
We need to review the whole idea of having third country agreements .
Very often it leads to the European Union exploiting third countries ' waters and means that fishermen in these third countries are driven out of business and the whole thing is being brought into disrepute .
Often the money which the EU spends does not reach the fishermen or the countries for which it is intended .
It very often ends up in the wrong place .
We should review the whole situation .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Miguélez Ramos for the thorough airing she gave to this subject and for the usefulness of her report .
I also want to thank the Commissioner for having tidied the whole matter up and made what was certainly an unacceptable situation a bit more acceptable in these renegotiations .
I should like to refer to what my friend Mr Casaca said about the appropriation by the European Union of the fish of Greenland .
That also applies to the Azores , I am sure , and to Ireland , though the Azores ' waters are not so rich .
The truth is something different .
At the time they joined the European Union there was only a six-mile limit in existence .
It was subsequently that the European Union extended it to 200 miles .
Then the fishermen of Greenland , Ireland and perhaps the Azores as well , began to see what might have been .
I agree - and have frequently repeated - that in order to have a common agricultural policy it was not necessary to take fish into common ownership .
We could have had a decent common fisheries policy without taking fish into common ownership .
We got the worst of all worlds , in that the Union owned the fish , but the national governments had the job of policing them .
That is where a very bad job was done .
That is why the stocks are run down .
What was everybody 's business was nobody 's business .
It was not the common fisheries policy in itself that destroyed the stocks , it was the lack of the necessary supervision .
If the Union had had the job of policing the catching of fish , we might have had some success .
Greenland withdrew from the Union .
It was not exactly as Mr Casaca said , but it withdrew after the 200-mile limit was extended .
It should have stood its ground and maintained solidarity .
It would have benefited from the structural funds , amongst other things .
At the very best , structural funds have only given EUR 300 per capita to any state in this Union - that was in Ireland .
The Portuguese , Greeks and southern Italians got a lot less than that .
However , according to Mr Busk 's calculation , the people of Greenland are receiving EUR 900 per capita per annum .
That is too generous .
I believe we have mixed up our foreign policy with our fisheries policy .
We have given Greenland a deal that it had no right to expect , seeing that it voluntarily walked away and did not accept in good faith that it would have been fairly treated within the Union .

We are unable to comply with Mr Stevenson 's request to move on to the debate on the Ojeda Sanz report because we are already behind schedule by almost a quarter of an hour with regard to the Commission 's communication and we cannot increase the delay .
The debate on the Ojeda Sanz report will therefore take place this evening at 9 p.m.

The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the Commission communication on the preparations for the 5th WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancún .
Commissioner Lamy has the floor .
Mr President , Commissioner Lamy , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , we can see that another essential round is on the cards .
What this is about is the successes that we are meant to be chalking up for Europe , and Commissioner Lamy was right to make the point that this is about opening up the market to trade , and I would like to emphasise that this is to be on a reciprocal basis .
Our problem is , however , that there are still many technical barriers to trade , particularly for our European structure of small and medium-sized enterprises , in which two thirds of Europe 's workers are employed .
This means that it is also important to set out positive effects of the Cancún round , showing what our chances are of growth in Europe and what kinds of new jobs might be created here .
I have a second question .
What is in fact the situation as regards regional quality products ?
We were focussing our attention on some forty of these products - one in particular from the candidate countries being Budweiser Beer .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am among those who believe it is extremely important for us to involve the developing countries in trade and for us to open up our markets .
Not all developing countries are the same , however .
There is one concern , especially when it comes to agriculture for , among the developing countries , there are some that are extremely competitive in terms of agricultural production , something that may be problematic for the EU .
I should therefore like to ask the Commissioner a question : what strategy does the Commission have for coping with this , but without thereby halting the project of involving the developing countries and , in a short space of time , making them major purchasers specifically of agricultural products ?
Mr President , I would also like to talk about the Singapore issues , because there is massive hypocrisy at the heart of the Commission and Council position .
According to your rhetoric , Commissioner , these negotiations were supposed to be heralding a development round which prioritises the concerns of developing countries .
You like to portray the EU as a supporter and advocate of developing countries and yet the EU is now perceived as bullying these countries into a new set of issues on investment and competition , in spite of the fact that the vast majority of them have already categorically said that they do not want negotiations in these areas .
Even the ACP Group - a group with which this Parliament is supposed to have a special relationship - has issued a statement stating it does not want them .
The least-developed countries do not want them .
On behalf of my group , I would like to issue a challenge to you today .
If you are serious about this new round genuinely being a development round and if you genuinely want the EU to be seen as a supporter of developing countries , will you ask the Council to withdraw the demands on these issues ?
If not , can you tell us how you square your so-called support for developing countries with your agenda , which is running precisely counter to their interests and wishes ?
Mr President , thank you , Commissioner , for your presentation .
The President of the WTO has now come up , of course , with a proposal to cancel the peace agreement in the agricultural sphere .
I know that this is not part of the mandate , but I nonetheless think it worth reflecting upon now that we are interested in obtaining equal trading conditions in this area too .
We do in fact use the United States 's protectionists in the agricultural sphere to excuse our own protectionism .
Why not instead do away with both forms of protectionism and enter into proper trading arrangements with the developing countries ?
The second point is workers ' rights .
How do we ensure that countries entering into agreements at the WTO observe , as a minimum , their own laws and rules governing workers ' rights , wages etc .
I am thinking , for example , of Thailand where refugees from Burma work in prison-like conditions for virtually no money and where the trade goes directly to Europe .
It is on our shelves that products from these prison camps are found .
How are we to get this issue into the WTO negotiations ?
Thank you Commissioner Lamy .
I do not think it will be possible for all those who requested the floor to speak , for we are short of time .
Mr President , I have two practical questions : last Saturday 's breakthrough in the field of medicines does mean that many are apprehensive about whether or not this will work in practice .
One of the things we could probably do now in the European Union , which possesses the capacity to produce its own generic medicines , is to declare that we are prepared to issue such a declaration of compulsory licensing in cases where developing countries ask for those medicines .
This would , as it were , be a gesture on our part which demonstrates that those medicines will actually be supplied in practice .
The other practical question concerns the blue box .
Many fear that in agriculture , we will be using this blue box in order to again indirectly subsidise exports on a massive scale .
Brazil has asked whether we are able to promise at this stage that we will be supporting this blue box - in other words the switch from product subsidy to blue-box subsidy - but that we will not be making improper use of it for the purpose of export subsidies .
With this , we would really contribute to abolishing this export subsidy .
I am interested to know whether this line of thinking is currently on the agenda or plays a part in our negotiators ' thinking .
Commissioner , how do you see the agricultural negotiations develop in the WTO ?
The European Union and America have drafted a common framework in this respect , a so-called joint approach on agricultural questions .
Do you anticipate the developing countries , including China and Japan , simply accepting this framework ?
Are America and the EU prepared to make concessions in the agricultural field ?
Are they in a position to do so ?
Secondly , I should like to ask you how you feel about a larger parliamentarian dimension to the WTO ?
Do you consider a clause on this subject in the final declaration of Cancún possible , or is this premature at this stage ?
Mr President , Commissioner , my first question follows on from Mr van den Berg 's question in connection with generic medicines .
There has been criticism to the effect that , since patent law has not been changed , many of the further details that we expect from this new agreement will , in fact , remain nothing but words to the developing countries .
Can you reassure us in this respect ?
After all , if this is grand but ineffective gesture , then this means precious little in the way of a weapon in the negotiations as a way of offering evidence of good will .
My second question concerns the mandate .
Do you not agree that the mandate you have is insufficient to equip you for outlining future agricultural policy which , de facto , will make better integration of the developing countries possible , given the fact that a huge chunk of agriculture in the developing world is about survival ?
Thank you Commissioner Lamy .
I apologise deeply to all the Members who had asked to take the floor , but we have already overrun and we have to stop now in order to move on to Question Time .
I know there were legitimate requests to speak .
I did not use the d 'Hondt system because I wanted to give at least one representative of each group the chance to speak .
On this occasion , using the d 'Hondt system would have penalised the smaller groups and I wanted to avoid that .
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0273 / 2003 ) , although we are running behind enormously , by 25 minutes , which has been happening every sitting , and I do not hold President Imbeni responsible for that , naturally , but we are going to have to try to conduct this Question Time as rationally as possible so that the greatest possible number of Members may speak .
We will take questions to the Commission .
Part I
Question No 33 by Piia-Noora Kauppi ( H-0483 / 03 ) :
Subject : Commission preparing to abolish visa requirement for Russian citizens ?
Russia has long urged the European Union to abolish the visa requirement for citizens of the Russian Federation .
The European Union has responded with caution , particularly on security grounds .
According to newspaper reports which appeared at the beginning of July ( STT-AFP ) , the head of the Commission 's Moscow representation , Richard Wright , has said that ' negotiations ' on the subject could begin before the next EU-Russia summit , which is scheduled for November .
Is the Commission preparing to abolish the visa requirement for citizens of the Russian Federation without having informed the Member States ?
Can the Commission explain what representation head Richard Wright meant by his statement and particularly how we should interpret the term ' negotiations ' ?
. In its conclusions , the General Affairs and External Relations Council at its October meeting last year agreed that the Russian proposal to open discussions on the conditions for the eventual establishment of a visa-free regime would be considered as a long-term issue and that further discussions should take place within the structures of the partnership and cooperation agreement .
On the same issue , the European Union-Russia Summit in St Petersburg in May 2003 , which I attended , agreed to examine the conditions for visa-free travel between the European Union and Russia .
The Commission , in close consultation with Member States , is considering how best to launch these discussions with Russia in the framework of the EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
Some media outlets appear to have misinterpreted comments made by the Head of the Commission 's Delegation in Moscow on this matter .
I can clarify that he rightly said that the European Union is prepared to discuss with Russia the conditions for visa-free travel as a long-term issue , and that this question is linked to a number of related matters which also need to be addressed , such as the need for more effective border management , cooperation in the fight against organised crime and illegal immigration .
The conclusion of a readmission agreement with Russia will be an important confidence-building measure in this context .
That is a point which I have put to my Russian colleagues and interlocutors on a number of occasions .
. The European Union is absolutely clear about the position .
Sometimes there is some misinterpretation on the other side , or some attempt to bounce the debate on our side , but we have been absolutely clear and absolutely consistent in our contacts with our Russian colleagues .
I would like to revert to the last point I made .
It is very important that if we are to start serious discussions with the Russians on these matters - and there are some very difficult issues to resolve - they should understand our legitimate concern about the negotiation of the readmission agreement .
It is not reasonable to have discussions on these important issues where the traffic is all in one direction .
I would also add , when we are considering and preparing the agenda for summits , that we have been insistent that we should work through the structures of the partnership and cooperation agreement , and in this particular case that we work through the appropriate subcommittee .
It is very important to use the mechanisms that we have established for discussing these sensitive issues .
We should not try to bypass them , nor should we try to bounce ourselves into decisions which are of considerable concern to all the Member States , and to some Member States in particular .
Question No 34 by Manuel Medina Ortega ( H-0440 / 03 ) :
Subject : Operation Ulysses
Can the Commission provide information on the success of Operation Ulysses in curbing illegal immigration in the western Mediterranean and the Atlantic ?
Commissioner , thank you very much for your reply .
In fact , I am in a position to verify what the Greek Presidency has said on the issue , but , given that the Commission will have to evaluate the project , I would like to warn you of the following :
Firstly , that perhaps the way in which the Ulysses Project was implemented - a first phase in the Mediterranean and then another phase in the Atlantic - meant that during the Mediterranean phase immigration was diverted towards the Atlantic and during the Atlantic phase it was diverted towards the Mediterranean , and therefore in practice the effect was minimal .
It would appear , furthermore , that , at least in the first part , there were understanding problems between the different operations .
We are now talking about a second project , the Neptune Project , for the central and eastern Mediterranean - I imagine the Commissioner will be up ? to-date with this issue - and the question I would put is whether , as a consequence of this second project , by focussing on one area - the central and eastern Mediterranean - there will be a danger of increasing the pressure on the western Mediterranean and the Atlantic .
In other words , to what extent the second project can produce that result because it appears that the total flow is always the same : if one side is closed off , immigration is diverted towards the other .
. I share the view of the honourable Member that migratory flows are very flexible , and when the pressure increases in one place , there will be lower pressure somewhere else .
That is why the Commission has proposed the creation of a stable operational framework to deal with the control of maritime borders .
We asked for a feasibility study to be carried out .
I shall present this next week to the informal Justice and Home Affairs Council in Rome .
Our proposal is to create three permanent control centres for our southern maritime border .
Meanwhile , we need to learn from both successful and less successful joint operations , in order to incorporate this knowledge in the project that we are going to present to the Council .
Question No 35 by Paulo Casaca ( H-0456 / 03 ) :
Subject : Additional Protocol on safeguarding nuclear material
Since August 2002 , following documented reports by the Iranian resistance , the Iranian regime 's illegal activities connected with developing Iran 's nuclear capability have come to light and been referred to openly not only by the US authorities , but also by the press and specialist bodies .
In June the International Atomic Energy Agency fully confirmed the reports and the European institutions were at last forced to acknowledge the evidence .
In the meantime , in statements and answers to parliamentary questions the Commission has always maintained that the accusations by the Iranian resistance and their confirmation by the US authorities were not credible and even went so far as to claim that in general Iran had complied with the relevant provisions and had even allowed its nuclear installations to be inspected , which any observers in possession of even the minimum of information at the time knew to be absolutely untrue .
Does the Commission not consider that the credibility of its sources of information on Iran must be urgently reviewed ?
. The Commission welcomed the June report of the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) but noted with concern that Iran had failed to fulfil some of its obligations under the Non-Proliferation Treaty safeguards agreement .
In the meantime , on 26th August 2003 , as a follow-up to the June report , the IAEA issued a new report with further findings .
The August report highlights that while Iran has demonstrated an increased degree of cooperation , this cooperation was at times slow in coming and some of the information contradicted what had previously been provided .
This report will be analysed by the IAEA board of directors at a meeting in the week commencing 8 September 2003 .
It is also likely that European foreign ministers will discuss this matter at the Gymnich meeting in Italy this weekend .
The Commission has called for full transparency from Iran on this issue and has consistently stated that the issue of weapons of mass destruction constitutes one of the major concerns in relations between the European Union and Iran .
Through contacts at ministerial and official level , the Commission has asked Iran to proceed to a prompt signature and ratification of the additional protocol and to cooperate fully and in a transparent manner with the IAEA .
Without such a protocol in force , it would be hard for the IAEA to assure itself that there was no undeclared nuclear activity in Iran .
The Commission makes every effort to base itself on available objective information , in particular IAEA sources .
We will be following developments within the IAEA closely , not least in view of the meeting I had a couple of months ago with Dr El Baradei .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am very pleased to note that , after all these months during which these questions have been asked , during which we have been told countless times of the existence of information that it was impossible to verify , the Commissioner is not telling us , as he did very recently , that Iran appears in general to have complied with the provisions of the Additional Protocol of the International Atomic Energy Agency .
I am also pleased that the Commissioner is not giving us the same answer he gave me less than a month ago , in which he said that he recognises Iran 's right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes , as if anyone had ever questioned this right .
The Commission has changed its line , but I fear this has come too late .
The question that I raised , therefore , stands : do you not think , Commissioner , that it would be useful to listen to those whom you did not previously consider to be credible ?
Thank you very much Commissioner Patten .
Part II
Questions to Commissioner FischlerQuestion No 36 by Monica Frassoni ( H-0432 / 03 ) :
Subject : Spain 's National Hydrological Plan ( NHP ) and Mediterranean agriculture
The Ebro transfer scheme will directly provide some 600 hm 3 of water for agriculture in the Mediterranean .
In addition , the re-use for agricultural purposes of water transferred for urban use will provide a further 150 hm 3 .
Added to this will be more than 200 hm 3 of desalinated water .
Finally , the NHP provides for investment in improving the efficiency of existing irrigation systems , which could generate hundreds more cubic hectolitres .
In total , the increase in agricultural water supply under the plan would be well in excess of 1000 hm 3 per year .
In modern Mediterranean agriculture every cubic metre of water generates 3 euro worth of agricultural production .
In many cases , hothouse production exceeds 6 euro per cubic metre .
The Ebro transfer scheme will therefore boost current production by several billion euro .
Aside from the question of how officially irrigated areas are monitored , these new resources will increase production levels , since they are bound to be used somewhere .
Has the Commission considered what effect this massive increase in supply might have on farm prices ?
Mediterranean agriculture markets are already virtually saturated in the case of some products and North African countries are starting to penetrate these markets .
The precarious balance currently prevailing in Mediterranean agriculture , which essentially keeps it outside the CAP subsidy system , could well be upset by the Ebro transfer scheme .
. ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , as Mrs Frassoni has accurately observed , the implementation of the Spanish National Hydrological Plan would make a greater range of water resources available in Spain .
The Commission does not at present have any detailed information or studies at its disposal that would indicate what effect such availability of additional water would have on production in the European Union and on agricultural prices .
So we can only estimate it .
The Commission estimates that the increase in water resources will have only a very slight effect on the extent of the agricultural products supported by Community agricultural funding .
The fact is that there is already an upper limit for Community support for most irrigated cultures , and this upper limit relates either to surface area ( as in the case of maize or rice ) or to guaranteed national maximum authorised quantities ( as in the case of cotton , olive oil , or processed products from fruit and vegetables ) .
Payments are reduced in proportion to the extent to which the cultivated areas exceed the areas dedicated to crops eligible for support .
The increases in yield or the extension of the irrigated areas , which are the possible consequences of the Spanish Hydrological Plan would thus have no effect on the total amounts paid , nor could the implementation of the plan have any effect on the production of milk , to which quota rules apply .
The only sector in which production could increase is the fresh fruit and vegetables sector , which is , however , already very strongly market-oriented , and production would increase only if the necessary market potential were present .
An additional consideration is that irrigation could improve the quality and competitiveness of fresh fruit and vegetables .
So , were the invisible balance of Mediterranean agriculture to be affected by the Spanish plans , such a development would not be supported by the Community , as increases in production do not automatically entail an increase in Community support .
Commissioner , the problem to which we have tried to draw your attention is the fact that , as you , yourself , have said , we do not yet have accurate estimates to tell us what the actual effect of the National Hydrological Plan will be on prices .
Since we do not know what price will be set for water , we clearly do not know what effect the plan will have on prices either .
I can therefore only ask you to pay particular attention to this factor , not least in that , according to the most recent news we have received , in addition to the increase in water supply under the National Hydrological Plan , there are plans for a series of desalination plants which will further increase - according to certain estimates of as much as 400 cubic hectometres per year - the water production capacity in this area of Spain .
It would appear that , from the point of view of farming , the Commission has a particular responsibility to pay special attention to these factors , yet you , yourself , confirm that the Commission is not yet able to do that .
. ( DE ) Mr President , while the Commission certainly bears some degree of responsibility for this , primary responsibility lies with each and every Member State that is desirous of making this investment .
The fact is that the project as a whole runs under the title of ' Structural fund support as part of support for Objective I areas ' , and , within this framework , a cost-benefit analysis of this project does indeed have to be carried out in order to establish whether such support measures can be implemented in the first place , and whether the conditions for support have been complied with .
It follows that this is a task for the Member State setting the project in motion .
On the other hand , there is no doubt that it will be the Commission 's task - in this case , a structural support task - to examine whether the estimates that have been carried out are realistic and make sense .
Although it is not a question , but a warning for the future , Commissioner Fischler may comment if he so wishes .
. ( DE ) Mr President , as you so rightly say , no question has been put .
I would , though , like to make one thing clear .
All the issues of water rights that are involved here , that is , the question of what rights of extraction exist and to what extent , are not matters to be dealt with at the Community level ; in so far as they affect two Member States , these issues should be sorted out in bilateral negotiations between the Member States concerned .
The honourable Member wished to return to the previous question . He should do so within the allotted time .
Mr President , I am sorry , but I only joined yesterday , so I would ask your forgiveness and I hope I will be quicker next time .
Commissioner , I am a new Aragonese Member , and therefore , as you can imagine , we are greatly affected by the NHP , amongst other things because the intention is to take water from our region .
If I have understood you correctly , you have said that there is no data on how it is going to affect prices , but there are estimates .
Is it possible to obtain these estimates ?
. ( DE ) Mr Ferrández Lezaun , the initial estimate that can be made of this can be only a very rough one , as there are no binding provisions relating to irrigation , for example , on which fruits or crops farmers are to cultivate on the irrigated areas .
That is left to the individual farmers as a management decision .
They will probably cultivate those fruits that open up the best economic opportunities to the individual farmer , but what I can make clear from the outset is that such changes will not give rise to the topping-up of this or that milk quota , nor will the Community be willing to accept such things as , for example , higher hectare premiums or additional reference areas for any crops .
The whole project must be handled subject to the existing framework conditions under the laws on support grants .
Question No 37 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0444 / 03 ) :
Subject : New reform of the CAP and highly disadvantaged ( Objective 1 ) areas of the EU
The Presidency 's 26 June 2003 undertaking regarding the new reform of the CAP contains only a timid , rhetorical reference to disadvantaged regions and cohesion within the EU .
An analysis of the proposals put forward by the Commission and agreed by the Council does not enable what is meant by ' desire to support ' to be either qualified or quantified .
Within the EU there are highly depressed agricultural areas which by themselves will be unable to achieve the degree of competitiveness required on account of the new decoupling of aid and the additional demands imposed by the reform .
Only some fresh agricultural-training and -promotion and commercial-distribution policies , together with special programmes to boost agricultural and commercial development , will be able to counter the heavy impact of the reform , thereby preventing economic depression and the abandonment of farming .
In view of the above , what action is the Commission planning to take in order to prevent the reform of the CAP from having a harmful effect on the most disadvantaged parts of the EU ?
. ( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , I would just like to start with a clarification .
If , in the field of agriculture , we speak in terms of less-favoured or of especially disadvantaged areas , we have to distinguish between two things ; firstly , those less-favoured areas in which hectare premiums are paid as part of the rural development programmes , in order to compensate for their disadvantaged situation , and , secondly , those areas categorised as Objective 1 areas by reason of their generally backward state of development .
As you know , the Community can , in these Objective 1 areas , do such things as grant investment programmes higher cofinancing rates .
There are also , in addition , quite specific conditions for what we term the outermost regions .
Let me start by establishing , in the context of reform , that it will continue to be for the Member States to decide what value and priority they attach to the measures for the less-favoured areas under the rural development programmes .
They will , in any case , subject to modulation , have more funds at their disposal for this purpose .
It is also the Member States who decide how much by way of structural funds they want to spend in the Objective 1 regions under the Guarantee Fund , how much they want to allocate to the Social Fund and how much to the Regional Fund .
Nothing about this is changed by the agricultural reform .
It is also true , though , that there are some less-favoured regions in which the reform could cause agricultural production to fall , and this leads the public in the EU to fear that more and more land in especially disadvantaged areas could be left uncultivated .
The reform of income aid will , however , link direct grants to the role played by the farmer as a manager responsible for his land and for the rural environment .
The new farm payment will in fact be cut if management obligations are not discharged .
We do not pay our farmers for doing nothing , and nor will we do so in the future .
Those who receive premiums must manage their land in line with agricultural and environmental standards ; moreover , the premium for less-favoured areas will be paid only if the land is properly managed .
I do not therefore go along with you in the conclusions to which you have come , and which underlie your question on the less-favoured areas .
All the same , I would like to point out that the Commission will continue to closely monitor the effects of the new common agricultural policy on the less-favoured areas , for the reform does indeed provide for the possibility of appropriate adjustments being made , should it prove necessary to do so .
Commissioner , the reform of the CAP should be carried out above all in situ , in the countryside , and not just on paper .
The people who will have to reform and convert their crops and their farming are the farmers , not just the bureaucrats .
In the countryside there is great uncertainty and worry about the consequences of the reform at the moment .
In less-favoured regions , there is much more .
This is because , as you know , new commercial policies will be needed , and in less-favoured regions - objective 1 regions , apart from the terminological issue - new commercial measures , education and training for farmers are going to be needed . In this reform , however , you have not planned for anything like this for the regions in the worst situations .
In Andalusia this will mean more than EUR 1 000 million .
Throughout this summer there has been talk of a hard blow .
Furthermore , your proposal is bureaucratically much more complex .
In other words , rather than being simplified , the bureaucracy is increasing .
From the point of view of social cohesion , moreover , this represents a retrograde step , especially when Mr Prodi commissions reports from his advisers which may be the final straw for social cohesion .
You are not replying to my question , Commissioner .
To what are you referring when you say that it is true that certain areas - the least-favoured - may be subject to reductions ?
What does this mean ?
A little more formality , and a lot more with those who are worst ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , you have been talking for more than twice the time allowed , which is one minute .
We will give Commissioner Fischler the floor so that he can reply .
. ( DE ) Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , I can give a succinct answer to that .
You take the specific example of Andalusia and say that it will be necessary to inject more funding in Andalusia in order to give farmers better training in order to enable them to adapt to the new situation - well , that is a matter for the Andalusian Government .
It will have to put forward a proposal for reprogramming its rural development programme .
If it complies with the general conditions , we will certainly approve it .
I do not see a problem in that .
I might add that the time for discussing my proposal has been and gone .
A decision has been taken ; the ministers took it unanimously - and that means that Spain voted for it .
This means that discussion of changes to the proposal is now idle talk .
The reform stands .
What is now far more important is the question of how you implement this reform in Spain , for you will be aware that the latest decision made a certain degree of flexibility possible .
What matters now , for example , is whether , in Andalusia , you decouple everything or whether , in animal husbandry perhaps , you retain certain coupled elements , with the stipulation that this task could , under certain circumstances , devolve upon the rural communities .
Such a possibility exists , but it is now for you to make your move .
It is you who must decide !
.
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Bushill-Matthews , let me first make it clear that ' Objective 1 areas ' is in parentheses , so this is not just about areas that are generally in decline , although the question made specific reference to Objective 1 .

Turning , secondly , to your own question , the flexibility that we are creating in the rules is there to be used .
Right now , I can do no other than to encourage the Member States to make use of the flexibility that is there , and to do so in such a way that they meet to the maximum possible extent the needs of the specific situation in an actual region , such as the one to which you refer .
May I take the question on the Fischler proposals for the mid-term review a little further with the Commissioner ?
Under your reforms you will break the link between production and subsidy .
This will put the European Union in a strong position in Cancún .
Do you feel that the decision the Council of Ministers arrived at , whereby some countries are going to start decoupling long before others , has actually weakened the position of the European Union ?
. ( DE ) I would like to tell you quite frankly , Mr Parish , that I do not believe that we have weakened our position in the negotiations , since even if the Member States use the maximum of the coupled elements that are permitted to be retained , at the latest possible point in time , we have in any case decoupled 70 % of payments .
Even now , though , we can see a whole array of Member States declaring that they want to introduce decoupling - 100 % decoupling , moreover - at the earliest possible opportunity .
Even states such as Ireland , which take a critical view of decoupling , have in the meantime made clear their decision to proceed with it in full .
I believe that this example will be followed by many others , and so I have no fear that we are now in any worse a negotiating position .

Since the time allotted to questions to Commissioner Fischler has elapsed , and in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , Questions Nos 38 , 39 , 40 and 41 will be replied to in writing
Question No 42 by Bart Staes ( H-0436 / 03 ) :
Subject : Development aid for Congolese agriculture
On 12 June 2003 the Flemish weekly Trends reported that the public prosecutor 's office in Antwerp , Belgium had instituted an investigation into two exporters of European food surpluses to Africa ( Soafrimex and Afroliner ) and their alleged involvement in tax fraud , money laundering and suspected diamond trafficking .
The branches of the two companies in Congo place ( European ) foodstuffs on the market at dumping prices .
The development project CDI-Bwamanda , for its part , states that local agriculture has to contend with far too high general costs .
The European Commission , among others , purchases maize locally for double the price as farming is so inefficient , Trends points out .
However , the FAO considers that Congo has the potential to feed some 2 billion people .
Does the Commission have further information concerning the apparent fraud being conducted from Antwerp involving European food surpluses and is it prepared , in the light of the exceptionally ( ! ) high level of need , to put extra resources into developing local agriculture and consequently to gradually reduce European food exports to the region ?
. The article on which this question is based contains a number of inaccuracies that could mislead the reader .
On the one hand , legal proceedings are currently under way against European food surplus exporters in relation to a money laundering and diamond trafficking affair .
The Belgian magistracy has dispatched an investigating committee to the Democratic Republic of Congo .
That investigation is secret and falls within the competence of the Belgian Courts .
The Commission therefore has no information on this matter .
On the other hand , the Commission is currently allocating significant resources to the development of local agriculture in the DRC .
Under the European Development Fund , projects to boost agriculture and rehabilitate rural roads , along with phytosanitary measures are under way to the tune of EUR 13.2 million .
An agricultural support project worth EUR 12 million is awaiting approval .
The food aid supplied by the Commission amounts to nearly EUR 5 million and consists , inter alia , of amounts made available to the NGO , CDI-Bwamanda , to purchase maize from local producers at the Kinshasa market price .
This approach enables Congolese farmers to continue producing in a domestic situation , characterised by a patent lack of purchasing power , and therefore to prepare themselves to compete on the national and regional markets when the post-conflict economic upturn begins .
Furthermore , the Commission 's intervention , via this NGO , will help avoid a situation where food aid produced outside the country weakens an agricultural sector already hard-hit by the country 's political conditions , which are having huge repercussions on production .
All this has given rise in Kinshasa to a steep increase in the market price for maize .
It should be noted , however , that since the conclusion of the ' global and inclusive ' Pretoria agreement in December 2002 , and the official reunification of Congolese territory at the end of June 2003 , commercial navigation on the river Congo is returning to normal .
This will in all probability bring the market price down .
Mr President , needless to say , I am pleased to hear from the Commissioner that the article contains factual inaccuracies .
I would simply like to ask the Commissioner if he could expand on the detail of those factual inaccuracies in that article , given that this is important .
I think we all share the Commissioner 's view that reinforcing local agricultural markets in any developing country is , of course , what matters most .
Does the Commissioner , however , dare to stand up here and confirm that in Congo , in the region mentioned in the article , there is no wholesale import of European agricultural products that are dumped there ?
Although the Commissioner confirmed that we support local NGOs and that we purchase maize there , does he have the nerve to state loudly and clearly that there has not been any import on a massive scale , apart from the purchases that the Commissioner himself mentioned ?
. No , I cannot do that .
I take it for granted that there is some reason why the Belgian authorities are conducting their investigations in the DRC .
I also gave the Member what information I had available and even explained why an investigation like this is not something for us to comment on .
I have done what I could .
Question No 43 by Francisca Sauquillo Pérez del Arco ( H-0452 / 03 ) :
Subject : Murder of the Spanish citizen Ana Isabel Sánchez Torralba in Equatorial Guinea
The Spanish voluntary worker Ana Isabel Sánchez Torralba has died in Equatorial Guinea as a consequence of gunshots fired by members of the armed forces at the coach in which she was travelling to Aconibe in order to work with Misioneras Escolapias .
This is another tragic example of the brutality of the Equatorial Guinea regime , whose contempt for human life , human rights and the most basic public safeguards has expressed itself once again in the murder of Ana Isabel Sánchez Torralba .
Has the Commission considered the possibility of imposing sanctions on Equatorial Guinea by suspending all forms of aid to Obiang 's dictatorial regime ?
Can the Commission provide any information on the human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea ?
Has there been any improvement in the system of safeguards since an agreement thereon was concluded between the Commission and the Government of Equatorial Guinea ?
. The Commission deeply regrets the death of Ms Sánchez in Equatorial Guinea .
The young soldier responsible was acting against the orders of his superior and is now in prison , pending trial for murder .
In this case , the authorities acted rapidly and correctly , so the Commission would not consider it a reason to impose sanctions .
I would remind you that cooperation with Equatorial Guinea under the 8th EDF programme is conditional on the promotion of human rights , and the 9th EDF programme has not yet been signed .
As regards the evolution of the human rights situation in Equatorial Guinea , following its visit in July 2003 , the Commission reported some small improvements , such as the President 's invitation to the opposition parties to join the government , an improvement in prison conditions , a reduction in the number of military barricades found along the main roads and a slightly freer press .
Lately we have seen some positive signs with the release of 18 political prisoners on 18 August 2003 .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Today I have found out that a council of war sentenced the person who killed this aid worker to thirty years in prison and has awarded compensation of EUR 40 000 to the family of the victim .
It does represent progress that there has been an emergency council of war ; however , Commissioner , you know - and I imagine this has been expressed by the people who have been in Guinea - that human rights are still being violated all the time , despite certain prisoners having been freed , and that this situation is unfortunately constant in this small country which has few citizens .
They continue to live essentially in terror , and although the country is one of the world 's richest , thanks to oil , the population , as you know , receives no education or health care and lives in poverty .
Therefore , Commissioner , despite the fact that you have said that there have been improvements , I would ask you to continue to demand a system of guarantees which make it possible for these citizens to live with the minimum degree of human rights .
. Absolutely .
This is one case illustrating the sad fact that oil is not a shortcut to decency or progress for the majority of any country .
We are in this difficult dialogue with this country and I am afraid that I am not able to come up with something magnificent or highly optimistic here .
We have to keep trying .
Question No 44 by Eija-Riitta Anneli Korhola ( H-0474 / 03 ) :
Subject : Linking Kyoto mechanism credits to development cooperation
The EU is drafting a directive on credits obtainable from Joint Implementation ( JI ) and Clean Development Mechanism ( CDM ) projects which comply with the Kyoto Agreement , which credits would be convertible into emission rights that would have a monetary value for purposes of emissions trading .
An instrument would thus be created which would enable some development projects to earn money .
At the same time it is likely that this will make one more tool available which could help to attain the UN 's target of 0.7 % of GNP .
The EU also intends to hold emission rights itself .
Despite the bright prospects , a satisfactory outcome will be attainable only through careful planning and a well-considered strategy .
Is the Directorate-General which is responsible for development cooperation at the Commission aware of the nature of CDM projects and the opportunities they create for additional funding of development cooperation ?
Will the Commission guide the Member States towards a common approach ?
How will CDM projects be integrated with the EU 's own financial planning of development cooperation ?
Mr President , Commissioner , you are quite right to say that business people must sort this out among themselves , but we all know that , in order to do so , they need a marketplace , that is to say , an exchange where it is possible to trade in these rights , these CDM projects .
Do you think it possible that the Commission might take the initiative in providing such an exchange with a base in Europe ?
. From a practical point of view , pilot projects and other similar actions are necessary to get started , try this out in practice and demonstrate how such activities can be carried out .
This is where we are at the moment .
I mentioned the bigger problem , which has not yet been clarified , of how any of this can be reported as official development assistance .
We have to be careful about that .
If business can identify something that is interesting for it and if governments in developing countries can see this as being in their interests also , that is when we should urge them to meet .

Thank you very much Commissioner .
Question No 50 by Alexander de Roo ( H-0431 / 03 ) :
Subject : Spain 's National Hydrological Plan ( NHP ) and conservation of the lower Júcar river
The plans for the river Ebro in Spain 's National Hydrological Plan ( NHP ) have aroused major controversy .
Nothing has been said , however , regarding the fate of the river Júcar , the second largest river in the Spanish Mediterranean region , which under the NHP is to be used as a centre for hydraulic redistribution in the Mediterranean area , with three transfers within a 200-kilometre stretch , namely the Tajo-Segura transfer , in operation since 1980 , the Júcar-Vinalopó transfer , already being slowly introduced , and the Ebro transfer scheme , under which it is planned to transfer 63 hm 3 of water in the vicinity of the Tous dam .
The lower and middle sections of the river Júcar are of major environmental interest .
The stretch of river from Tous to the sea has been proposed as a site of Community importance by the Valencia Generalitat ( LIC ES 5232007 ) . Furthermore , the final stretch of the river and the adjacent coastal waters are included on the list of wetlands of the Community of Valencia .
The Júcar basin was recently chosen as a pilot river basin ( PRB ) as part of the procedures for applying the framework directive on water .
Is the Commission aware that neither the Júcar basin hydrological plan nor the NHP make provision for environmental flow for the Júcar between the Real del Júcar irrigation system and the estuary ?
Does the Commission think it possible to ensure the conservation of a stretch of water of such major environmental importance without using hydrological planning to provide it with a minimum maintenance flow and prevent biological pollution through mixing with waters from other basins ?
I should like to thank the Commissioner for her reply .
It is true that the DG for the Environment has not given the go-ahead for the EUR 80 million subsidy for which the Spanish Government has applied for the Júcar-Vinalopó project .
The DG for the Regions did want to grant the subsidy and subsequently asked the European Investment Bank to draft a socio-economic report about the economic viability of the Júcar project .
However , the representatives of the European Investment Bank have only spoken with the Spanish Government in Spain , not with any of the people who are opposed to the Júcar project .
The report of the European Investment Bank on this Júcar-project is not public .
I should like to ask the Commission whether this report can be made public , particularly the technical information which the Spanish Government has supplied to the European Investment Bank ?
Question No 51 by Chris Davies ( H-0441 / 03 ) :
Subject : Ecological flows of the Ebro river and the Water Framework Directive
What is the Commission 's current view of the scientific and political debate in Spain over the estimates of the minimum ecological flow of the Ebro river to its delta after the Ebro transfer ?
The Water Framework Directive requires that there is no further deterioration of current status and that a ' good ' ecological status ( including hydromorphology ) is achieved in the whole river basin and not just in certain stretches of a river ; how does the Commission intend to ensure this is achieved in the whole of the Ebro basin in view of the proposed Ebro transfer to the north , east and south-east of Spain ?
Does the Commission agree that the twin objectives of prevention of deterioration of current status , and the characterisation of what should constitute ' good ' ecological status in the whole of the Ebro basin need to be fulfilled before further evaluation of whether the Ebro transfer is technically possible and which regions could finally benefit from it ?
In practice that answer was very satisfactory .
I thank the Commissioner .
Question No 52 by Camilo Nogueira Román ( H-0434 / 03 ) :
Subject : Global costs of repairing the environmental damage caused by the wreck of the ' Prestige '
In view of the extent of the ' Prestige ' disaster and its impact on several Member States , will the Commission carry out a study of the costs of restoring the status quo ante and making good the long-term environmental and associated socio-economic damage caused by the wreck of the vessel off the Galician coast ?
Mr President , Commissioner , the reality of the situation cannot be denied . We cannot turn our backs on the consequences of the Prestige disaster .
Fuel oil is still washing up on the coasts of Galicia and in the Bay of Biscay ; a week ago I saw this situation for myself , in the Rostro sandbanks at Cape Finisterre . The Prestige is still lying at the bottom of the sea .
It is haemorrhaging fuel oil and we do not really know what it contains .
Fishermen , scientists and Galician and Cantabrian society as a whole are all extremely concerned at the damage that has already taken place and crucially , at the uncertainty of what the future holds .
Objective studies state that the final balance of the damage caused by the Prestige will exceed EUR three billion .
Compare these sums , Commissioner , with those you have just mentioned , which are totally inadequate .
I therefore put the question to you once again : is the Commission going to remain passive or is it going to take the bull by the horns once and for all and shoulder its responsibilities in order to solve this very real problem and to impose some order on the unregulated traffic that plies our seas ?
. I do not accept that the Commission has been passive .
I was there immediately after the accident .
I offered the Spanish authorities funding or co-funding for an environmental impact study .
We have been in active contact with the Spanish authorities , but we cannot force ourselves upon the Spanish Government or people .
We have to work in collaboration .
We also immediately followed up in political terms , proposing different measures in order to be able to repair damage of this kind and we have also set aside money both from the structural funds and the solidarity fund .
If the Spanish Government wants more money or assistance , we expect it to contact us to determine exactly what should be done .
I also hope it is considering our offer to make the environmental impact study I mentioned , because this is for the longer term and would be very useful in preventing such accidents from happening again .
Again I underline that we took the necessary measures immediately after this accident and will continue to react immediately .
Our civil protection unit was also activated immediately .
We have been doing everything in our power to assist and help the Spanish Government , authorities and people .
We are willing to listen to any further requests that may arise and we will deal with them in an appropriate manner .
Question No 53 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0457 / 03 ) :
Subject : Health risks for the population of Athens from high concentrations of nitrogen dioxide and microparticulates
In its answer to my Oral Question H-0371 / 03
I thank the Commissioner for her substantiated reply .
I must of course point out that we are talking about statistics for 2001 and living in 2003 and there is the added element of the numerous works for the Olympic Games and the dust floating above Athens against which no suitable measures have been taken .
This being so , I should like to ask the Commissioner if there are any plans to investigate the question of worsening pollution as a result of this photochemical pollution and micro particles and the factor of the works for the Olympic Games , which are being carried out without suitable measures being taken to protect citizens ' health .
Question No 54 by Ari Vatanen ( H-0470 / 03 ) :
Subject : NATURA 2000 site designation
The rules of Article 4 of the Habitat Directive 92 / 43 / EEC
. The Commission has , on several occasions , looked into the correct transposition of the habitats directive and the birds directive into Finnish legislation .
At present the Commission is of the opinion that the Articles referring to the procedure of establishing the Natura 2000 network have been correctly transposed .
As the Natura 2000 network has caused a considerable amount of controversy in Finland , the Commission has looked into the national procedure for site selection and has in past years notified Finland of some shortcomings , both in the number of sites to be protected and the quality of the data .
Finland has endeavoured to address these shortcomings .
The present quality of the data is acceptable to the Commission .
The complaints from Finland seem to contain some misinterpretations of the evaluation principles .
The Commission bases its evaluations on the latest submitted data , not on the oldest information .
The Commission is aware that some landowners in Finland have been dissatisfied with the Natura 2000 proposals .
The Commission has been informed that all landowners have had the possibility to see the proposals and to lodge complaints against them before Finland officially submitted the proposals to the Commission .
The Finnish courts have examined the complaints on a case-by-case basis , considering each time the validity of the data .
The majority of the complaints have been rejected by the courts .
The directive does not establish any requirements for consultation at the national level and thus , in respect of the principle of subsidiarity , it has been for individual Member States to exercise their responsibilities , taking account of national laws and procedures .
The Commission 's concerns are therefore limited to respect the scientific selection criteria as set out in the directive .
Although the Commission can understand that in these cases the dissatisfaction might persist , it cannot conclude that the Finnish authorities have arbitrarily misinterpreted the rules or proceeded in a way that has been contradictory to those rules .
Commissioner , I appreciate your answer and your effort generally regarding the environment in Europe , but what you say is simply not coherent with everyday facts .
When this was implemented in Finland it was mainly based on old protection schemes , which do not meet directive criteria for Natura 2000 sites .
Therefore , you must understand the position of the private landowners .
Their right to use their own land was wrongly prohibited and in fact , contrary to what you say , the appeals in the Finnish courts were handled en bloc .
99 times out of 100 they were rejected outright .
People therefore feel frustrated and powerless .
We believe in Europe , but how do we convince ordinary European citizens or the Finnish farmer if they feel they have been steamrollered by Europe and , in this case , by the Finnish authorities ?
They have simply been the victims of injustice .
As the time allocated to Question Time to the Commission is at an end , Questions Nos 55 to 85 will be answered in writing
The next item is the report ( A5-0270 / 2003 ) by Elizabeth Lynne , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Communication from the Commission ' Towards a United Nations legally-binding instrument to promote and protect the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities ' ( COM ( 2003 ) 16 - 2003 / 2100 ( INI ) ) .
I am very pleased to open the sitting this evening in the European Year of People with Disabilities , which we are working our way through .
I underline , along with my colleagues in Parliament and the Commission , the importance we attach to this mission .
. Mr President , I should like to say thank you to the sign language interpreters .
I wish we could have sign language interpretation every plenary session , for every report .
I should also like to thank everyone who has helped me to write this report : all the MEPs that have worked very hard with me to come up with compromise amendments ; the Commission ; and especially disabled people 's organisations .
I have taken a lot of advice on this report .
That is why it is a good one .
It is not my report .
It is a report that has been brought together with the help of disabled people .
I am delighted that the UN ad hoc Committee , between 16 and 27 June 2003 , decided on a specific convention on disabled people 's rights .
I believe only a specific , legally-binding convention will do , rather than any other instrument .
But there must be a monitoring mechanism to see how disabled people are treated in practice across the world .
I put in my report a list of rights that should be included in any UN convention .
It is a non-exhaustive list because of space .
However , I called for a mainly rights-based approach to get away , once and for all , from the medical model of disability and to cover all forms of disability , whether it is a person using a wheelchair , or somebody with another mobility problem , a hearing impairment , a visual impairment , a learning disability , a mental health problem or any other hidden disability .
We must be inclusive .
There are 37 million disabled people in the European Union .
There are 600 million disabled people world-wide .
There has already been some progress in the United Nations : the 1981 World Programme of Action and the 1993 Standard Rules on Equalisation of Opportunities for People with Disabilities , to name but two .
At EU level there has also been progress : in 1997 , for instance , Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam brought forward the employment directive and the Action Programme .
But as I said in my report , we now need a specific disability directive at EU level .
We need all Member States to implement the current employment directive that is due to be implemented this year .
There are many Member States that have not even started to look at implementation .
Even if we did get it right at European level , 80 % of disabled people come from developing countries .
That is why we need a legally-binding convention covering a whole raft of different rights , including the right to quality of life .
That also means protection from degrading and inhumane treatment . That includes institutionalisation .
We need to see access to employment because a vast majority of disabled people do not have employment .
We need access to vocational training , education and the right to inclusion , which is so important .
That means access to buildings , access to live as independent a life as possible , and access to public transport .
If people do not have access to public transport they cannot get to their place of work .
Then we look at civil and political rights .
I believe very strongly in equal citizenship , as do most of us here . That means no more ' rights for disabled people ' , but ' equal rights for disabled people ' .
Those equal rights mean access to financial support as well ; access to health care , access to culture and leisure - including sporting activities , equality before the law and the right to justice .
I understand that a split vote has been asked for so that only organisations of disabled people , rather than organisations representing disabled people , will be consulted over this .
Let us remember that we deal with developing countries here !
Many do not have organisations of disabled people . They only have organisations representing disabled people .
Are we going to exclude them ?
We are not just dealing with the European Union . This is a world-wide convention .
Even within the EU there are many organisations that would be left out , including the Royal National Institute for the Deaf in the UK , and , more importantly , people with profound learning disabilities and severe mental problems , who quite often need an advocate to speak on their behalf .
I urge you to vote for this report in its entirety and not be tempted to vote in the split vote .
Mr President , I should like in particular to thank Mrs Lynne and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for drafting this report .
This report confirms that the issue of disability is an issue with political , social and economic aspects .
It is an issue which horizontally touches all European Union policies .
In particular within the framework of the European Year of Disability , this report sends a clear message to the European Union and to the Member States , making Parliament 's commitment known in the clearest of terms .
The first point which I should like to raise is the future UN Convention , which is expected to be a very important document of historic significance .
Your report will be useful and will play an important role for the Commission services during the discussions being held with the Member States , on the one hand , and the UN , on the other hand , on this future Convention .
It is well in keeping with the Commission proposals and communication .
We share the same principles and the same objectives .
In particular , I should like to comment on the core political aspect on which we agree , namely an approach based on human , social and political rights .
It is worth noting that the UN Convention is further recognition of the fact that it is not the individual 's disability that needs to be corrected , it is the restraining environment that must adapt so as to safeguard full participation and equal opportunities for the individual .
The emphasis has shifted from the medical model to the so-called social standard , to building a policy based on fundamental human rights , on the one hand , and on social rights and guaranteed equal opportunities on the other .
In issuing this communication , the Commission has made clear its intention to promote this rights-based approach at European level and to rely on the European experience obtained to date from combating discrimination .
In addition , the Commission is insisting on an approach based on the social integration of the disabled and has tabled the issue of disability as one of the basic elements in the national action plans drawn up for social integration and combating poverty .
The Commission has requested negotiating instructions due to the fact that part of the Convention concerns the issue of ' non discrimination ' , which now comes under the jurisdiction of the European Union following the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Discussions with the Council have continued up to today , while at the same time the Commission is working closely with the Presidency on the pre-preparatory work for the Convention .
Mrs Lynne referred to the specific issue of developing countries and to the policy for development cooperation , which so far has been limited to drafting an explanatory memorandum on disability and development .
This memorandum , which is addressed to the representations and services of the European Union , was drafted in close cooperation with non-governmental organisations representing the disabled .
This document , which has been distributed to the representations of the European Union in developing countries , has had positive reactions at both government level and at the level of civil society organisations and it is important that , for the first time , we have an approach to the issue of disability in relation to development policy and development aid .
Although it is difficult in the initial stage to call for disability to be incorporated into the central body of development aid policies , this is a clear declaration that disability must be included and dealt with in the policies of every state in all sectors .
My final comment concerns the possible disability directive .
As Mrs Lynne has already said , the European Union has had a general directive on non-discrimination in the field of employment which also relates to the disabled since 2000 .
This directive , which really was a big step for Europe and was accepted by all the Member States , has not progressed as we would have expected .
Most countries have not yet presented even a preliminary bill for transposing this directive , even though the final deadline is December 2003 .
Despite repeated efforts during discussions in the Employment Councils , my letter to all the ministers and the mobilisation of European and national organisations , it would appear that the Member States have serious difficulties of a political and economic nature .
I call here on Parliament to also play an important role in exerting pressure on the Member States to get them to adopt this directive in principle .
However , I believe that it is clear from the situation today that it is premature to promote a new directive which would extend the scope of policies beyond the field of employment to all policy sectors overall .
I think that this would create a difficult situation in the Council and it would perhaps make it even more difficult to adopt the first directive , which has come up against the difficulties I referred to earlier .
At the same time , however , the Commission has proposed that the Member States examine and decide themselves if Community legislation should be used to combat discrimination on the grounds of disability in sectors other than employment in a report on the application of the directive on equal opportunities .
This will give us a first official reaction on the part of the Member States to this second , important step which , politically , is clearly a step which the European Union needs to take , but which it needs to take at the right time , with important preconditions to success , both at the decision-making level and at the level of practical implementation .
To conclude , the Commission has undertaken to participate actively with the Member States in the negotiations on the United Nations Convention .
Participation in these negotiations will also continue after the European Year of Disability within the framework of continuing action here , because our objective is to present an action plan at European level at the end of 2003 , at the end of the Year of Disability , which will be the result of all the work carried out in all the Member States during this year , so that we have commitments on the part of the Member States at legislative , budgetary , policy and programme level .
Mr President , I will begin by saying that I fully agree with the report by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs produced by Mrs Lynne and that , furthermore , I agree with what the Commissioner has just said , wishing everybody the best of luck - Parliament and the Commission itself - with the objectives we have set , because they will undoubtedly have an effect on the well-being of thousands and thousands of citizens .
All the Member States agree that it is necessary to integrate disability into the procedures used by the organs monitoring the Treaties , either in the form of a protocol attached to one of the existing Treaties on human rights or as an instrument containing general principles , leaving open the possibility of subsequently adding implementing protocols .
I believe , however , that we will only be able to achieve the desired objectives by means of a legally binding convention which includes civil , political , economic , social and cultural rights suited to the circumstances of disabled people .
An agreement of a binding nature will demonstrate that disabled people face in their daily lives - as we all know - serious generalised problems which relate both to access difficulties and to bureaucracy and the attitudes of their co-citizens .
Its objective is not to create new laws but to clarify and adapt the existing ones .
The creation of a specific convention will be the only way to provide an effective monitoring mechanism for analysing the treatment received by disabled people throughout the world .
The convention will prioritise the rights of disabled people within the agendas of governments .
Its approval must mark the beginning of an effective and specific process aimed at guaranteeing the full and equitable integration of disabled people throughout the world .
This means that the problems of these people will be taken into account in the political decision-making processes at regional , national and international levels .
The European Union should also guarantee that organisations of disabled people are represented and act as advisers throughout the process and not just at the final moment .
I would just like to insist on certain points which are important , although other Members have mentioned them , and which we in Parliament and in the Group of the Party of European Socialists have been advocating : the existence , in many cases , of multiple discrimination - as a disabled woman or a disabled immigrant - eliminating legal barriers in order to eliminate physical barriers , education - which is very important - in values , which includes non-discrimination against disability in schools .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Lynne , for her excellent report , which was , moreover , adopted unanimously in the Parliamentary committee : a report which is evidence of her particular sensitivity and experience , not least as rapporteur of the document launching the European Year of People with Disabilities 2003 .
The unanimous vote in committee also serves to prove that disability is not a left- or right-wing issue , but an issue promoted by those who care about respect for the rights , equal opportunities and dignity of all citizens .
Moreover , the figures are no joking matter : there are 600 million people with disabilities in the world , 38 million of which live in Europe , and there will be 45 million in the enlarged Europe next year .
It should be pointed out that anyone can become disabled at any point in life .
It happens , in particular , as a result of the ageing of society , but that is not the only cause : consider - and I am quoting a figure relating to Italy - the 24 000 young people who become disabled each year as a result of accidents caused by the frenetic approach to life and social activity today .
These are figures which give cause for thought .
Hence the importance of establishing binding international standards seeking to protect the rights of people with disabilities with an appropriate built-in monitoring mechanism .
The binding UN Convention adopted last June , which has just such a monitoring mechanism , like the six human rights conventions , will have to bring to light the considerable , widespread problems encountered by people with disabilities in their everyday lives , whether in terms of access or bureaucracy or social attitudes .
It will therefore form the basis for the rights of all people with disabilities throughout the world .
I therefore trust that the European Presidency too , the Council in its role of negotiator , will make every endeavour to achieve a better-defined , more specific text in early 2004 than that presented in Mexico , in order to define practical standards to guide the approach of governments .
However , I regret the position adopted thus far by the European Commission , which has not yet provided a timetable for a future horizontal directive on the rights of people with disabilities in Europe and has not given specific or genuine undertakings to incorporate the rights of people with disabilities into its policies .
The directive on employment and occupation is important , as is the directive on access to transport , but we need to go further , Commissioner . In particular , we cannot let the different countries get away with inertia as regards their legislation .
Mr President , it is extremely important that we have a legally-binding convention on the issue of people with disabilities .
Legislation is necessary which not only protects the rights of people with disabilities but also ensures that people with disabilities are provided with support and structures that will allow them to participate on an equal footing in all aspects of life .
The best-placed people to do this and present what is needed are people with disabilities themselves .
We have to be very careful about telling people with disabilities what they need and what we can do for them .
Unless you are a person with a disability , you do not know what is necessary to allow you to participate in society on an equal footing .
It is very good to see people here tonight providing sign language .
This should not only be for tonight : it should be looked at on an ongoing basis .
We also need to look at how people are educated .
We need to ensure that education is fully integrated and allows people with disabilities not to be segregated , but to be educated along with everyone else .
There is a tendency when we speak about disability to provide certain services for people with disabilities , but to segregate them .
We should look at sign language , at Braille , at all these things that are necessary and allow them to be part of the educational curriculum in all the Member States .
People should not have to go to special places to be educated or to participate .
This is extremely important .
Mr Howitt mentioned the Commission and its commitment to bringing forward a directive by the end of the year .
In the year of disabilities , it is not enough to say we are going to do a lot and then at the end of this year forget all about it and go along as normal .
We need to have something at the end that we can be proud of , to allow people to participate in society .
We need a broad perspective , not one which focuses only on accessibility in education .
This needs to be done in relation to disabled people themselves .
On that final point , I would like to say that the Centre for Independent Living , which is based in Ireland , is bringing a delegation from all over Europe for the second part-session here in September .
There is going to be a special intergroup which will be meeting with people with disabilities .
They will be telling us exactly what they want and what they would like to see brought forward .
This will be a great opportunity .
Everybody interested in the issue should come along and listen to people outlining what they want .
They are the people who are best-placed to do so .
We have to listen and allow them to make the decisions , we should not make decisions for them .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the European Year of People with Disabilities , the European Union has the chance to provide a great opportunity for making up for a huge amount of lost time .
Politics certainly cannot give back sight to the blind or speech to the dumb or mobility to the sick , but it can and , at all events , must enable people with disabilities to bear the difficulties of everyday life with less physical and mental effort and thus to give them the chance to lead an even more dignified life .
Sometimes - as we know from personal experience - it does not take much to give them this chance : removing structural barriers , building according to certain criteria which take into account the needs of a section of our people who have difficulties .
Thus , politics has the task of giving the issue due consideration : this is not charity or a work of mercy but recognition of the right to the best life possible .
Where , then , a physical disability goes hand in hand with a state of financial need or even extreme poverty - and that is the most common thing in the world - the situation becomes even more tragic .
The figures recorded in the report are alarming : there are 600 million people with disabilities , many of which come from the developing world .
We can therefore imagine their quality of life .
The Union for Europe of the Nations Group , on behalf of which I am speaking , is aware that there is still much which can and must be done to address a major issue which affects millions of families in the world , who are waiting for politics and politicians to respond with practical measures to a topical problem which continues to be urgent .
However , the group acknowledges the Commission 's sound proposals and endorses the conclusions drawn by the rapporteur , Mrs Lynn , in her report .
We will therefore vote for the resolution , which has the merit of giving many unfortunate people to whom fate has dealt a bitter blow the right to hope once again .
Mr President , I would like to echo the compliments which Mrs Lynne has received for her report , but the report is not complete in my view .
I welcome attention being given to the rights of the disabled .
However , all the rights that are mentioned relate to people with a disability ; none relate to the rights of the unborn child with a disability .
This unborn life is also entitled to our protection .
All too often , antenatal pregnancy diagnostics is only used to determine whether an unborn child has a disability , whereupon , in the case of a disability , an induced termination of pregnancy is proceeded with .
It is a slap in the face of people with a congenital disability to know that we make such a fuss about their rights , while their disability in the unborn child would be a reason for termination .
It appears that there , the disabled do not have any rights , let alone dignity .
Mr President , 40 million European citizens are affected by some type of disability , but these individuals ' full participation in society is not yet a reality because they still suffer prejudice and lack fundamental rights in terms of access to education , to gainful employment , to information and communication , as well as difficulties in access to the built environment and to transport .
There are some loopholes which must be closed .
Firstly , the international treaties currently in force in the field of human rights do apply to persons with disabilities but none of them contains specific and binding provisions in this area .
Then we have the European Union , which has been relatively active in protecting persons with disabilities , but which adopts measures that are intended only to establish a general framework for equal treatment in employment .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur , who calls for the adoption of a United Nations convention .
This convention will be able to highlight the serious problems facing disabled persons in their daily lives .
I wish to take this opportunity to recall that the organisations representing disabled persons must participate fully in the drafting of this convention , and in defining and assessing all the measures intended for them .
Despite the Commissioner 's understandable caution about the commitment of the Member States , I would ask the Commission not to delay presenting a wide-ranging Community directive on the rights of the disabled and incorporating these rights into our cooperation and development policy .
Mr President , the rapporteur has turned to the problems of the disabled with particular , I would say even excess care , and she deserves congratulations from all our Members .
Usually we all offer to say nice things about the disabled .
What is not mentioned , however , is that the problem of disability does not concern a separate group of unlucky people ; it concerns all of us , because we are all potentially disabled .
We just have to remember the thousands of people made disabled every year by accidents at work or on the roads .
This fact alone can incite us to the required degree and reduce our negligence to date .
We all know that the major revolution in the approach to disability over recent years is that the disabled are not treated simply as people with problems but as subjects of human rights .
However , what has not yet been fully realised is that this is not just a question of additional recognition of certain extra rights of a group of people .
The recognition of the disabled as people with rights is part of the realisation of the idea of the functioning of democracy .
It is therefore a question of the effective exercise of all existing fundamental rights .
? he right of free expression of opinion presupposes the right to information .
Neither of these two rights can be exercised by the disabled unless they are given the right language .
Universal access to public services is a dead letter if the obstacles to access to services for the disabled are not removed .
The fundamental rights of the elector and the elected remain inactive for certain groups of disabled as long as no care is taken to ensure there are specialised arrangements which make it possible for them to vote .
This being so , it is not a question of wishing for more advanced safeguarding of rights which are already generally safeguarded for the disabled or even the principle of the recognition of specialised rights ; it is a question of how such a fundamental issue to the functioning of democracy has remained unresolved for so many years .
Allow me at this point to ask a simple question : 2003 has been proclaimed the Year of Disability .
This sort of celebratory proclamation has a practical impact not only when it is confined to raising people 's awareness or collating material , but also when provision is made for specific timetables .
I know that Commissioner Diamantopoulou has an increased interest in and is particularly sensitive to an advanced policy for the disabled .
However , the Commission and the Member States do not appear to be on the same wavelength .
This explains the fact that the Commission , as the rapporteur has pointed out , is avoiding making any such commitment .
I should like , therefore , to ask the Commissioner to convey to the Commission our position that it is not possible for the European Union to reliably exert pressure on the members of the UN to vote for a special convention which will also be binding on developing and poorer countries when the more developed world refuses to set an example in this endeavour .
In all events , the basic line which needs to be adopted is not the recognition of new rights , but the effective application of rights already safeguarded in the international conventions recognised by the UN .
In this way , safeguarding the rights of the disabled will move away from the idea that it is a question of granting rights and will be established on the perception that it is an obligation based on commitments undertaken internationally .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , certainly , the presence at this moment in the Chamber of 25 Members out of 623 , including the President , bears witness to the importance attached to this issue - I am serious , in view of the time - the issue of people with disabilities and the consideration given to them by legislation .
I am convinced that it is we legislators and politicians who are responsible for discrimination against people with disabilities , because of everything we have failed to do thus far .
Mr Mantovani , in 2004 , there needs to be a legally binding UN decision to protect people with disabilities - it is necessary because , otherwise , they will not have their rights - and there is also a need for a European directive on disability .
I regret this too .
I know that if Commissioner Diamantopoulou had the powers of a European minister - the powers of a minister of one of the national states - she would have already resolved the issue of people with disabilities , for we have all seen the importance she has attached to this matter over the past four years .
I would like to make one more suggestion - to myself , more than anything - with a view to resolving the issue of disability : given that politicians are deaf , it may be better for us to channel our energies into educating young people - the few who are not - to respect disability .

Lastly , Mr President , I will end , if I may , by mentioning a subject which is very dear to the shadow rapporteur , Mr Mantovani , who has been striving on behalf of the non-self-sufficient for a lifetime , and saying that , in too many parts of the world , the non-self-sufficient , in addition to being disabled , are also elderly and do not receive the financial assistance which would allow them to live dignified lives as elderly , disabled people .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mrs Lynne most warmly , not just for the quality of the report she has presented to us , but also because she gave such careful consideration to the different proposals put to her .
Every year , throughout the world and here in Europe , the fundamental rights of disabled people continue to be infringed in many ways .
Even in Europe , the ill-treatment of disabled people is often a taboo subject , as is the very subject of disability itself .
These problems affect real men and women but most importantly victims .
Disabled people are vulnerable both physically and intellectually . This indicates the desirability of a legally-binding instrument and specific legal protection for disabled people the world over .
I am , of course , very happy that this question is on the agenda of the United Nations .
As was the case in respect of women and children , it is certainly now time for all the nations of the world to consider the protection of the fundamental rights of disabled people and the respect of these rights .
Drawing up a convention would establish global reference points for drafting national policies and legislation . It would enable appropriate monitoring and control mechanisms to be put in place to ensure that the fundamental rights and dignity of disabled people are respected .
We are aware that the Charter of Fundamental Rights outlaws discrimination on the grounds of disability and states that the integration of disabled people must be assured .
Above all , however , the first article of the Charter affirms the right to human dignity .
Europe is founded on the rejection of the differentiation , segregation and negation of people on any basis whatsoever .
It is therefore essential that , in addition to the categories of rights we have established in this report , we establish the right to protection against any form of violence and the right to protection against cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment .
In this regard , I hope the European Commission will be in a position to put to Parliament a proposal for a comprehensive European Union directive on disabled people at some time in the future .
The action we take in relation to disabled people must seek to combat not only violence and ill-treatment , but also the negation and infringement of disabled people 's most fundamental rights in their daily lives .
To this end , I believe we must adopt pro-active policies to integrate disabled people into the whole of society on the same terms as any other citizens .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Bushill-Matthews .
Tonight he has made his best speech ever in the House .
It would appear that we have had some influence on him .
We all recognise that there are millions upon millions of people in the European Union and around the world who suffer indignities every day of their lives because we have failed , not only to pass legislation , but to change society 's attitude to them .
We constantly obstruct their path towards enjoying a full human existence .
There are six hundred million disabled people across the world , 80 % of whom are in the developing world .
It is clear , as the Commissioner said , that we need to address this in our development and aid policies .
It is clear that a voluntary approach to guarantee rights for people with disabilities is not working .
We need legally-based rights , as this report points out , at an international level .
We need a convention to do that .
We are here as representatives of states , all of which have failed to implement a directive that they freely entered into not more than two years ago .
They have all failed to implement the framework directive .
Therefore we have to accept our own responsibility for that .
It is a matter of regret for me that in my own country we have a proposed disability bill , intended to implement the framework directive , which refuses to accept a rights-based approach for people with disabilities .
I simply cannot understand how , after all the years of experience , this continues to be the case .
I listened with care to the Commissioner when she gave her reasons as to why she has not brought forward a draft directive under Article 13 of the EC Treaty .
I have no doubts at all that she is committed to providing legally-based rights for people with disabilities , but her argument on not bringing forward a new draft directive is wrong .
By bringing forward a new draft directive greater pressure would be brought to bear on Member States and people in this House to ensure that what is there already will be implemented .
If we sit back and allow Member States to stall on the current directive , by not putting pressure on them through a new directive , we would be making a grave mistake .
What mandate , if any , has the Council given the Commission to negotiate on behalf of the European Union in relation to the United Nations Convention on People with Disabilities ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to join with everyone who has already congratulated Mrs Lynne on her excellent and exhaustive work examining the challenges facing people with disabilities and to congratulate Mrs Cerdeira Morterero on the major contribution made by the opinion she has delivered .
As has already been emphasised in this debate , it is estimated that around 600 million people in the world are affected by one form of disability or another . This equates to 10 % of the world 's population , and there is a direct link between disability on the one hand and poverty and social exclusion on the other .
The problem faced by disabled citizens is the way in which principles of equality and non-discrimination are applied , in other words , the problems in accessing the rights of full citizenship also faced by people who are discriminated against on any other grounds .
The most important aspect of overcoming this discrimination , furthermore , is the attitude that we all take in the various decisions we face in our daily lives .
We in the European Parliament 's intergroup for disabled persons - and I wish at this juncture to make a special reference to the group 's chairman , Mr Richard Howitt , who has been tireless in chairing this intergroup - in close collaboration with the European Disability Forum , we have , despite everything that has been achieved , noted some points on both minor and major issues that concern everyone : with regard to disabled access to city buses , to banning obstacles in the built environment and with regard to telecommunications .
Much , however , remains to be done .
As our rapporteur said , it is curious that the Commission should consider a new United Nations convention to be needed to promote and protect the rights and dignity of disabled persons alongside other conventions devoted to specific areas of human rights and yet is not of the view that this principle should also apply to European legislation .
We hope that the Commission will pay sufficient attention to the Disabled People 's Parliament that will be meeting in our own Parliament buildings in Brussels in November . We also hope that it will then think not only about the legislative initiatives that must be taken at international and Member-State level , but also about those that the Commission itself will be taking .
I would first like to thank Mrs Lynne for her report . It underlines the need to establish international legally-binding instruments to provide better protection of the rights of disabled people .
This is an appropriate moment to point out that Member States are not making sufficient efforts to ensure that disabled people enjoy the same rights as non-disabled people .
Essentially , what is at issue are the so-called access rights : rights to access a job , buildings , email and the Internet .
These rights may exist on paper , but they are not a reality .
Present European Union legislation on discrimination against disabled people only relates to employment .
Discrimination , however , occurs in all areas of people 's daily lives . It follows that we must adopt a horizontal approach and integrate this factor into all political domains .
The European Year of People with Disabilities is in full swing .
It should mark the start of lasting change for our so-called invisible citizens .
Its success will be measured in tangible results . These include increasing the public profile of disabled people and establishing more comprehensive measures to combat discrimination .
We would like the Commission to enter into a firm undertaking in relation to disabled people .
( Written statement abbreviated in accordance with Rule 120 ( 7 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) .
.
( DE ) Mr President , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by warmly thanking you , Mr Ojeda Sanz , for your report on the extension of the Guinea fisheries protocol to 31 December 2003 .
I am glad that you give our proposal your full support .
In your report , you ask the Commission to resume negotiations with the Revolutionary People 's Republic of Guinea as soon as this year , in order to reach longer-term arrangements concerning our fishing relations with that country .
I can already tell you that this has been done .
A new fisheries protocol , to run for five years , is to enter into force on 1 January 2004 .
Even before negotiations commenced , we commissioned a study on the ex post-evaluation of the current protocol and to analyse the impact of the new one .
This study produced results in good time for the beginning of negotiations , and so these could provide input into the new protocol .
The proposal will be presented to this House and to the Council as soon as the Commission has formally adopted it .
Let me now turn to the amendments .
Although I can agree to the first , I would like to point out to you that the Commission has already , under the Interinstitutional Agreement , forwarded to Parliament the information you demand .
In essence , then , this amendment is no longer necessary .
I regret to say that the Commission cannot endorse the second amendment , as it would contravene the procedure applicable to fisheries protocols .
The protocols are annexed to the framework agreements , and so no new negotiating mandate is required for them to be extended .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner very much for his information .
I would like to say , and this will please the Members waiting to speak on this and other reports , that I am not going to use up the five minutes which the Presidency has granted me .
Firstly , I would like to say that the protocol agreed between Guinea and the European Union is beneficial to both parties .
I believe that this is an important conclusion , above all with a view to the negotiation of the next Agreement .
The previous protocol , which has now been extended , is the eighth in the series since the two parties signed the fisheries agreement in 1983 .
This extension includes the same fishing opportunities and the same conditions for 2003 .
The truth is that we expected to have an assessment report beforehand on the situation of the populations , which , for technical reasons relating to the vessel which would have to carry out this type of investigation , could not be produced .
However , and now that the Commissioner has confirmed that this information will be available soon , we expected this information to be available during this year ; because the results of that investigation are the ones which will allow us to verify whether or not the objectives and conditions for the signature of this agreement have been fulfilled .
And one of these conditions is the reduction in the global fishing effort in the waters under Guinean jurisdiction .
This condition is based on the cautionary principle introduced for the first time in the protocol of 2001 and whose aim is to guarantee the recovery of certain fishing grounds within its jurisdictional waters .
By means of that assessment , the delay of which has led to this extension , the Commission will decide on a subsequent negotiation , but this time , also according to what the Commissioner has said , with a considerably longer period of time .
My two amendments simply expressed , on the one hand , our dissatisfaction at not having been able to carry out the scheduled evaluation of resources , which justifies this one-year extension and , on the other , our criticism of the fact that this consultation has been communicated to Parliament so late , because it is no longer possible to issue an opinion before the payment of the financial compensation of some EUR 3 million which has already been paid at the end of June .
Furthermore , I consider it particularly useful for this House to be able to obtain more information relating to the implementation of the specific measures to which almost 50 % of the financial compensation in this agreement has been directed .
This financial compensation and these measures demonstrate the European Union 's interest in guaranteeing , beyond legitimate support for the fishing activities of Community ships , the sustainable development of the fisheries sector of the Republic of Guinea and greater control over the implementation of the measures laid down in the protocol .
I would also like to say that I am pleased that the Commissioner has informed us that the next agreement will be negotiated for five years , because I believe this is the best way to offer ship owners , companies and professionals in the sector a framework for safety and reliability , which will allow them to make investments and rationalise their activities in a more consistent way than they were able to do simply through two-year agreements .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists agrees with the conclusions of the rapporteur , Mr Ojeda , and of the Committee on Fisheries and will therefore vote in favour of the extension of the fisheries agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Guinea .
Having said this , we should learn certain lessons when it comes to renewing other fisheries agreements .
Firstly , duration .
It is not good either for the Community or for the other contracting party , or for the fisheries sector , for agreements to be of such a short duration - two years - as the existing one between the European Union and Guinea .
In order to make the necessary planning , it would be more appropriate to have an agreement of five years , even if it contains a mid-term review clause .
I must therefore express my satisfaction with the announcement Commissioner Fischler has just made to the effect that the next agreement will last for five years , if I have understood correctly .
Agreements must also serve the Community in terms of establishing strategic alliances within international fora with a view to making effective progress in the fight against illegal fishing , which is the greatest scourge faced by sustainable fishing and the future of fisheries .
We want the Community to help the Guinean authorities responsible for controlling and monitoring fishing activities in order to achieve sustainable exploitation of the fisheries resources of the country , showing respect for the environment and marine resources .

Our group therefore believes that it is justified to support this extension as requested by the rapporteur , Mr Ojeda , who has done wonderful work , since , as in the case of the other commercial fisheries agreements , it is beneficial to both parties , since it contributes to the development of local fishing , increases food safety in the country , allows its port infrastructure to be improved and because the money paid by the European Community means significant income in the form of financial compensation for the public coffers of the Republic of Guinea .
Furthermore , this agreement contributes in turn to European economic and social cohesion , since it benefits fleets from regions highly dependent on fishing , peripheral regions and regions with incomes below the Community average .
I would ask the Commission , when considering a further renewal of this agreement , to take account of the request , already made by Parliament on other occasions , to include the social clause in the next protocol .
Mr President , the Commission has claimed that it is entering a new phase with respect to fisheries agreements and that from now on they are to be called ' partnership agreements ' .
It is all very well changing what you call them , but if you do not change the approach there is very little to get excited about .
The one year extension makes it very clear that not much has changed .
I will give you three examples .
By the Commission 's own admission a new protocol was not negotiated because a scientific survey had not been conducted .
Basing access rights upon scientific information is fundamental to good management , so I do not believe this is very responsible .
Secondly , vessels are supposed to land fish for the local market , which could be an important factor in food security and yet ship owners can escape this requirement by paying a small fee .
In the Senegal Agreement this requirement is far more constraining so that vessels can lose their licences for failure to comply .
Thirdly , the by-catch allowed to be kept by the EU fleet is far higher than what the Guinean fleet is allowed to keep .
For instance , EU cephalopod vessels are allowed to keep over four times as much fish by-catch as Guinean vessels .
This is clearly discrimination .
What has the Commission done in its approach to agreements , other than to change the name ?
This is not an acceptable situation .
Can the Commission tell us if things have improved in the newly-signed protocol , particularly in relation to the fact that ship owners can opt out simply by paying a small fee , which they would be well capable of doing ?
In relation to discards , this is also completely unacceptable .
I would like the Commission to give us a few answers on this .
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Gröner and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities on this extremely positive report , which concerns the DAPHNE II Programme , the second five-year phase of a programme to combat violence against children , young people and women .
This proposal is a response to and a direct consequence of the recommendation made by the European Parliament in its interim report on the first DAPHNE Programme , in which it calls for violence to continue to be combated beyond 2003 .
Parliament 's report on the mid-term review of the DAPHNE Programme in 2002 had already presented an opportunity for us to debate some of the initial ideas on a programme that could follow on from the DAPHNE Programme .
We could , therefore , say that this proposal for DAPHNE II is in line with the discussions we held at that time : an increase in financial and human resources and more sharing of information and best practice , amongst other aspects .
The Commission has not made any substantial changes to the objectives , mechanisms or beneficiaries of the programme , because the current DAPHNE Programme is acknowledged to be an instrument that has produced excellent results .
In footballing terms , we would say that there is no point in changing a winning team .
We have , however , proposed some improvements to increase the programme 's impact .
The main improvement is doubtless the increase to the programme 's budget : EUR 41 million as compared to EUR 20 million .
The need for a larger budget is indeed a concern that the Commission and Parliament share .
Since the time that this proposal was presented to Parliament , the needs associated with the European Union 's enlargement have been taken into account with regard to all Commission instruments and , as you can see in the proposal for the 2004 budget , the sum currently earmarked for the DAPHNE II Programme stands at EUR 49.2 million for the period 2004-2008 .
This sum will provide almost EUR 10 million per year , which represents a 100 % increase , a doubling of current resources . This will put us in a better position from which to address the growing demand from organisations in Europe and the consequences of enlargement too .
A second improvement consists of the list of activities that can be supported and that are referred to in Article 4 .
The DAPHNE II proposal is clearer than DAPHNE I where this type of activity is concerned .
Another change has been made to exchange the information and best practice developed under the programme .
The aim of this is to increase the programme 's impact on the groups involved .
Specific invitations to submit proposals will be published with a view to identifying and defining the policies to pursue , where possible on the basis of the work already undertaken by the projects that have been funded to date . The aim is also to disseminate on a European scale the good practices developed in projects that have been funded .
This could be achieved by producing and making available not only traditional written material but also an increasing number of CD-ROMs , films , videos and websites or by promoting or arranging exchanges of experienced staff between civil society organisations in order to support the implementation of new solutions or practices that have proven to be effective in another context .
The last change we have made is to enable non-governmental organisations to use , adapt or transfer the results of the DAPHNE Programme to other parts of the Union or to other categories of beneficiaries .
These are the basic outlines of the presentation I wish to make , and I look forward to the debate and the questions you might want to ask so that we can obtain Parliament 's approval for this programme which I believe is a milestone in the fight against violence in the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner Vitorino , the DAPHNE Programme - as we will all well recall - was brought into being in response to the results of the Peking Platform for Action , in the aftermath of the Stockholm world congress on the sexual exploitation of children for commercial purposes and , finally , following the horrors of the Dutroux affair , which gave the European public a rude awakening .
The initiative was aimed at funding measures to combat violence against children , young people , and women in Europe , and its great success led to the DAPHNE I Programme , which will now keep on running right up to 2003 .
A four-year programme , it was funded to the tune of EUR 20 million .
My report is concerned with the Commission 's proposal for the DAPHNE II Programme , which is to run from 2004 to 2008 .
Within the programme 's framework , measures can now be promoted to protect the three groups that will benefit - children , young people , and women - as can the relevant preventive measures .
These include the establishment of networks for NGOs across Europe , support for collaboration between NGOs and authorities in the same field , measures to protect the target groups and to prevent violence against those belonging to them , studies , research work aimed at discovering the causes of violence , at preventing it , and at the support of groups at risk and their reintegration into society .
This includes the sharing of good practice and of information , as well as awareness programmes for the general public , for the victims , the groups at risk and for those who work with them .
Participation in the DAPHNE I Programme was open to the central and eastern European countries , as well as to Cyprus , Malta , Turkey and the countries belonging to EFTA and the European Economic Area , and there was the possibility of multiannual programmes .
Amendment No 11 is now aimed at linking DAPHNE with other Community programmes and sharing the experience of them with third states .
The DAPHNE Programme , which supports these projects , is now regarded , both in Europe and far beyond its borders , as exemplary and as an important instrument in combating violence .
What we have achieved is a change to framework conditions through regional initiatives with international concepts .
The German Protection against Violence Act , for example , has taken on distinct characteristics derived from European experience .
Let me also , at this point , mention the Austrian right of exclusion in cases of domestic violence , which keeps perpetrators of violence away from the home .
DAPHNE I 's budget made it possible to fund 140 projects .
The thirty-five projects selected in 2001 focussed on the genital mutilation of women , in which third countries were also involved , and the sexual exploitation of children through paedophilia .
It must be made clear , though , that these projects saw the submission of 662 proposals in the last two years , and that these would in fact have necessitated funding to the tune of EUR 65 million .
The glut of applications , and the fact that only 13 % of all projects in respect of which applications were submitted could be funded , makes it apparent that significantly greater sums need to be made available .
We cannot fail to come to the conclusion that funding for DAPHNE II must be increased to EUR 65 million , and my group , the Group of the Party of European Socialists , has supported an amendment to this effect .
If the praise heaped on DAPHNE I is not to be forgotten - and it is not a matter of controversy to say that it should not be - then this must be made a political priority .
The response from the Committee on Women 's Rights has been somewhat timid .
In contrast to what my group has proposed , we have come up with the figure of EUR 50 million , so I have submitted the new amendment and ask you to support it .
Amendment No 39 is intended to set up a helpdesk providing help to women 's organisations in the new Member States , which have as yet little experience of European programmes .
We want the European Year against Violence to be based on our experience with DAPHNE and to make a definite mark .
This European Year against Violence could become a reality as soon as 2006 .
I am aware that the idea of a substantial topping-up of funds is meeting with resistance from the Committee on Budgets , but if DAPHNE , which is founded upon the health articles in the Treaties , is not to go unheeded and be dismissed as a game like football - the example given by the Commissioner - for lack of a legal basis specific to it , and if we want to take seriously the problems involved in combating violence , then we must demonstrate political courage and make more funding available .

- ( DA ) Mr President , the Committee on Budgets ' opinion on the DAPHNE II Programme is primarily rather technical in scope , and of course this technical side is very important . How much in terms of funding should be allocated to the programme for combating violence against children , young people and women ?
As Mrs Gröner stated , there has been a lot of interest in seeking funds from the previous DAPHNE Programme , and there were far more high-quality projects than there was money for .
The programme has been implemented well and the funds used efficiently and , given the wealth of interest , there are clearly sound reasons for increasing the budget for DAPHNE , and also by an amount larger than the general budget increase we normally give in connection with enlargement .
It is , however , no secret that the multi-annual budgets for this type of policy - an internal policy - has a very low ceiling .
There is not a lot of extra money to give away . We must prioritise , and the Committee on Budgets has therefore been unable to give its support for a budget for DAPHNE of EUR 65 million .
We have instead proposed that we stick to the budget framework of EUR 49.2 million proposed by the Commission .
I can see that , in its report , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has arrived at a budget of EUR 50 million . It bears quite a lot of resemblance to the Committee on Budgets ' proposal , and it is an amount I would assess as defensible from a budgeting point of view .
I should also like to say how very pleased the Committee on Budgets is that the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has adopted our proposal that , after 2006 , the commitment appropriations for DAPHNE II be dependent upon an agreement with the budgetary authorities .
We shall , of course , only in the end be able to say how the budget for DAPHNE II will look after 2006 once the next multi-annual agreements and financial perspectives for the EU 's budget have been established , and it is of course a traditional proposal we have .
Overall , then , I wish to say that we in the Committee on Budgets are able to support the report as it stands , but we cannot support the amendment designed to increase the budget to EUR 65 million .
Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs . ( SV ) Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mrs Gröner , as rapporteur , for her committed work .
In Europe , there are still misapprehensions and false stereotypes surrounding the issue of violence against women and children .
The problem is too often treated as an unfortunate and natural part of life . Moreover , the victims - that is to say women and children - are often blamed .
That applies to violence within the family , but also to , for example , trafficking in women and structural violence against women .
That is something we must combat .
Many run a high risk of being exposed to violence and abuse , something that is the concern of all of us .
We are responsible for working for the effective combating of violence in the EU .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , my efforts have been directed towards ensuring that the purpose of DAPHNE shall be to combat and prevent all forms of violence , be it in the home or elsewhere .
That is what my committee has supported , and I am pleased that the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities also agrees with this position .
I am also pleased to see again amendments dealing with victims of human trafficking and the vulnerable position of street children .
The DAPHNE Programme has shown itself to be one of the most successful projects within the EU and has been adapted to many different types of difficulties and of problems involving violence that could not always be foreseen from the beginning .
DAPHNE has , for example , funded projects to combat female circumcision which , at the start of the programme , was not a problem that was greatly discussed .
Now , the DAPHNE Programme is to be extended by a further five years .
That is extremely commendable , and I am listening with interest to what the Commissioner has to say .
This is an important period , however .
The EU is to be enlarged by ten new Member States , which is why an increase in the budget is necessary .
In the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , we have supported an amount of EUR 65 million .
We believe that this is necessary and hope that our proposal will win a majority in plenary so that we can now show by our actions that we wish to combat violence against women and children .
Mr President , Commissioner , as has already been said , this programme is the result of analysing the success of DAPHNE I , which has been an enormously successful programme .
It has been a very positive programme , very well executed , with very satisfactory results , and the only negative point we see is its financial insufficiency , since there was only EUR 20 million for four years .
It is true , though , that at times we have had annual supplements , which have helped to finance some other projects .
This programme is based above all on the prevention of domestic violence , on combating domestic violence through prevention and education , with a view to preventing domestic violence from taking place and helping its victims .
It is therefore very important to take action agreed amongst the Member States because , although it continues to be a private issue , a family issue , it also has repercussions for relations between different countries as a result of the exploitation of women and children by organised mafias who work internationally .
As was pointed out in the mid-term report on the previous programme , the cooperation of the media in terms of the way they report the news , the way they report on domestic violence taking place in society , is very important .
The treatment of this phenomenon by certain television programmes , certain films and by advertising is very important .
Particular emphasis should be placed on all of these issues because they have an influence on the awareness of society and on the way this horrendous phenomenon is reported .
It is also essential that the public institutions participate together with the NGOs , in particular the local institutions , where they can do extremely important work .
We have seen that until now there has been very little participation .
It was introduced in the previous programme and we hope it will increase with this one .
Another essential innovation is the right to remove the aggressor from the family home , and this has been introduced into certain national legislations , which are competent to do so .
In other countries this is being prepared and we hope that it will soon be a reality in the whole of the European Union , because the victim must be protected .
The victim should not have to flee , should not have to hide , should be able to remain in their home , in their own environment , with sufficient protection and far away from the aggressor .
The DAPHNE II Programme takes up important suggestions which have been made as well as the experience of the DAPHNE I Programme and we in the Group of the European Peoples ' Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats are going to support it through certain separate votes which we are going to request .
Despite the fact that the greatest problem is the financial one , we agree with the proposal made by the Group of the European People 's Party in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities that the total contribution for the Programme should be EUR 50 million for the five years .
We are doing this , moreover , because we know that the financial perspectives and enlargement do not allow for a greater contribution and we do not want this programme to go to conciliation .
We are therefore going to do everything possible to ensure that it is approved before the end of the year and that the DAPHNE Programme can continue as it has until now .
Mr President , Commissioner , preventing and combating violence against women and children is a high priority for the committee which I have the honour of chairing and we are fighting for it to be placed at the top of the European Union 's agenda .
The Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities made huge efforts to combat violence immediately after Peking and as a result of these efforts the DAPHNE Programme was adopted , the extension of which until 2008 is the subject of today 's debate .
Our committee , for whom Mrs Gröner is acting as rapporteur , welcomes the adoption of the second phase of the DAPHNE Programme until 2008 and the increase in its budget .
Violence against women and children is known to be a widespread phenomenon , but I should like to refer in particular to something which happened at the height of summer .
Of course , this matter would not have received so much publicity in the international press were it not about the daughter of the famous French actor Jean-Louis Trintignant .
We know that Marie Trintignant was battered to death by her French partner , the musician Bertrand Cantat .
Of course , there are thousands of women who suffer violence on a daily basis within the European Union itself , thousands of women and children daily suffer humiliating treatment and / or fatal violence from men like the worthy Mr Cantat .
The UN even maintains that more women die from domestic violence than of cancer .
In addition , as flows of immigrants have increased over recent years , we know that thousands of women and children within Europe are the victim of the new form of slavery , trafficking for profit and sexual exploitation .
This is a complete denial of fundamental rights and freedoms , in other words of everything that makes human life dignified , which is why my political group believes , given the size of and rapid increase in the problem over recent years , that a significant increase in the budget is needed , because the programme is the only source of funding for the agencies involved in this issue .
During the previous period , funding weaknesses limited the full application of the programme , because it was unable to meet the increased demands which Mrs Avilés Perea also referred to earlier .
In addition , it is a known fact that our committee made an effort to raise the awareness of the members of the Convention so that they would adopt a stronger legal basis to combat violence , but unfortunately our call fell on deaf ears .
Mr President , I think that our rapporteur , Mrs Gröner , has set out our claims in detail and her report is truly excellent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is just one detail I deplore in the whole of this report , namely the term ' forced prostitution ' , used in the justification for Amendment No 1 .
It is a bizarre distinction between voluntary and forced prostitution with which we are persisting in this House .
That is the only thing I deplore , and I hope that it will not affect organisations that work on one aspect or another of the issue of prostitution .
I think it is quite excellent to compare and evaluate the various national legislations .
All I can do is mention the Swedish law prohibiting the purchase of sexual services and , of course , the Austrian legislation .
The provisions of the Austrian legislation may be compared with a case in which someone goes into a restaurant and begins hitting people .
The person is , of course , shown out and probably apprehended by the police , and is not welcome in the restaurant on future occasions .
In the same way , someone who hits women and children in the home should not be welcome there again .
Just like restaurant customers , women and children must be able to remain where they are and return to a place of safety , while the man should not be able to do so .
I also think that an information campaign directed at our legal bodies is a very good idea .
In the last six months , it has emerged in Sweden that , despite an intensive debate , rape victims are treated in an incredibly insulting way .
I can make another comparison : that with a man in an Armani suit and wearing a Rolex watch who is walking around drunk in the middle of the night .
He is never asked what he is doing out at that time or why he is intoxicated .
Nor does anyone suggest that he might be inviting crime .
That is , however , what happens in the case of women who are raped .
Finally , I would again address the issue of the budget .
That is precisely what everyone has talked about .
I believe that the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities is sometimes accused of being naive and ill at ease on budget issues , but it is our task here to deal with such issues .
We are not only talking about enlargement of the EU , but also about the tasks for the DAPHNE Programmes .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank Mrs Gröner for her work and commitment .
We can be very happy with the report that is before us .
The most remarkable thing about the previous DAPHNE Programme is probably the enormous success it has enjoyed .
The fact that demand exceeded the budget eight times gives a clear idea of the need for support for the work that falls within its scope .
Consequently , the proposed increase in the budget , of which the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities approves , is certainly not a luxury .
In this area , we can state without any hesitation that we should not ask ourselves how much the programme is costing the Community , but rather how much it is generating .
The DAPHNE Programme has become a very important advertisement for the added value that the European Union can offer .
Moreover , not only does it provide a support , but at the same time forms the most important incentive , in the field of equal opportunities and the fight against violence perpetrated against children , young people and women .
This is why it is so important to note that the complex nature of the project applications appears to constitute a major stumbling-block .
There is the risk that this may create a number of inequalities , certainly for third countries , but also for the new Member States .
In order to alleviate this , it should be possible , and even straightforward , to set up a helpdesk or support desk which can guide applicants through the application procedure , as is now also proposed in the report .
This will also enhance the quality of the projects submitted .
The fact that perhaps a number of projects had not been drafted all that well is undoubtedly related to the rather limited provision of information .
This is why Parliament 's report also suggests organising a think tank , as Mrs Gröner has already mentioned .
This think tank could suggest possible projects and make it easier to set priorities during the process of selecting them .
It is precisely for that reason that the report very definitely wants to mention by name a number of particularly vulnerable groups and situations .
Mr President , it is true that thousands of women and children are battered every year .
All of us in France have been shocked by the Trintignant affair this summer , but similar incidents happen on a daily basis .
Again in France , a recent news item told how a father stabbed his two children to death . The children were two and three years of age .
This story sends a cold shiver down the spine .
It highlights the importance of the DAPHNE II Programme .
I would like to point out in this regard , Mr President , that it is a matter of regret that the Conference of Presidents decided to programme debates on disability and violence against children at such a late hour .
These are issues of great importance and deserve the full attention of all Members of the house .
No one would dispute the importance of DAPHNE II . The programme is today widely recognised as an important instrument in combating violence .
It also serves as a model of good practice at a European level . Nevertheless , it seems it was conceived initially to bring European added value by complementing measures implemented at a national level .
The DAPHNE I Programme will conclude at the end of this year . It has emerged , however , that it was only possible to select 13 % of the projects eligible under DAPHNE I. This was because of the increasing number of proposed projects to combat violence .
Accordingly , Commissioner , in future I believe we need to target the categories of people who may be concerned more effectively . Greater openness and flexibility may be called for at times .
Clearly , all types of violence merit being included within the scope of this text , especially when those most vulnerable are affected .
Today , we are talking about children . Tomorrow , it could be old or disabled people .
The amendments tabled draw our attention to the importance of prevention and of raising public awareness . They also suggest a need to collate precise statistics in order to assess the extent of the violence .
I do not wish to reiterate what my fellow Members have said about the need for appropriate financial arrangements .
I also support Amendment No 39 , tabled by Mrs Lulling . It highlights the need to provide a support service to help the NGOs in the new Member States to develop their own projects , given that they have not previously benefited from this community funding .
Mr President , the establishment of a second phase of the DAPHNE Programme to ensure continuity of the projects approved by the DAPHNE I Programme undoubtedly provides us with an excellent opportunity to talk once again about the instruments available to us for combating violence against women and children .
This is without doubt one of the most serious problems faced both by societies in the less developed countries and by our societies , which we consider to be democratic and to comply with a genuine rule of law .
So we could ask ourselves , what kind of rule of law is this if it does not protect women ?
Violence against women affects all of us , even in countries with relatively egalitarian societies and with women fully incorporated into active and autonomous life .
These things do not only take place outside our borders .
It appears that violence against women has deep roots and that they are established in the very part of the world that we live in .
The European Union - this Parliament , most directly - must send an unequivocal sign of its firm commitment to combating this violence which kills hundreds of women and which makes thousands of them suffer unjustly and avoidably .
The DAPHNE Programme has been an essential instrument for trying to combat this violence , but it has been restricted by its budget .
In 2004 the European Union will be enlarged to 25 countries and the rights of the women and girls of these acceding countries are seriously unprotected and a large number of them , furthermore , are victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation , as well as suffering violence within their families .
The initial budget is clearly insufficient - everybody has acknowledged this - and this Parliament 's message must be crystal clear to all citizens .
The increase to EUR 65 million proposed by the Group of the Party of European Socialists is therefore much needed .
The mid-term assessment of the DAPHNE Programme has demonstrated the need to continue with the programme .
The DAPHNE Programme is one of those small grains of sand with which the Union 's institutions can contribute to relieving the pain , exploitation and abuse that many women and children have to live with within our borders .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Gröner on her report , the Commission on its work and , above all , the broad spectrum of women 's organisations which strive every day to try to build a different world .
Mr President , we can congratulate ourselves on the fact that the European Union and the European institutions , namely , the Commission , Parliament and the Council have succeeded in establishing a programme to combat violence against women .
Why is this an achievement ?
It is an achievement because we know very well that the situation in our own countries is not easy .
I would like to comment on the difficulty of combating violence against women .
It is an institutional problem , as the rapporteur , Mrs Gröner , pointed out a moment ago .
We do indeed lack a legal basis .
The legal basis on health is not in line with the social project at stake in combating violence .
This is the only comment I am going to make today .
I would , however , like to associate myself with all the comments made about the budget and the late interventions on subjects of such importance .
A survey of violence against women has just been published in France .
I would like to say a few words about this , as I know that in all Member States there are huge difficulties in getting this form of violence recognised . Recognising the need to combat this violence is difficult , but so is recognising the very existence of the problem .
The survey revealed a very simple fact . There is a continuum of different types of violence .
The various reports on DAPHNE have already highlighted this , but we have to understand that it is difficult to explain this point in our various countries .
There is a continuum ranging from domestic violence to violence that occurs in public spaces .
The existence of this continuum should be acknowledged .
It has been called into question in the media debates I have witnessed in my own country .
The debate over the dramatic story of the death of Marie Trintignant , that appeared in the newspapers this summer , can either strengthen or weaken this notion .
My first point , therefore , is that we must explain , affirm , recognise and emphasise the fact that serious and less serious violence are part of one and the same phenomenon affecting women and children .
There has been a media debate on this subject in France .
I expect that there have been similar debates in other countries .
They have exposed a second problem . This is that some individuals , including some women , have asserted the existence of a kind of victim mentality among women , who tend to exaggerate their status as victims , and the need to reassess the perception of the damage and the violence done to women or to other victims .
In this regard , I think it is important to understand that we have to combat a sort of confusion in the imagination , where reality is less important than fantasy or the representation of people 's love and sex life in relation to the expression of passion . I think , therefore , that we have a serious challenge before us .
We need to say , quite clearly , that there is no such thing as victimisation . We need to acknowledge that violence exists , and that it kills , every single week and in every single country .
Mr President , it is a matter of great satisfaction to me personally and to all the members of our committee that we are debating the extension of the DAPHNE Programme today and are programming it for the next five years in an enlarged European Union .
Although the policy for combating violence is the duty of and comes within the jurisdiction of the Member States , DAPHNE ? made us all more aware of the consequences which violence has on the physical and mental well-being of individuals and of society as a whole .
Our ambition with DAPHNE ? ? is to raise public awareness in a broader and more systematic way , to improve research into the causes of and practical solutions to the problems and to get closer to target groups and individuals .
The results of the research referred to by Mrs Fraisse , who has experience in research , are very important and they convince us that we really need to engage in research more systematically , because we often fund actions which are commonplace and do not offer any added value .
I agree with the proposal by the European Commission on the amount of funding for the programme , which our political group has rounded to EUR 50 million .
We believe that it is not the money that is lacking , it is the right action directed at the right targets and a suitable legal basis that are lacking .
This money , if used properly , will be sufficient .
In the second stage of the implementation of the DAPHNE Programme , the experience we have acquired must help us so that the actions funded are more qualitative and efficient , complement national policies and are coordinated with national objectives .
My political group also believes that this programme must remain within the framework of the countries of the European Union , in other words that it should not be extended to neighbouring countries .
The problems we face are already numerous and serious .
Violence is a global phenomenon and we are very concerned about the policy we need to apply to combat it in the countries with which we have association agreements and other forms of commercial cooperation , but this needs to be done on the basis of other , special policies .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my fellow Member said that violence kills .
No woman , no child in any country is immune from this violence . This violence is both physical and mental , both private and public and it costs the lives of 1.5 million people each year .
DAPHNE is justifiably a beacon programme that seeks to combat the root causes of violence against the most vulnerable , namely women and children .
Action aimed at preventing violence , combating violence and providing support lies at the heart of this programme .
The number of DAPHNE projects is constantly increasing , and the first phase of the programme has been enormously successful . This demonstrates that DAPHNE is an appropriate instrument , and that the problems it addresses are of vital concern to the people of Europe .
It is important we take account of the increase in the number of projects , the expectations of the NGOs and the enlargement of the European Union . These factors provide ample justification for the need to increase the programme 's budget .
The budget only allowed 13 % of the projects to be financed .
For action to be efficient and effective , a bigger budget is needed . If the allocated budget is not increased , I think Europe would be guilty of failing to assist people in danger .
By increasing the budget , the European Union will be sending a strong signal concerning the level of its commitment to this problem , something it could rightly be proud of .
Furthermore , in order to be effective , we need to differentiate our studies and research to take account of gender and age .
Combating violence , in all its forms , is not limited to a single programme called DAPHNE .
This work should become an integral part of the policy in respect of the dignity that the European Union should afford all its citizens in all its Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we know that violence against women and children remains an open wound on the everyday lives of our societies .
Hence the importance of adopting measures to change the situation . Unfortunately , however , the very small sums allocated to the DAPHNE I Programme has only enabled 13 % of projects submitted to be accepted , which has disappointed the expectations of the organisations working to combat violence and this has been the case more or less throughout the European Union .
I therefore support the proposal to increase funding to EUR 65 million that the rapporteur has tabled for this second five-year phase of the programme . I also regret the fact that the Commission does not support this proposal because it is simply not enough to adopt good proposals and good positions - practical measures must also be adopted , measures that do not involve only this programme , even if funding to combat violence is increased .
Priority must be given to policies for social integration , we must invest in educating people about equality , we must increase resources and materials and also legislation that protects and promotes the social integration of victims , that throws rapists out of their homes and that helps to create a new mindset which respects the dignity of women and children .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately , physical , sexual or psychological violence against children , young people and women takes place in every country of the European Union .
The statistics collated in the Member States reveal extremely high and in some cases terrifying levels of violence .
We all agree that violence must be roundly condemned because , as well as constituting a breach of fundamental rights , it has serious consequences for society as a whole and acts as a real barrier to equality between men and women .
The DAPHNE I Programme , which was set up to combat this major scourge , by implementing policies for prevention , by clamping down on aggressors and by providing victim support has been enormously successful , clearly demonstrating that it has answered a deeply-felt need .
The second phase of the programme must consequently be able to help out with more projects to combat violence , whilst taking account of the realities of a Europe of 25 Member States .
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work and on the various points she has raised , which warrant being pursued in the second phase of the programme .
I would highlight in particular the creation of filters that prevent the dissemination of paedophile material on the Internet , the reintegration of street children , and the creation of a European database for missing persons .
I also believe that this programme should receive a substantial increase in its funding so that it can accept the proposals submitted to it .
We must , however , be pragmatic and realistic . The main aim is to ensure the programme 's continuity .
We cannot waste time on protracted negotiations in conciliation .
Funding of EUR 50 million , which the Commission has already stated it can accept , will enable the DAPHNE II Programme to enter properly into force in January 2004 , in the new Member States too .
Mr President , those who are resisting the notion of increasing the budget in this House should ponder one very stark statistic .
Up until August 2003 , 92 women in Ireland were killed over the previous 92 months : one woman per month on average dies in Ireland as a result of so-called domestic disputes .
That is only the tip of the iceberg , because there are thousands of women and children and young people who are being abused constantly .
It behoves us to take this matter seriously .
I have no doubt that those who have spoken here regard it as a serious matter .
It is important to recognise that DAPHNE has been one of the most successful European projects .
It has made a real change to real people 's lives in all of the Member States .
People are alive today who would not be alive if this programme did not exist .
I would appeal to the Members to bear this in mind when they are voting tomorrow in relation to this question of increasing the budget .
I cannot accept that it is impossible for us to find an additional EUR 15 million in the vast budget that we will be approving here in a short period of time .
It is there : what is missing is the will to search and to find it .
Finally , I want to make the point that this issue is not the same as the issue of violence between strangers .
This is an issue of violence between people who at some point must have loved each other .
It is a question of power and how power is abused .
We also have to address that in a serious way if we are to get to the root of this problem .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are all familiar with the tragedy that unfolded in Vilnius recently .
The tragic case of Marie Trintignant is no isolated incident .
Thousands of women face the self-same fate every day .
According to the British Crime Survey , half of the murdered women are killed by their violent partners .
Despite this , domestic violence , sexual violence and violence perpetrated against women and children are still a huge taboo .
This taboo must be broken .
Politics has an important role to play in this .
Fortunately , this issue has been on the European agenda and also on the agenda of the Member States for some years , but there is still a great deal left to do .
Too many women and children are victims , as was mentioned earlier .
Member States must get even more encouragement to tackle perpetrators and protect potential victims .
Violence against women is a form of violation of women 's rights and cannot be tolerated .
Awareness in this area must increase and legislation should be adapted accordingly .
This is why we welcome the DAPHNE Programme .
DAPHNE I was a runaway success .
Many organisations active in the fight against violence against women and children have found their way to DAPHNE and thanks to financial support , have managed to do a great deal of good .
DAPHNE I had a budget of EUR 20 million , but that turned out to be insufficient .
Only 13 % of the requests could be honoured - not because the applications did not meet the requirements , not because the organisations were unable to find their way to the DAPHNE Programme , but because there was simply a lack of funds .
Hence the appeal for an increase in the budget .
Also , with a view to enlargement , more countries will make a bid for the budget .
Agreement has now been reached on 50 million .
This is , of course , not enough to be able to do everything that should be done , but I think that this is the best we can hope for at the moment .
The new proposal to increase the budget to 65 million is honourable , but not , in my view , realistic .
We risk a conciliation procedure and are putting progress with regard to the current activities on the line .
An extra increase of the budget of this kind stands in the way of a smooth transition from DAPHNE I to DAPHNE II .
Finally , I support the appeal for a European year against violence .
The problem is so enormous that it deserves more attention , and in line with this , I hope that as soon as possible , a start can be made on an adequate legal basis for the fight against violence against women and children .
Thank you , and thanks also to Mrs Gröner , whom we know to be an extremely committed Member of this House , and I should like to thank her for all the work she has done .
Thank you , Mr President .
EUR 13 million were spent on the DAPHNE Programme from 1997 to 1999 , EUR 20 million for the DAPHNE Programme 2000-2003 , whilst , for DAPHNE II and the years from 2004 to 2008 , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats believes that EUR 50 million will have to suffice .
It is not , however , the money that concerns me .
I welcome our discovery of street children as a new target group .
It has been not only in Nepal and India that I have seen their misery .
I know what is the fate of many of them in the EU 's candidate countries , and also , for example , in major German cities .
Some are from families in which there is physical violence and sexual abuse .
Some believe that they survive only by joining together in gangs .
They use drug dealing , theft , and small-scale crime as means of keeping their heads above water .
Physical and emotional violence , day in and day out , hardens many to all normal feeling .
DAPHNE is meant to raise awareness of violence against girls and boys , young people and women , awareness of how it comes about , awareness of its effects , awareness of how it may be overcome .
That this is for the Member States to deal with is not a matter of doubt , but there is a dearth of public resources .
It is all the more important that help should be given at European level .
Knowledge about the projects is what is needed .
Which were successful ?
How have the victims worked through the violence they have experienced , and what has been learned from the many mistakes ?
These are topics for seminars , conferences and studies , but always in collaboration with the national NGOs and self-help groups .
There is real hope of change through social facilities in which healthy groups can develop , in which friendship can be experienced , solidarity can develop , where children can be motivated to achieve good results at school and be equipped for their integration into the world of work .
This is also about adequate accommodation for the victims of violence and about the law standing by the individual .
DAPHNE II must succeed in mobilising public awareness .
We also need support through the media questioning the need for violence rather than merely depicting it or even glorifying it .
If , moreover , this can be achieved by way of committed campaigning across national borders , then such collaborative effort will bring with it real added value for Europe .
I understand .
The Commission wishes to take the floor again , but I would ask you , Commissioner , to give some thought to the lateness of the hour .
According to the Rules of Procedure , of course , you may speak for as long as you wish , but perhaps you might consider keeping an eye on the clock .
. ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to thank Mrs Gröner once again for her superb contribution to this debate , and all the Members who have taken part in it .
I shall confine myself to making three observations , the first of which concerns the budget .
We acknowledge that this programme must be accepted to be a priority and this is why we ourselves proposed that its funding be more than doubled in comparison to the DAPHNE I Programme ; we believe that EUR 50 million will enable us to manage the programme properly and carefully but we understand the differences of opinion that exist in the House on this matter .
If there is one thing that I have learned as Commissioner , it is to be extremely prudent when taking part in debates on budgetary matters in the European Parliament .
My second observation is to say that I accept the majority of proposals for amendments tabled by Parliament .
I wish to draw attention to just three , on which my opinion diverges from the proposals that have been tabled .
The first concerns the wording of Article 2 , which deals with the aims of this programme : I should like to keep a full and open form of wording , which covers all forms of violence and all victims , including women , adolescents and children .
As to the issue of street children , which we acknowledge to be a very significant one , and which has in fact already been accepted as a priority for actions for 2003 and also for years to come , I do not believe that the decision to include only some beneficiaries is the right one .
We should leave this to the discretion of the Management Committee .
I also wish to add that , at the moment , 71 % of the DAPHNE Committee is made up of women , which means that in this sphere the Commission has implemented the general decision on the composition of committees and of experts that are consulted .
I do not , therefore , believe that any specific regulation is needed on this matter , since in this specific case we have already exceeded the general level set .
With regard to Amendment No 35 , I doubt whether there is anything to be gained by institutionalising a ' think-tank ' with non-governmental organisations .
As you all know , we do consult non-governmental organisations closely but institutionalising this system might create a potential source of conflict of interest .
The organisations involved in the think-tank might find it difficult to apply for assistance from the fund and yet are often the most appropriate organisations to apply .
Lastly , I wish to make an observation on the issue of the European database .
One already exists , ladies and gentlemen .
This European database forms part of the operation of the Schengen information system , which contains specific references , likely to be acted on through the national Sirene network , to all those who are sentenced or prosecuted for perpetrating violent acts against women or children .
I do not believe there is any advantage in creating a second , parallel database ; we must use the one we have .
I wish to confirm that the Commission has funded a project to create a specific database for police investigations in cases of child pornography and paedophilia , managed by Interpol .
I shall conclude , Mr President , by saying that given the lateness of the hour , I have not used up the five minutes allocated to me .
Mr President , the Commission 's proposal has its basis in Article 251 of the Treaty and therefore , Mr President , it is subject to the codecision procedure .
It relates to the economic accounts for agriculture and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , for which I am rapporteur , has been responsible for the main report .
Mr President , Eurostat has been publishing these accounts since 1964 , producing them on the basis of a common methodology and sharing competence with the Member States .
After 39 years of existence during which the economic accounts for agriculture have shown themselves to be an indispensable instrument for controlling and evaluating the common agricultural policy , the Commission believes that the time has come to formalise them and to provide them with a sufficient legal basis .
The Commission justifies this need through the risk of their possible deterioration as a result of budgetary restrictions and the need to use these accounts in view of the coming enlargement .
I agree with all of this , Commissioner , and I have no objections , as I have stated in previous debates .
The issue which causes me some problems at the moment , and which my amendments deal with , relate more to the agricultural aspect of the issue and specifically to the current reform of the common agricultural policy .
This reform , as you well know , implies a substantial change , a fundamental change of orientation , a change which is not just terminological , but which is fundamental .
The accounts for agriculture are a basic tool for analysing the economic situation of agriculture .
Precisely for this reason - because we use them for the control and evaluation of the CAP , because they are a basic tool - they must be faithful to the reality of the agriculture they are reflecting .
That is because if the instrument we use is not the right one , the accounts would end up being fictitious or suffering because they lack the transparency they require .
Therefore , Commissioner , I believe that once the reform of the CAP is to be implemented , it will be necessary to progressively adapt and update the economic accounts for agriculture , in order to introduce the new values and fundamental elements of the new CAP , so that the economic accounts for agriculture do not become obsolete and inaccurate within a few months .
If this is not possible immediately , I would suggest , Commissioner , that you consider what I have said , so that it may be carried out progressively and as soon as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Izquierdo , thank you for your speech .
This proposal for a regulation , submitted by the Commission , is intended to guarantee that the economic accounts for agriculture continue to be defined within the appropriate time limits and are of sufficient quality for all twenty-five Member States of the Union .
The proposed draft regulation simply consolidates , as you have rightly pointed out , the practice which has existed for many years , since for a long time the accounts for agriculture have been established by the Union on the basis of a gentlemen 's agreement between the Member States and Eurostat .
The proposed regulation does not therefore mean an additional burden for the Member States , but it simply intends to ensure the continuity of work and extend it to the new member countries of the Union .
I believe we should take pleasure in the fact that the proposed regulation has been well received by Parliament , both in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - which has fundamental responsibility for this issue - and by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in their debates .
The Council 's Special Committee for Agriculture has already approved the Commission 's proposal , with certain linguistic changes .
Furthermore , the approval of the proposal without amendments by the European Parliament would allow the regulation to be adopted rapidly , before enlargement takes place , with sufficient time to provide the new Member States with a solid legal basis for independent agricultural accounts for the monitoring of the CAP .
While I am making this request and communicating it to Parliament , however , I am not forgetting your concerns .
If I have understood correctly , the concerns you have stressed relate to three specific issues .
Firstly , a clearer definition of the methodology ; secondly , a clearer definition of the classifications of the accounts and thirdly , taking account of the euro when calculating the accounts .
With regard to the first point , there is concern for the methodology .
The regulation , according to our interpretation , explicitly proposes and authorises the adaptation of the methodology of the accounts to the different aspects of the reform of the CAP , which is what you are concerned about .
This will be done by means of a comitology procedure , as laid down in the regulation .
Your second point of concern is perhaps the most important one : to what extent the current accounts reflect that reality of the new agricultural policy which we wish to define by means of other criteria .
It is true that you have made a series of comments , a series of specific proposals for new classifications , new data which I believe is essential we take into account in future reforms , in those changes which will unquestionably take place .
From the Commission 's point of view , it would not be a good idea to begin this debate before the approval of the regulation , since this would delay the whole process and would render the decision-making more complex .
What I can guarantee , however , is that the comments of your committee and your own personal comments will be taken into account in future changes which we are going to introduce and , clearly , they will be taken into account so that these changes can take place .
The final point is the euro . The concern is that , in some cases , rather than using the national currency as we propose , the euro should be used for everybody .
However , this solution would raise a technical problem of some importance .
It is true that in the countries which have currently adopted the euro this type of problem does not arise .
The problem arises for the countries which have not adopted the euro .
To decide on an exchange rate a priori for the calculation of statistics which are essentially produced in national currency , however , would mean using a theoretical exchange rate which does not correspond to reality .
This is why , from a technical point of view , we believe it is more reasonable for information to be received in national currency and then once the periods the information relates to have elapsed , and once we know what the average exchange rate of the euro is in relation to the national currency , we can transfer those accounts from the national currency to the euro .
I believe the comments I have made correspond to your concerns and I believe it is very important , however , that the regulation is adopted very rapidly , so that we can begin the preparatory work necessary for the accession countries , which will provide us , from the moment they are members , with agricultural statistics which are as comparable as possible and which are of the highest possible quality .
Thank you , Mr President . Those of you are still in the House will have certainly noted that the explanatory statement of Mrs Izquierdo 's report contains a series of considerations which formed the basis of the amendments she tabled in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The Committee on Agriculture did feel a degree of sympathy with these considerations . Nevertheless , the great majority of the said committee adopted my amendment to the draft legislative resolution that seeks to approve the Commission 's proposal without amendment .
This is the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , for whom I am the draftsman .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs agreed unanimously to propose the adoption of the Commission 's proposal without amendment . We did so for the good reason that it is only a question of adopting a legal basis for the economic accounts for agriculture .
A legal basis is urgently needed .
If it is not put in place before enlargement , the very existence of this mechanism , which is vital for monitoring and assessing the CAP , will be threatened .
As has already been stated , to date , the economic accounts for agriculture have traditionally been established by the Member States and then supplied to Eurostat in accordance with a common procedure within the framework of a gentlemen 's agreement .
For the time being , it is therefore just a question of maintaining continuity and consolidating an existing satisfactory statistical mechanism .
If it proves necessary to adapt this tool in line with the reformed CAP , this will have to be done , as the Commissioner just said .
This is why it is important not to allow amendments to delay adoption of this regulation . Interesting as the amendments may be , they have no place here .
In the context of codecision , our main concern must be to establish this legal basis .
The procedure can be adapted in time , if this proves necessary in the light of the reform of the CAP . Fortunately this reform has not yet come into force , as the Commissioner has just stated .
Our rapporteur has been able to put forward her concerns in her explanatory statement .
The representatives from the Commission , Eurostat and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development have had the opportunity to reassure her that our agreement today will not prejudice the future with regard to any new requirements concerning the details , information or deadlines that may prove necessary .
For this reason , I would like to call on Members to vote against the amendments tabled by our rapporteur , even if this seems illogical .
We will of course vote against ourselves , for a good reason .
Nevertheless , I would like to invite Mrs Izquierdo to demonstrate her goodwill and withdraw these amendments .
Given the state of affairs concerning Eurostat , Commissioner , I would like to take this opportunity to highlight its excellent work in the past . There is no justification for discrediting this body by condemning it , while disregarding the principle of the presumption of innocence .
I think the Commission is being over-zealous in this matter .
It risks jeopardising the work of Eurostat staff . I am not referring now to the hundreds of innocent individuals whose jobs are in danger as a result of brutal decisions of the Commission .
The latter has decided to suspend the contracts and payments of companies that have worked for Eurostat for years .
Without these companies , Eurostat would not have been able to fulfil its tasks . It would not have been able to supply us with the statistics we required whilst not providing it with the necessary means .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
EU-Cuba relations
The next item is the oral questions ( B5-0271 / 2003 ) , to the Council , and ( B5-0272 / 2003 ) , to the Commission , by Mr Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Foreign and Security Policy , on EU-Cuba relations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I believe this discussion to be both important and delicate , in that we are considering violations of human rights , a country 's very poor social and economic conditions , and how we should plan a strategy aimed at helping to improve matters .
I would also like to put on record my immense regret that the Cuban authorities have not been prepared to cooperate , and that Oswaldo Payá Sardiñas , the winner of the Sakharov Prize , has , alas , not been allowed to leave Cuba and take part in this debate , which I would like to take as an opportunity to express to him and to his friends our solidarity with them , so that it may be made clear that the democratic opposition in Cuba enjoys our support and solidarity .
For this reason , I would like the Council and the Commission to tell us how we are now to proceed in order to prevent human rights from being violated , how we may support the seventy human rights activists who have been in jail since 18 March 2003 , and what means exist for setting at liberty political dissidents in general .
Cuba is one of the last Communist regimes and its economic system is also the wrong one .
Both these factors , taken together , explain the catastrophic situation in which the country finds itself .
We can now discuss whether or not a boycott , such as that imposed on Cuba by the United States , is the right strategic approach to adopt , but this boycott is not the cause of the problems .
I think this has to be made very clear .
The fact is that , in the days when there were still Communist regimes in Europe , the massive aid to the former German Democratic Republic , including such things as loans to the tune of billions , which gave the GDR every opportunity for trade as a de facto Member State of the European Union , did not bring about the development of a democratic system in the GDR that was capable of meeting the economic and social needs of its people in a proper and civilised manner .
I believe that it is in this context , and with clarity , that we have to see our dealings with Cuba , and that we should therefore consider whether this is in any way the right approach in view of Cuba 's accession to the Cotonou Agreement .
If this were conditional on Cuba opening itself up , on greater freedom to travel , on the free movement of persons - including members of the opposition - then , in Cuba too , a start could be made on a proper process of transition .
For that to happen , though , we need to see progress in certain areas .
I would therefore be very interested to learn , both from the Council and the Commission , how a transformation strategy of this sort might be set in motion , whereby one of the last Communist dictatorships might be brought down , something that would be desirable from the point of view of the people who are its victims in this wretched country .
I therefore look forward with eager anticipation to what the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council have to tell us on this subject .
.
( IT ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Brok for his speech .
The Council Presidency has , on a number of occasions in past months , issued public statements and made vigorous representations to the Cuban Government since the deterioration - we can make no bones about this - in March 2003 of the already precarious situation as regards the exercising of individual freedoms and rights in Havana .
Recently , on 21 July 2003 , the European Council confirmed that the objectives of the European Union 's policy on Cuba remain respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms , the promotion of a process of transition to a pluralist democracy , and sustainable economic recovery to improve the quality of life of the Cuban people .
The Presidency notes that , since the last evaluations , not only has the Cuban Government not taken any positive measures to satisfy the objectives of this European measure but the human rights situation has also deteriorated further .
The European Union expects the Cuban authorities to reintroduce the de facto moratorium on the death penalty ; we call once again upon the Cuban authorities to release all political prisoners immediately and we call for the prisoners not to be subjected to suffering or inhumane treatment in the meantime .
In recent months , the media - the Cuban media themselves - have reported that Internet access is being increasingly limited , that satellite television stations and also foreign newspapers and radio broadcasting equipment have been seized .
Freedom of movement is extremely restricted , both within the country and at international level .
The Presidency regrets the lack of - even - intention to proceed towards restoration of economic and civil freedoms .
All this certainly makes the daily lives of the Cuban citizens difficult .
Once again , we strongly urge and encourage the Cuban Government to give an indication of economic reopening and of the existence of a private economic sector in Cuba .
In the light of what I have just said , the Presidency calls , once again , for a change of attitude .
The common position already issued in recent months still stands : there must be a constructive , ongoing endeavour to lay the foundations of the Union 's policy on Cuba .
In order to promote more effective implementation of the objectives of this European common position , the Council believes that we need to pursue political dialogue , intense , critical dialogue , indeed , to contribute to the achievement of tangible results , first and foremost in the field of politics and , therefore , where political freedoms , the economy and civil rights are concerned too .
The Council would therefore be willing - and I use the conditional tense here - to support an increase in European Union development cooperation where Cuba is concerned , in the areas which could further the transition , the path to pluralist democracy and respect for human rights , and in the areas which could improve the quality of life of the Cuban people and therefore contribute to sustainable economic growth too .
In the opinion of the Presidency , these funds should be granted only where there is a guarantee of a genuine , immediate benefit for the Cuban people or a major contribution to a process of opening up Cuba to a series of economic reforms .
Clearly , therefore - and I will conclude by answering some of the questions posed by Mr Brok - the measures adopted by Cuba , which Europe deems to be a violation of fundamental civil and political rights , have influenced the Union 's relations with the country .
As the European Commission has already said , it has decided to postpone its evaluation , which is necessary to any analysis of Cuba 's request to sign the Cotonou Agreement .
Moreover , the withdrawal of Cuba 's request for the second time on 17 May 2003 came as no surprise , although the Council is not required to comment on that decision .
I will merely say that we were not surprised .
The measures made public through the initiative of 5 June last and the Council 's conclusions of June and July 2003 seek to make clear the European Union 's support for the Cuban non-violent , democratic opposition and to show the Cuban authorities that trade cannot proceed normally in the absence of tangible gestures from that government .
Our concern relates to political freedoms , as I said , and also to the refusal - despite limited , hesitant openings - to allow greater private initiative in the economic sector .
The Union 's Heads of Mission will continue to monitor the situation of political prisoners and conditions in which they are being held in Havana .
Political dialogue with Cuba , resumed in 2001 , should certainly be pursued , but under the conditions and constraints which I have mentioned .
Of course , political dialogue also covers the human rights situation .
We regretted the refusal to take part in political dialogue expressed by the Cuban authorities in public statements made even just recently and the public decision to reject funding from European countries and from the Commission .
Over these six months , the Presidency , consulting Parliament for its opinions , will concentrate on finding ways of increasing the tangible effectiveness of political dialogue , ensuring that it is frank , constructive and , of course - when necessary - critical too .
. Mr President , developments in Cuba have taken a very negative turn with the large-scale arrest of dissidents in March 2003 and the execution of three people convicted of hijacking a ferry at the beginning of April 2003 .
I will try to deal as directly as possible with the seven questions raised by Mr Brok .
The Commission is monitoring the growth of internal opposition .
I met a group of the most well-known Cuban dissidents during my visit to Havana in March 2003 .
The recent EU decision to invite dissidents to national day festivities , as the Commission did on 9 May 2003 , recognises the role of the internal opposition .
I must also add that regular meetings with opposition groups in Cuba have taken place at the initiative of Member States in Havana .
The Member States and the Commission have established a Human Rights Working Group in Havana to follow human rights issues in Cuba , including the matter of political prisoners .
The Commission is regularly informed of detention conditions through this working group and through bilateral contacts with family members of those imprisoned , as well as with local human rights groups .
The European Union has repeatedly called for an immediate release of all political prisoners and has appealed to the Cuban authorities that , in the meantime , the prisoners do not suffer unduly and are not exposed to inhumane treatment .
Repression in Cuba has received a prompt , firm and sustained reaction from the Union .
Last July it re-evaluated the common position on Cuba , six months ahead of schedule .
This re-evaluation reaffirmed that constructive engagement remains the basis of EU policy towards Cuba .
The EU intends to continue its dialogue with Havana to promote political , economic and civil rights reforms and is willing to provide aid whenever possible via non-governmental organisations in order to promote democratisation and improve living standards for ordinary Cubans .
I believe that the common position is the best policy instrument we now have for Cuba .
It is a coherent policy document and should , therefore , be maintained in its present form .
Based on it , political dialogue with the government and the opposition needs to be strengthened , as well as the promotion of human rights , pluralist democracy and an open economic system .
The Commission regrets the decision of the Cuban Government to withdraw its application for accession to the Cotonou Agreement .
Cuba is the only Caribbean , and practically the only developing , country in the world with which the Commission has not been able to sign a cooperation agreement .
Membership of the Cotonou Agreement would have provided the right framework to develop a structured dialogue with the Cuban authorities and to improve the delivery of aid to that country .
The Commission is positive about the operation of our new delegation in Havana .
Our presence in Cuba is more important today than ever .
The main tasks of the delegation are not only to assist with the implementation of aid programmes and projects , but also to promote a political dialogue with the Cuban authorities and civil society , to monitor human rights issues and to protect the interests of the Member States in terms of trade and investments .
As a result of the events that have taken place recently , the Commission Delegation in Havana will have to focus its attention in the future more on monitoring the human rights situation in Cuba , on trying to promote a political dialogue and on looking after the trade interests of the EU Member States .
This is a heavy and difficult agenda to pursue , but it is essential if we wish to promote political and economic changes in Cuba .
The latest evaluation of the common position encourages the strengthening of EU development cooperation in Cuba in areas that promote the transition to pluralist democracy and respect for human rights , that improve the living standards of the population of Cuba and promote sustainable economic growth .
The common position states that funding should only be channelled through governmental institutions if it directly benefits the population or if it promotes a meaningful contribution towards economic reform and a more open economy in Cuba .
Commission projects have been undertaken in this context .
According to a recent statement from Havana , it seems that in future the Cuban Government will only accept aid from the Commission and the EU Member States that is channelled through UN agencies , NGOs , foundations , solidarity movements , autonomous regions and local governments .
Furthermore , the Cuban Government will apparently refuse to negotiate directly with the Member States and the Commission on development cooperation themes , programmes and projects and will only agree to deal with NGOs on such issues .
However , as the Commission has worked mainly with NGOs and independent technical assistance teams in the past anyway - and with good results - there is no reason to believe that the same cannot continue in the future .
The only thing we need to ensure is that the visibility of Community operations is maintained and also that monitoring of such operations by EU bodies can continue .
Finally , I was informed that the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights is not currently funding projects in Cuba .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , today 's debate on the situation in Cuba tells us one simple fact : it tells us how difficult it is to promote and support human rights and democracy when we are faced with a totalitarian regime and we have been trying everything for years : constructive dialogue , economic cooperation , humanitarian aid .
We have tried everything and I feel that the answer is simply to take a harder line , so much so that a Socialist Member was prompted to say ' We hope that Fidel Castro , who is 77 years old , will die , so that ? ' , for , quite frankly , Fidel Castro has been a thorn in our side for some time now .
Maybe we could reflect on another point , we could reflect on the fact that , when our democracies are divided over a dictator , we will not go far .
The time may have come to talk about the World Organisation of Democracies , Mr President , Commissioner , in an attempt to adopt a more coherent attitude , a more coherent approach .
Let us consider it , for we have tried everything .
What is the point , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , of keeping a delegation open when we are dealing with an official who appears to be a hostage of the regime more than anything , and is certainly not a promoter or defender - or is a purely symbolic , certainly not genuine defender - of civil and human rights ?
The frustration is real : constructive dialogue with a dictator is proving to have its limits and the real question is what to do .
I believe that the World Organisation of Democracies is one of the instruments we should pursue with great , or rather immense determination .
Mr President , it is not easy , especially for a Spanish person , to take an objective and dispassionate view of the Cuban problem , because Cuba has a place in the hearts of all Spanish people .
Unfortunately , Cuba is an anomaly within the history of the European Union 's foreign relations , as has been pointed out here .
Back in 1995 , it was not possible to fulfil the mandate given by the Summit to the Commission to present directives with a view to reaching a bilateral agreement at that time .
And now , for the second time , Cuba 's incorporation into the Cotonou Agreement is being rejected , at a time when international attention , Mr President , has been focused on the Iraq crisis and taking advantage of that situation there has been a wave of repression , unprecedented in recent years , which has resulted in three death penalties and a wave of arrests which have affected independent journalists , human rights campaigners and peaceful dissidents , many of them from the Christian Liberation Movement .
This Parliament is going to adopt a very tough resolution , expressing its inescapable commitment to the cause of human rights and to all those in Cuba and outside it who are fighting for its freedom and its dignity .
And I would ask myself , Commissioner , whether in these circumstances , with a country which does not wish to have a link with the European Union - because it has rejected incorporation into the Cotonou Agreement for a second time ; with a country whose leaders reject Community aid ; with a country whose leaders insult and denigrate European Union Heads of Government ; with a country which imposes endless restrictions on the presentation of identity cards by the Commission 's diplomatic representative , it is worth , Commissioner , keeping the office in Havana open .
The draft compromise resolution , which will be voted on tomorrow , contains a condemnation of the closure of the Spanish Cultural Centre in Havana .
And this does not surprise me , Mr President , because culture is freedom and , therefore , the person who knows most is the most free .
What I do not know is whether the Cuban authorities know that it is much more difficult to preserve and maintain the balance of freedom than to bear the weight of tyranny .
The people who know this best , Mr President , are exemplary people - such as Oswaldo Payá , the winner of this Parliament 's Sakharov Prize , nominee for the Prince of Asturias Cooperation Prize and nominee for the Nobel Peace Prize - who bravely fight for their rights as people and as citizens and ultimately for their freedom , because they are perfectly aware that at the end of the day , Mr President , freedom - as a compatriot of mine said some years ago - does not make men happier , but simply makes them men .
Mr President , I believe that the people of Cuba , in view of the Americans ' continuing , unfair and disastrous sanctions policy , would see the stepping-up of relations with the European Union as a matter of importance .
It is at this point that I must counter what Mr Brok said and make it clear that it was the American sanctions that drove Castro into the Communist camp .
It was not at Moscow 's behest that Castro led a revolution ; he was prompted to do so by the unrest among the Cuban people .
That is what makes the American sanctions policy so very , very damaging , in both political and economic terms .
This would make it all the more important now for good relations with the European Union to be developed but Fidel Castro has unfortunately failed to recognise the signs of the times .
He is himself engaged in destroying everything that the revolution stood for and trampling underfoot its undoubted successes .
I find this particularly regrettable , as the eventual consequence will be that Cuba will , like a ripe apple , fall into the hands of the Americans and of American big business .
We Social Democrats have stood up for freedom throughout the world , and Cuba is no exception .
As Social Democrats , we are opposed to the death penalty , always and everywhere - and Cuba is no exception .
So it is that we , as Social Democrats - and , I hope , everyone in this House as Europeans - oppose repression , and it goes without saying that Cuba is no exception .
It is , though , a matter of concern to us that the introduction of democracy and of a freely-chosen economic system should be peaceful and not enforced , whether by what one might term Castro 's internal power relationships or by international big business .
The people of Cuba must have freedom to choose their leaders , democracy , their parliamentary representatives , and their economic system .
Castro has provoked the EU .
Many have said that - and they have been quite right to do so - but I do not take the view that we must now respond by in some way breaking off relations or by putting them on ice .
Mrs Bonino is wrong ; this is not about dialogue with dictators .
Castro is a dictator , and he would be delighted if the European Union were to withdraw , but would the dissidents be pleased to learn that they would be getting no more support from such sources as the Human Rights Working Group that Commissioner Nielson mentioned ?
Would the people of Cuba be happy if the European Union were to cease its involvement in Cuba ?
I think the opposite would be the case , and so I want to endorse unreservedly what Commissioner Nielson said : we need a delegation in Cuba .
I agree with Mrs Bonino , in that I would want the European Union to be represented by more than just one person .
The European Union needs also to have a visible presence in Cuba , and I think it absolutely right that it should have one .
The European Union 's presence in Cuba is important , in that it will enable Cuba to introduce a democratic system .
What Cuba needs is democracy and freedom .
Mr President , at the end of March , more than 75 dissidents were arrested in Cuba , upon which they were sentenced , without trial , to terms of imprisonment lasting 20 years and more .
These also include a number of Liberals whom I have met personally in Cuba , such as Osvaldo Alfonso Valdés , the leader of Cuba 's Liberal Democratic Party and Adolfo Fernández Sainz , the international secretary of the Party for Solidarity and Democracy .
This happened less than a month after the European Commission 's office in Cuba was opened .
It is not only a violation of human rights , but also a slap in the face for the European Union .
I value the activities that our Cuban office has subsequently taken .
We must give a clear signal to the regime in Cuba that we no longer tolerate the situation .
A restriction of high-level bilateral government visits , as announced by the Council in its statement of 5 June , is , however , too weak a measure .
We must be clear in what we say and as far as I am concerned , the Council should consider taking the same measures as we have done in Zimbabwe , namely deny Fidel Castro access to the European Union , as , in fact , Greece has done in the context of the Olympic Games .
I have a great deal of appreciation for this , and I also wonder whether the Council has discussed this and whether the Council supports the Greek Government 's decision .
Mr President , Cuba is a Communist dictatorship with all the hallmarks of a totalitarian regime .
Not only is the human rights situation abysmal , but the economy is a disaster too .
We all have our opinions about the United States ' foreign policy , but America 's embargo was introduced following systematic human rights violations in Cuba , and not the other way round .
The United States is for the Castro regime the scapegoat that is blamed for everything that goes wrong .
Quite a few Members of this House are guilty of this rather simplistic way of thinking .
To some , a dictatorship is quite justifiable as long as it is politically correct .
The European Union must respond to the current situation in a forceful manner .
This means that we must stand united .
Castro no longer wants any support from the European Union , only from NGOs and other private organisations .
In the Netherlands , organisations such as Novib , Oxfam and Hivos are currently receiving the criticism that they are offering support to one of the world 's last Communist dictatorships via support to bodies such as the Anap farmers ' union , Casa de las Americas and the Martin Luther King Centre .
According to Carlos Payá , spokesman of the Faella Project and brother of Osvaldo Payá , financing these organisations is tantamount to financing Castro .
Let us play into Castro 's hands ; support of any kind to the regime should be withdrawn , and if it transpires that NGOs use European subsidies inappropriately to support the Cuban regime , their funding should be cut off too .
Mr President , Cuban-EU relations , which had been steadily improving in recent years , have recently been plunged into crisis by President Castro 's arbitrary and provocative decisions to imprison 70 dissidents and human rights activists and carry out executions .
For a long time the Cuban Government has been able to blame all the country 's woes on the American embargo .
As soon as serious discussions take place on a possible relaxation of the embargo , the Cuban authorities engineer a provocation to scupper such developments .
These latest moves appear to be part of that pattern , albeit aimed at a European audience this time .
Nevertheless Cuba cannot escape with impunity , and it is vital that we send a clear signal to the authorities that violations of fundamental rights , including a lack of medical care for prisoners , cannot be tolerated .
Nor should Cuba be allowed to participate fully in the interparliamentary meetings between representatives of the European Union and Latin Americans , such as the Parlatino , as though it were a functioning democracy , whilst Castro 's suggestion that EU humanitarian aid can only be given if it is distributed in a disguised fashion via other agencies is totally unacceptable .
Aid needs to be transparent .
Cat-and-mouse games need to give way to a more reasoned dialogue in which ways are found to open up the country to change , whilst preserving some of the genuine achievements of the revolution .
I generally do not support the closing of European Community delegation missions abroad , so a small presence in Havana is useful .
However , it is bizarre that we have an office there but not in some of our neighbouring European countries- we do not have an office in Chisinau , Moldova , nor in Minsk in Belarus .
The latter is another country where contact with human rights activists is also essential .
. Mr President , I have only a few very brief remarks .
Firstly , I should like to say to Mr Brok - who was very close to using rhetoric that sounded as if he wanted regime change - that nowadays we have to be careful about the exact wording in applying that type of language , especially when we discuss the methodology of such action .
I totally agree with the need for pressing on with the process of democratisation and opening up political life in Cuba .
This is exactly what we are trying to do .
Secondly , there was a remark about Cuban participation in the Joint EU-ACP Parliamentary Assembly : as long as Cuba is not a party to the Cotonou Agreement , that participation is the answer .
It is clearly defined and we have no problem technically or politically on that score .
Thirdly , two different views were expressed about the delegation in Havana .
It is quite clear that this delegation is not only useful in this situation but also essential in order for the Commission to do what Parliament expects and asks of us .
We have to have a presence there .
Finally , I would urge that we do not cause any provocation by the way we handle things in Cuba .
I see a lot of turmoil behind the tragic events of this year .
It is important we stick to a long-term perspective : there will be a Cuba after Castro and nations are more important than regimes .
Although we feel frustrated by the current situation , we have to realise that there are very good basic , long-term reasons for a close , friendly and harmonious relationship between Europe and Cuba .
We have to keep that in mind and stick to a more cool-headed , long-term approach and this is what we will do on the basis of the established common position .
Mr President , I would just like to say that I hope that , after this debate , the President-in-Office of the Council , and we , ourselves , too , will have the chance to hear - as in the case of the Commission - a response , a summing up of the debate .
I would therefore like to ask - as you know , the Rules of Procedure not only allow it but there is a precedent too - if it is possible for the President-in-Office to make a concluding speech .
The possibility exists , Mr Pannella , but it is not a requirement .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 42 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The next item is the debate on the European Convention : presentation of the draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe .
Colleagues , welcome to this special debate on the European Convention .
I should like to welcome President Giscard d 'Estaing , President Romano Prodi , Deputy Prime Minister Fini and Foreign Minister Frattini who will take part today in this reflection on the work of the Convention .
This is the first opportunity that we in the European Parliament , in plenary session , have had to hear directly from the President of the Convention , reporting to this House on the outcome of the Convention and on the way forward for its content through the Intergovernmental Conference .
At the outset I should like to place on record the deep admiration and respect that this House has for the work of the Convention and for the leadership provided - especially but not exclusively - by its President , Mr Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , who made an indispensable contribution to the successful and comprehensive outcome of the work of the European Convention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament , I am really extremely moved to be standing here before you to present the Constitution for Europe drawn up by the Convention , over which I have had the exceptional honour of presiding .
As you have just said , Mr President , the Constitution is being presented now because this is the first plenary part-session of the European Parliament following the conclusion of our work .
You invited me to come at the beginning of July but I had not yet presented the text of our work to the Council Presidency and because it is the Council Presidency that called for this work to be done , it was , therefore , to the Council that we were bound to submit the text first .
This is why I am presenting the text to you in this part-session .
I must tell you that you are fully entitled to have this presentation , because the European Parliament is really the institution behind the Convention and thus the draft Constitution .
As long ago as 1984 , spurred on brilliantly by Altiero Spinelli , Parliament drew up an initial draft constitution for Europe , at a time when nobody dared talk about it or even think about it .
You had the boldness - the calculated boldness - to rename your Committee on Institutional Affairs the ' Committee on Constitutional Affairs ' at the beginning of the legislature , and I am hoping to catch the eye of its Chairman , Mr Napolitano .
He is not yet present but I am sure we will see him soon .
Shortly after the disappointing results in the Treaty of Nice concerning institutional matters , you called loud and strong for a Convention to be formed .
At the instigation of the Belgian Prime Minister , the Laeken European Council of December 2001 backed your call .
When we addressed the substance of the matter , your preparatory work in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , as I said , under the chairmanship of Mr Napolitano , made our task considerably easier , as did your reports , which sometimes preceded and sometimes accompanied our debates , such as the report by Mr Alain Lamassoure on the key issue of competences in the European Union .
I wish to emphasise the outstanding and willing participation of all your representatives in the work of the Convention , as well as the pivotal role played by Mr Klaus Hänsch and Mr Iñigo Méndez de Vigo - I believe that working together with them for eighteen months gives me the right to call them by their first names - in the deliberations of the Convention 's Praesidium .
Lastly , Mr President , I am not forgetting that you have given the European Convention a home on your premises .
I also visited you in July to thank you for your generous hospitality .
As for the benches in your hemicycle , they ended up not knowing whether they were members of Parliament or of the Convention !
This presentation is , therefore , an emotional occasion , but also a realistic one , because I stand here before you both in order to present and assess what we have accomplished , and also to reiterate what remains to be done to ensure that Europe gains a real Constitution .
In attempting to assess any type of situation , one tends to forget what the starting point was .
Two years ago , the very word ' Constitution ' was still taboo , to the extent that the Laeken declaration only alluded to it indirectly .
Today , the idea of a Constitution for Europe has entered the consciousness of the European : Europe 's citizens are now ready for the Constitution .
According to the latest Eurobarometer survey , drawn up by the Commission , Mr President , and conducted in June and July throughout the European Union , 70 % say that they are in favour of a Constitution and only 13 % are not in favour .
In Italy , which is the current holder of the Council Presidency and which consequently has a major responsibility for the success of the Intergovernmental Conference - I must take this opportunity to welcome the Vice-President of the Council , who is a member of the Convention and the Minister of Foreign Affairs - 82 % approve of the idea of a Constitution .
Even in the traditionally more cautious countries , there is greater approval than disagreement .
I shall give the example of Finland , whose representatives have played a very active role in the Convention : 53 % of the public is in favour and 37 % against .
Our joint endeavours to explain the content of the Constitution have also enabled us to make progress in increasing European citizens ' understanding of our project .
It must be acknowledged that we have come quite a long way , from a time when there was little recognition of our work and little understanding , whereas a survey conducted by the Commission at the end of June , in other words two months ago , suggests that 70 % of the public who do hold an opinion about our work consider it to be positive .
And to you who represent them , ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament , I have one request to make : never forget the citizens .
One hears many opinions expressed ; by leaders , decision makers , by those in government , but you must never forget the citizens : it is for them that we are working , after all !
During the Convention 's deliberations , when I was sitting in your place - only temporarily , Mr President - I thought continually about the man or woman in the European street , and have attempted to imagine their reactions to our proposals .
What , then , is the outcome of all our work ?
The draft Constitution that I am presenting to you is the outcome of an intense effort .
It was published , as you know , in all the languages of the Union and in the language of every new Member State .
This was done in time for all citizens , throughout the Union , to be able to access the text as soon as it was presented at the Thessaloniki European Council .
The members of the Convention have worked long and hard .
They have taken part in twenty-six plenary sessions , some of which have lasted two days and they have heard more than 1800 speeches .
Every proposal , every amendment , every alternative solution , whether it came from a Convention member , a Member State , the European Commission , civil society or , of course , from the European Parliament has been rigorously examined and pored over with a critical and objective eye .
This is why , and I must be frank with you , I do not believe there is a single solution that the Convention is not aware of or that it has not explored .
I believe that our proposal goes as far as it is possible to go , given the political , social and cultural climate in Europe today .
Far from being the lowest common denominator , as might have been feared at certain times , I would say that it represents the upper limit of what can be achieved in Europe in 2003 .
If we seek to go further , as some would like to see , and perhaps I am one of those , there is a danger that , as a result of some people 's rejection of the idea or of other people 's disapproval , we will tear apart a Europe that has only just been united .
This is an unacceptable risk that no one has the right to take .
And you yourselves , the Members of the European Parliament , have encouraged us to go as far as possible , whilst outlining the limits of what is reasonable and acceptable .
What then are the basic proposals put forward in the Constitution ?
You have learned of them as our work has progressed and I do not , therefore , need to describe them to you in great detail , which would also cause me to far exceed the time scheduled for the debate .
I nevertheless wish to emphasise that barely two years ago many of these proposals still appeared to be inaccessible and beyond reach but today form a solid and coherent whole .
I shall now recall these proposals for you .
First of all , a central point , which underpins the entire system : the affirmation of the dual nature of the European Union , a union of European peoples and a union of European States .
Next , the establishment of a single text that replaces all existing Treaties , of which there are four , plus a few others , and the attribution of legal personality to the European Union .
When , in spring 2002 , I looked into the possibility of Europe having a single text , I studied the previous work , the research that had been carried out in this area , and discovered that those involved had encountered obstacles that appeared to be insurmountable .
Next we have the incorporation into the Constitution of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which enshrines citizens ' rights .
My attention is drawn to Mr Vitorino , who contributed an enormous amount to the discussions on this subject .
Another proposal is the clear , transparent and stable definition of the Union 's competences , and these are three aspects that I wish to reiterate .
The definition must be clear so that the citizens can understand these competences and it must be transparent so that these are not open to interpretation by institutions that might have a more opaque way of doing things .
As well as defining competences , the Constitution also states that they must be exercised by means of simple procedures , a point to which I will return .
The last proposal is the political guarantee that the principle of subsidiarity will be respected , involving national Parliaments in conjunction with the European Parliament .
Mr Méndez de Vigo , a Member of the European Parliament , who is present here today , has played a major role in his capacity as chairman of the working group on this issue , which had been deadlocked since 1990 .
Furthermore , the Union is given new means with which to act in three areas in which the citizens believe them to be a priority .
First of all justice , because in this field we envisage the construction of an area of security and of justice that will enable us to fight more effectively against major cross-border crime and to achieve the mutual recognition of civil rights between Member States .
In the field of the Union 's foreign policy , the Convention has met the citizens ' second expectation by proposing the appointment of a European Union Minister for Foreign Affairs , who will chair the Foreign Affairs Council and work to ensure the development of a much-needed common foreign policy .
In the field of common defence , it has met the citizens ' expectations by establishing , amongst other provisions , a European arms agency .
Lastly , the Union 's economic and social governance will be improved , especially but not exclusively , between the countries that have adopted the euro , to ensure the stability and success of our common European currency .
As a result of these provisions , the much-vaunted three pillars that have complicated the management and the perception of the Union 's actions since the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties will disappear from the European landscape .
The Constitution will give Europe a single institutional system , and by that I mean just one institutional system that will replace the system of the three pillars .
The institutions that the Constitution proposes are stable , democratic and effective .
The European Parliament , the main Union institution featured in the Constitution , becomes the Union 's main legislature and the overseer of budgetary policy .
The European Council , which will from now on be distinguished from the Council of Ministers because they share neither the same composition nor the same competences , will provide the necessary impetus for the Union 's development and will set its broad political priorities .
This Council will now have a face , with a President elected by his or her peers , who will organise its work and plan for the future .
The Council of Ministers will be refocused towards the tasks of the Legislative and General Affairs Councils and the various formations within it will be regrouped .
The European Commission , which is to be structured in a way that confirms its collegiate nature and whose composition is in line with the number of functions it performs , will act as the driving force and the main executive body of the Union .
It will express and embody the common European interest .
The President of the Commission will be able to appoint non-voting Commissioners in order to ensure , if he or she wishes , that all Member States are kept informed .
Speaking now to you , who have worked so hard on this matter , I wish to reiterate one essential point : the democratic legitimacy of the system proposed in the Constitution .
There will no longer be any justification for talking about a ' democratic deficit ' , an expression that has become part of the everyday language of the critics of our political system .
Parliament is now given its central place as legislator in the European system .
Apart from a few rare exceptions - and we have endeavoured to limit these as much as was politically possible - the entire body of European law or framework law must be voted on by you , otherwise it will be rejected .
Parliament 's rights are also extended in budgetary matters .
When the Constitution enters into force , the President of the Commission will be elected by you .
Admittedly , the debate on the issue of the possible presentation of candidates was a difficult one and I am unfortunately unable to take it any further .
After lengthy deliberations in which both the Convention members , of course , and the political groups participated , we reached a common solution .
Candidates will be presented at the proposal of the European Council , but with two new features : firstly , the outcome of the elections to Parliament will be taken into account and , secondly , the necessary consultations will be held .
This is , therefore , an open proposal .
Most significantly , you will have the right of rejection .
If you do not select , by the majority of your Members , the candidate put forward by the European Council , the Council will be obliged to submit another candidate within the space of one month .
At the behest of Giuliano Amato , the Convention has succeeded in undertaking an enormous task of simplifying and classifying European decisions .
I recall the discussions held in your Committee on Constitutional Affairs at the time and the proposals by Mr Jean-Louis Bourlanges .
In now making a distinction between legislative and executive acts , we are taking a step closer towards the traditional systems in force in the Member States , systems that are familiar and understandable to all citizens .
The democratic system imagined by Montesquieu and the thinkers of the enlightenment - I , like many others , have been greatly interested in Montesquieu 's thinking - cannot , contrary to what is sometimes said , be transposed , because Montesquieu 's system was designed to meet the needs of a nation State and what he calls the ' balance of powers ' is a balance that exists only within such a nation State .
Nevertheless , we have managed to transpose it to some extent , to define a new balance of powers that takes account of the duality that is and will no doubt remain a unique feature of the European Union : the union of peoples and the union of States .
We have consequently defined a democratic model on a European scale , which takes account not only of the size of the population - 450 million inhabitants - and of the diversity of the Member States , both old and new , but also of the desire for the European continent to be united .
In short , if I may say so respectfully and cautiously , we have created a form of Montesquieu for the Europe of the twenty-first century .
( Laughter and applause )
Before entering into force , this Constitution still faces two sizeable obstacles to overcome : its approval by governments and its ratification by the democratic expression of Europe 's peoples , in the form of Parliaments or referendums .
I should like to say a few words about the role that you will have to play in this process .
Before doing so , however , I wish to remove any ambiguity about the future role of the Convention .
The Convention has achieved what it set out to do .
On 20 June 2003 , in the Convention 's name , I sent the first two parts of the Constitution that had been drawn up by the Convention to the Greek Presidency .
When in Rome , on 18 July , I handed over to the Italian Presidency the by then completed text of the draft constitutional treaty , I added - I shall quote this short passage in full , for Parliament 's records - that the Convention has executed the mandate conferred on it by the Laeken European Council and has completed it .
In presenting the draft treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe , the President of the Convention believes he has fulfilled his duty and consequently his work is at an end .
This means that the Convention no longer has a role and that it is no longer able to intervene in the process of the Intergovernmental Conference , because it would have no mandate to do so .
On the other hand , the Convention members , not least the President of this Parliament , the vice-presidents and myself , will remain available to anyone , and that includes those within this hemicycle , who wishes to ask us about the arguments that have led us to put forward any particular proposal contained in the Constitution .
The Intergovernmental Conference will open in precisely one month , under the Italian Presidency , a representative of which will perhaps say something about this a little later .
Most of the Convention members , before going their separate ways , expressed the desire that the conference will be brief and can be concluded by the end of the year .
The Thessaloniki European Council decided that the conference would take our draft Constitution as its starting point .
Three solutions are then possible .
Either the Intergovernmental Conference will improve the draft Constitution although it is hard to imagine how it could achieve this ,
? and I say this not out of the collective vanity of the text 's authors , but because this Conference will come up against two obstacles that the Convention did not have to face : shortness of time and the rule of unanimity .
How , in fact , could a draft that took us sixteen months of continual work to draw up be improved on in two and a half months ?
Furthermore , how can unanimity provide more thorough solutions than those on which we struggled to reach consensus ?
Let us be good sportsmen , however !
If the Intergovernmental Conference succeeds in improving the Constitution , the Convention Members will be the first to applaud its success .
The second possibility is that the Intergovernmental Conference will end up submitting proposals that are less worthy than those put forward by the Convention .
This could have serious consequences .
The reservations or criticism expressed in various quarters about our proposals , in particular those concerning institutional matters , suggest a very real risk .
We cannot alter one part of the building without risking bringing down the entire construction .
Those who think they can make substantial changes to our institutional proposals are , I believe , mistaken .
By probably satisfying a few people , they run the risk of dissatisfying and disappointing everyone else .
The third solution , which appears to be the most suitable one , consists of approving the draft Constitution .
( Applause )
If the draft Constitution produced by the Convention is to be approved , however , we would equally have to accept , of course , and I address my words now to the Presidency representatives , that some unanimously accepted amendments will need to be made to it .
I wish to ask you , without dwelling too much on the matter , to consider the gravity of the consequences of failure .
Because of the time of year , the location , the sunshine and the pleasure I am taking in being here with you , a degree of optimism appears to permeate this meeting .
I ask you nevertheless to consider the consequences and the seriousness of failure , the disappointment and the frustration that this would create amongst the entire European public .
Lastly , let us not forget that after the Intergovernmental Conference , we will face the real ordeal by fire : the draft 's ratification in each Member State , in each of the twenty-five Member States .
This ratification is by no means a foregone conclusion .
My personal conviction is that , after making an intense effort to provide explanations and to persuade people , if the draft Constitution as drawn up by the Convention is submitted to ratification by the people , in the form of referendums in some countries and of parliamentary approval in others , it will ultimately be approved everywhere .
If , on the other hand , what is submitted is a mutilated or truncated draft Constitution , I fear that it will be rejected in one or more Member States .
Indeed , if the draft is forced to undergo cuts in this way , it would lose two of the crucial arguments used to support and defend it : coherence and balance , which have come together in the draft Constitution .
We would , therefore , be unleashing a crisis that Europe really does not need in the current climate , and this is a crisis to which it is hard to imagine a solution .
Mr President , the European Parliament has a crucial role to play throughout this process and I would ask you to be active and vigilant .
Indeed , it is your duty to ensure that the general public is well informed .
What is needed is not a traditional-style Intergovernmental Conference and by that I mean a diplomatic one , where what is being debated between politicians , experts or diplomats are the mutual advantages that some attempt to achieve at the expense of others .
No , this will be a constitutional Intergovernmental Conference of a type never seen before , which must result in the creation of a Constitution .
It must , therefore , adhere to specific rules .
Observers from your Parliament will take part in this conference , and they must alert the public and demand transparency !
At the last sitting of the Convention that you attended , Mr President-in-Office of the Council and members of the Convention , I suggested that the Intergovernmental Conference should take its inspiration from our working method , which was actually imposed on us , by making it mandatory to make public , if necessary on the Internet , any proposal to change the Constitution and any amendment to it .
( Applause )
This will give the general public and the media a precise idea of the content of the debates .
Similarly , I feel it would be legitimate for you to be informed at each of your plenary part-sessions of the state of the Conference 's work , as I informed the European Council on behalf of the Convention .
You will , therefore , deliver an opinion on this Intergovernmental Conference and you will do so before the conference opens in Rome .
It is you , of course , who have the crucial responsibility of drafting this opinion and of adopting it , but it could , I believe , serve as a warning .
If the scope of the constitutional treaty , which has been drawn up with the utmost transparency by the Convention and with your considerable contribution , is substantially diminished by the Intergovernmental Conference and is consequently rejected by the European Parliament , it will have little chance of being ratified by the States and by the peoples of Europe .
If , on the other hand , the Union 's governments adopt at the Conference a constitutional treaty that closely resembles the draft Convention - we do not expect it to be exactly the one we have drawn up - and if this receives the approval of the European Parliament , it will occupy a central position in the great political debate that will take place in the European elections of June 2004 .
This will provide an opportunity for appealing to all players on our continent , for garnering the interest of civil society and for helping the ' don 't knows ' to make up their minds .
These are the people who have lost confidence in the Union 's ability to unite and to renew itself .
The main debate in the European elections will consequently echo the more modest work of our Convention , by helping to bring Europeans closer to the Union , to better understand it so that they can ultimately recognise themselves in it .
Ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament , at the very end of our work , we added into the Constitution , at the request of your representatives , a number of symbols and , in particular , a slogan for the European Union , which is ' united in its diversity ' .
I urge you , I beg you to help Europe to provide itself with a Constitution that will enable it to remain free , peaceful and content through being united in its diversity .
( Applause )
Colleagues , your reaction speaks volumes .
.
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament , I would like to start by expressing my sincere , heartfelt thanks - on behalf of the Italian Government , which I have had the honour of representing throughout the European Convention - to the Chairman , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , and the Convention for their work .
The Italian Government and the Italian public , which is deeply pro-European and fully endorses the Chairman 's words and , more generally , the text adopted by the Convention , echoes the applause with which the House received Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's report .
This was a genuinely significant moment and one which may justifiably be described as historic .
I would like , first of all , to express my deep satisfaction at the fact that the Thessaloniki Council endorsed the draft Constitution adopted by the Convention , describing it as a historic step towards achieving the objectives of European integration and then describing the Treaty as a ' sound basis ' upon which to open the Intergovernmental Conference which is to take place during the Italian Presidency .
Indeed , the Convention 's task went far beyond the - albeit important - role of adjusting the institutions ' mechanisms and rules .
The Laeken mandate was explicit : to rethink the entire European institutional set-up on the eve of the major historic event of the reunification of the old continent once and for all .
For the first time in the history of European integration , the task was not entrusted to - albeit esteemed - government officials , but to a genuinely democratic , representative assembly , in other words to a Convention made up of representatives of the national parliaments , the European Parliament and the Commission , and representatives both of those countries which have been part of the European Union from the beginning and of those which are about to become full members of our great family .
Now , after 16 months of work , we have achieved a major result which was , in many respects , unhoped for and which I feel is even more significant if we consider the innovative nature of the working method which the Praesidium proposed to the Convention .
We have consistently sought to achieve the widest possible consensus , without ever having to resort to the traditional method of a vote .
That is why the Intergovernmental Conference 's work , while not without difficulties , will certainly be facilitated by the fact that it is not dealing with several alternatives for a text but , quite the opposite , with a single text which has the broad support of the members of the Convention and has already been endorsed by the European Council .

It is why the Italian Presidency considers that Mr Giscard d 'Estaing is right when he states categorically that the further the Intergovernmental Conference moves away from the agreement reached by the Convention , the more difficult it will be to find consensus again and , therefore , the greater the likelihood of failure , and that failure would be a resounding defeat . It would not just be the failure of the Presidency or the Convention : it would be failure to live up to the expectations of those millions upon millions of Europeans who genuinely believe that the time has come to establish not just common rules but common , shared values too .
We are therefore pleased with the end result .
We have made that clear publicly before our own citizens , before the Italian parliament , but it is right to state the fact once again in this Chamber .
The text was , indeed , a compromise , but a superior , noble compromise between different bodies , perspectives and interests , a compromise based on a number of points which we feel to be essential and which I too want to mention again briefly : the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights into the text of the Constitution ; changing the complex and , in some respects , outdated pillar structure of the current Treaties ; clearer distribution of powers between the Union and the Member States with all due regard for national identities and the internal organisation of the respective States , that dual principle to which Mr Giscard d 'Estaing referred ; the introduction of mechanisms to ensure genuine respect for the principle of subsidiarity and to bring about increasingly extensive involvement of the national parliaments in the work of the Union .
The Convention established that there are four institutions : the Council , the European Parliament , the Commission and also the national parliaments , which represent the will of the people .
Furthermore , the classification of legal and financial documents and instruments , with the introduction for the first time of a proper hierarchy of norms ; the creation of the office of European Minister for Foreign Affairs - possibly the most innovative institutional figure to have emerged from the Convention 's work , following the merging of the duties performed thus far by the High Representative and the Commissioner for External Relations . Of equal importance is the potential future merging of the posts of Mr President-in-Office of the Council and Commission President .
In addition , qualified majority voting will be further extended to other areas .
A great deal has been achieved .
If anyone were to ask whether any more could have been done , I would say yes , more could and should have been done , but the compromise reached may be the only one possible .
In a 25- or 27-Member State Union , continuing on the basis of unanimous decision-making would have brought the end of the Union 's ability to govern properly owing to the complexities of public opinion .
I will end by saying a few words , Mr President , regarding the institutional balance of powers achieved by the Convention : a delicate balance , a balance that has been sought right from day one because it was quite clear to the entire Convention that the power of one institution could not be increased to the detriment of another .
It is a balance based on the distribution of powers between the European Council , which takes on the role of a political institution , with the task of laying down the Union 's guidelines and general political priorities , the Commission , representing the Member States , which keeps its central role of guardian of the Treaties and guarantor of the Community interest , and the European Parliament , which becomes a full colegislator .
I want to stress in this Chamber that one of the most important innovations is the election of the Commission by the European Parliament , which thus sees its legislative codecision and budgetary powers increased - with the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure ceasing to exist - and which acquires the right to propose a future revision of the Constitution , if necessary , using the Convention method .
Like the others , this innovation is part of an institutional package which , as Mr Giscard d 'Estaing said , certainly leaves room for improvement , although it would be extremely dangerous to attempt to modify it to any great extent for fear of upsetting the balance of a complex system based on the dual legitimacy granted by national States and citizens , as achieved in the Convention .
That is why the delicate but considerable balance achieved by the Convention will be the basic reference for the Intergovernmental Conference .
To preserve this spirit and ensure continuity and consistency with the work carried out by the Convention , I believed and continue to believe it desirable for the representatives of the Commission and the European Parliament to take part in Conference and for the Chairman of the Convention and its Vice-Chairmen , Mr Amato and Mr Dehaene , to take part too .

The European Parliament must continue to play a fundamental part in this stage of the project of constitutional reform .
During the July part-session , Mr Berlusconi called for the greatest possible involvement of the institution and I would like to stress the need for this once again .
I would also like to express a hope which I am sure will be realised : that the European Parliament take up its monitoring duties without delay , not just to ensure that the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference are open and transparent , as we are seeking to guarantee , but , first and foremost , to ensure that it reflects the expectations of the citizens and that the governments do not give way to the temptation to destroy the valuable fruit of the Convention 's labour .
Indeed , if this major opportunity were to be lost , it would be a negative signal for all the European citizens and we would certainly be doing irreparable damage to the project of European integration .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have certainly come a long way in the over 50 years which have elapsed since the day of what may be considered the birth of the European Union : the Robert Schuman declaration of 9 May 1950 which proposed the joint management of a small number of interests - relating to energy , raw materials and economic affairs - to promote and implement the principles of solidarity and peace .
The project of building a united Europe is currently going through a crucial stage in its history with , on the one hand , reunification with the countries of the east , which are once again fully embracing the principles of freedom and democracy , and , on the other , the transition from an economic dimension to a political dimension , which can only go hand in hand with the building of a European identity which will enable the Union to become an element of stability , prosperity and peace on the world stage .
These are the epoch-making challenges facing the Europe , united in diversity , which is evoked in the preamble to the Constitution : a Europe composed of States which are pooling their sovereignty and powers without losing their identities .
It is in a spirit of fidelity to its Europeanist tradition , which is the heritage of the Italian people and of all the political groupings of my country , that the Italian Presidency intends to conduct the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference .
The first Treaty of Rome launched European unification ; the second must - and will - bring about the transition to the new reunified Europe : a Union which is politically and economically stronger , destined to become an element of stability and prosperity on the world stage .
We can say with confidence , on the basis of the text of the reform Treaty adopted by the Convention , that we really are just a step away from achieving this historic goal .
.
( IT ) As Mr Giscard d 'Estaing and Mr Fini have said , the Convention has indeed represented and established a pillar in the process of European integration , and the Italian Presidency sees this achievement as a basic reference for the work of the Intergovernmental Conference .
There are three guiding principles which the Presidency intends to follow in directing the proceedings of the Intergovernmental Conference , which , as you are aware , will open on 4 October in Rome .
First of all , the Presidency considers it essential to adhere to the timetable drawn up by the Thessaloniki European Council : this will mean pressing ahead resolutely in an attempt to achieve a positive outcome in time for the European Parliament elections scheduled for June 2004 .
This requirement has dictated the Italian Presidency 's primary objective of conducting the IGC proceedings at a rapid pace , in the hope of reaching an overall , comprehensive agreement on the constitutional text by December .
The future Constitutional Treaty - a Constitution for Europe , as Mr Giscard d 'Estaing has described it - can then be signed sometime between 1 May 2004 , the date on which the ten new Member States will join the Union , and the European Parliament elections scheduled for June 2004 .
Any extension of the constitutional negotiations beyond those dates would raise two serious problems of legitimacy and democratic transparency : on the one hand , it would mean a gradual dissipation of the constituent foundations built up by the Convention , and , on the other , it would mean asking the European voters to elect their Parliament without knowing the constitutional shape of the future Union .
The second objective of the Presidency is to preserve the structure and balance of the text drawn up by the Convention .
We do , as I have already said , consider it appropriate to respect what can only be described as the constituent foundations built up over 16 months by a democratic body in which governments , national parliaments and Union institutions were represented .
At the same time , we consider it inappropriate to reopen debates which are now well and truly over .
The political wealth accrued as a result of the success achieved will not be dissipated or weakened by the Conference 's proceedings ; rather , the Conference must undertake to improve and supplement those parts of the Treaty on which full agreement has not yet been reached , the parts of the Treaty - I reiterate for the sake of clarity - which do not deal with the institutional pillars defined by the Convention .
The Italian Presidency will therefore oppose any questioning of the overall balance of the draft and its basic features .
The Presidency believes that the interests of Europe and the European citizens must prevail over any defence of particular interests which could lead to substantial amendments of any kind to the Treaty .
From this point of view , the opinions presented by Parliament and the European Commission will be factors to be taken into full consideration in the course of the Conference .
The third and final point which will constitute a guideline during the Conference is the need to achieve consensus on a number of topics which are still controversial using the desired principle of unanimity : this will , under no circumstances , force the Italian Presidency to negotiate a ' downwards ' compromise which would constitute a retreat from the Convention 's proposals .
Our aim is to achieve a high-quality outcome commensurate with the European public 's expectations and capable of ensuring that the Union functions effectively and democratically on a long-term basis .
We are not drafting a Constitution for Europe designed to last only a few years , and here we are relying on the fundamental support of the European Parliament .
As you know , the Italian Presidency has started the procedures for convening the Intergovernmental Conference , which will open in Rome on 4 October .
We believe that the Conference must be conducted at a high political level , as has already been stipulated by the European Council , namely at Prime Minister and Foreign Affairs Minister level , but we also believe that the representatives of all the European institutions must take part so that the IGC is genuinely the ideal continuation of the Convention 's work .
On that basis , I will put forward a proposal to the effect that the European Parliament should be guaranteed participation through its representatives in the work of the IGC , both at the level of Foreign Affairs Ministers and at the level of Heads of Government , with the participation of the President of the European Parliament .
Any other solution would , indeed , represent a step backwards in relation to the democratic method for revising the Treaties based on the principle and the requirement of transparency and consideration for the citizens .
In conclusion , we intend to seek the views and recommendations of Parliament and the other European institutions in the firm belief that , as Mr Fini has already said , endowing the European Union with a Constitution is a challenge not just for some countries more than others , still less just for the Italian Presidency , which has the honour of guiding the Council through this phase : it is a challenge for everybody .
We owe it to our citizens : if we fail to meet this challenge we have failed everyone , including those - and I hope that there will not be anybody - who have attempted to make particular interests prevail over the general interest .
We undertake to prevent any such destructive attempts succeeding .
( Applause )
.
( IT ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by expressing my warm thanks to all the members of the Convention , and to you , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , in particular , for the dedication and intelligence you have shown in the long months of intense work that have distinguished this phase of the constitution-building process .
The successful experiment of the Convention has brought a lasting change in the course of democratic life in the European Union .
A great job well done and an unhoped-for result .
The draft prepared by the Convention thus provides the basis - I would say an excellent basis - for drawing up the final version of the Constitution .
This is a good thing because , above all , the text has great symbolic value : this is the first time the Union 's foundations have been debated in an open , democratic forum representative of the peoples and States of Europe .
Secondly , the draft Constitution resolutely tackles the issues of the institutional balance of powers and the complex nature of the Union .
The debate has been intense and thorough , and it has allowed all the fundamental issues put forward to be dealt with coherently , namely : finding a new , more effective way of reconciling the two tracks of European integration , the Community and the intergovernmental ; striking a balance between the States ' political representation and that of the people , and the resulting roles of Parliament and the Council ; devising a way to organise the representation of the Union 's general interest and the legitimate interests of the individual Member States .
Thirdly and lastly , the Convention has laid the basis for the essential task of bringing the Union 's policies up to date .
The Intergovernmental Conference that is to finalise and formalise the work of the Convention is now commencing .
I see two extreme standpoints emerging and I believe we need to discuss this frankly .
On the one hand , there are those who believe the Convention 's draft should be left unaltered because it represents the only compromise possible . Then there are those who would like to throw everything up for discussion again because sovereignty is ultimately vested in the States and the last word should be theirs .
However understandable those standpoints might be , I believe both are open to criticism .
From the start - ever since the Commission and Parliament advocated the Convention approach after Nice - we in the Commission have always said that the Intergovernmental Conference should be a short , focused , conclusive phase .
This does not mean , however , that it should just be a rubber stamp , because that would deprive the Intergovernmental Conference of its political responsibility .
Clearly , this Intergovernmental Conference cannot be compared with any other that has gone before , since it will be working on the basis of the excellent work of the Convention .
It still has its primary function , however , which is to allow the Heads of State and Government to exercise their political responsibility and present the definitive text for approval to the institutions and , as Mr Giscard d 'Estaing said , the citizens of their Member States .
It therefore involves a new phase of political ownership . That does not , of course , demand a lengthy Intergovernmental Conference , but it does call for a proper period of reflection .
Indeed , there are aspects of the draft Constitution that bear clear witness to the fact that the compromise reached is incomplete and that the result achieved to date cannot be the end of the line , as we had originally hoped .
Therefore , it is right for the Member States , in whom sovereignty is ultimately vested , to be able to discuss it further in order to see whether there are areas where it can be improved .
It is the Commission 's duty and responsibility to point out such areas .
As it stands , the draft Constitution still provides for unanimous decision-making in over 50 sectors , including some key areas of the Union 's work .
Everyone agrees , moreover , that one of the shortcomings in the current situation is the lack of a proper instrument for coordination of Member States ' budgetary policies .
However , I wonder how people think such coordination can be achieved if the current power of veto is preserved , and the same applies to indirect and company taxation .
Then there is the key issue of the future balance of powers between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
The draft Constitution proposes a Commission made up in a way that will , in my opinion and the opinion of the College , make the institution representing the Union 's general interest less able to do its work effectively and credibly .
The solution put forward creates a distinction between Commissioners by creating a second , unnecessarily lesser , category . No people of the Union deserves to be represented by a second-class Commissioner .
( Applause )
It would mean splitting the College , where the link with the Member States has been the Commission 's driving force for the last 50 years .
More progress is therefore needed - and this is not at all incompatible with the need to keep the Intergovernmental Conference brief and bring it to a swift conclusion - to make sure every Member country has a full Commissioner .
At the same time , the present text of the draft Constitution leaves choices open on key points , such as the way the Councils are to work and responsibilities in the field of external relations .
The task of the Intergovernmental Conference is to make the work of the institutions more transparent and more effective and to prevent duplication and halfway solutions that may breed future conflicts .
This is a matter of facilitation rather than innovation .
Lastly , the Convention did not have time to update the current wording of the Community policies . In some cases , this dates back to the 1950s and has been partly or wholly superseded .
It will obviously be difficult to settle all the issues still outstanding , but it is our duty to take a step back from the current political circumstances and give careful , discerning thought to those points where it is still possible to make the changes which are necessary to make the constitutional structure even more capable of meeting the challenges ahead .
We do , of course , need to see whether the political will exists .
Is there no such will or is it a sense of realism that is inducing us to refrain from tackling these issues and to leave the text as it is ?
If this is the case , the Commission is , of course , willing to take note of this calmly and realistically , mindful of the fact that very significant progress has , in any case , been made .
Essentially , this has been the case every time the Treaties have been amended .
It was true for the Single European Act and for the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties , and it may be true here too , but we must realise that , as happened in those cases , we will need to be ready to cope with further crises and , therefore , to negotiate further changes and adaptations .
This may always have been part and parcel of European integration - a mixture of vision and reaction to crises induced by growth .
It is the history we have lived through and we know it well , even if there are times when we need to move forward more quickly .
This is definitely one of those times .
At all events , if we want to capitalise on our experience and if we genuinely want to draft a Constitution that will last , we must provide for mechanisms that allow decisions to be taken tomorrow where they cannot be taken today .
We therefore need - and I am coming to the end but also the final key point of my brief speech - to look at more realistic procedures for amending the Constitution that will allow us to act quickly and effectively where , under pressure of crises - and crises there will inevitably be - the arrangements we are setting out today prove to be insufficient .
Indeed , the worst-case scenario would be to find ourselves with inadequate constitutional provisions that , in practice , simply cannot be amended because of the requirement of unanimous agreement among 25 or more Member States .
This is true of unanimous decision-making , which still applies today in many sectors , and it is therefore even more true when it comes to bringing policies up to date , a process which we are unable to tackle now .
A Constitution set in stone for all time which could not be relied on to provide the solution to future crises would be the negation of the whole history of European integration .
This we must avoid at all costs if we want to perform the historic task entrusted to us responsibly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our work , we need to keep a clear vision of the path the Union must continue to follow : peace , freedom and solidarity must continue to be our goals in the day-to-day work of the institutions .
To do this , we must give the Union the practical tools to achieve those goals .
The Union must speak with a single voice in the world - a strong , authoritative , peaceable voice .
Internally and externally , it must be able to uphold the force of law which imposes duties but also protects the individual , safeguarding freedom to act in an ordered , creative society .
Lastly , the Union must have the means to show solidarity .
This takes the form of support for the most vulnerable in an inclusive society .
It is expressed through joint action to provide assistance in the event of natural disasters . It is based on the duty of mutual defence , in the firm conviction that the defence of each and every Member State is the best way to show that we belong to a single family .
Ladies and gentlemen , a new phase has now started : we must finish off the excellent work of the Convention wisely , resolutely and with courage .
Of course , it needs to be brought to a swift conclusion , but , above all , it needs to be brought to a satisfactory conclusion .
The Commission will continue to do its part to help achieve that aim .
( Applause )
Mr President , a few weeks before the Convention began its work , when Mr Klaus Hänsch and I visited the President of the Convention in his house in Paris , after we had left that meeting I noted in my diary , ' We will be successful if we manage to create the spirit of the Convention ' .
What did we understand by ' the spirit of the Convention ' ?
We meant ensuring that the members of the Convention were aware of the historic importance of the moment , of the difficulty of the challenge and of the will to rethink Europe in accordance with what was best for the citizens in the new Europe following the great enlargement .
I believe that in the creation of that Convention spirit , which has been the key to this success , you have played a leading role , Mr President .
I believe that the applause following your speech today demonstrates that this Parliament has appreciated your work at the head of this Convention .
Why in this task of rethinking Europe was it so necessary to convince ourselves of its difficulty ?
I believe that what we have carried out is an exercise in realising those slogans which this European Parliament has had since the 1990s : more democracy , more efficiency and more transparency .
I believe that this Constitution is more democratic , more efficient and more transparent .
It creates a Europe which is also imbued with these ideas .
Why ?
Because we have modified the institutional system .
It is true that we have done so , but we have done so precisely in order to provide the European Union with greater democracy .
We only have to remember and compare the model of the ECSC Treaty ; we only have to remember what that assembly was , that predecessor of this Parliament in the ECSC Treaty .
Today this Parliament , with this Constitution , is a fully democratic Parliament , fully integrated into the decision-making process .
But we have also managed to integrate the national Parliaments into this decision-making process .
And we have also ensured that the citizens can activate popular initiative when the law so establishes .
This idea of more democracy is reflected in the Constitution .
Also the idea of more efficiency - and that is why we have modified the institutional system .
We have modified it profoundly .
I believe we have always borne in mind the idea of safeguarding the necessary balance between the institutions , that that has been the fundamental premise of all our work .
The truth is that only time will tell whether we have achieved that or not .
But I believe that , in the modifications we have introduced , the idea of preserving the balance was absolutely essential .
Our work has ended . Now we have the Intergovernmental Conference .
I believe that to criticise the Constitution - to say that it should have been done this way or that - is the work of experts and professors , but I do not believe it is the work of the European Parliament .
The work of the European Parliament is to take a political position with regard to the Constitution .
We are going to do so in the report for which our fellow Members , Mr Gil Robles and Mr Tsatsos , are rapporteurs .
I believe , Mr President , that you have presented the European Parliament with a challenge today .
I remember that in the twenties there was a debate in Germany on the guardian of the Constitution between Carl Schmitt and Hans Kelsen : Der Hüter der Verfassung .
Wer soll der Hüter der Verfassung sein ?
[ The guardian of the Constitution .
Who should the guardian of the Constitution be ? ]
I believe that the political work of this European Parliament today , the political message we have to send is that we are becoming guardians of this Constitution .
This Constitution is one which this Parliament believes to be good for Europe and for its citizens .
I therefore believe that our political message should be to become the guardians of this Constitution .
To this end , Mr President , we must play an active part in the Intergovernmental Conference .
And I am glad that Mr Fini , who is also imbued with that Convention spirit , has said that the presence of the European Parliament will be real .
We do not want it to be ceremonial , we do not simply want to take lunch in Rome , although Rome is a wonderful city .
What we want to do is to continue bringing our ideas and our impetus to this Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , it has been an honour to chair the delegation of the European Parliament , it has certainly been one of the most wonderful adventures , without doubt the most wonderful of my political life , but above all I would like to say here today in this House that I believe that in the end the great beneficiaries will be the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , President Giscard d 'Estaing , our work in the Convention was not always free of conflicts - and nor , indeed , was the work of the praesidium - but we agreed on our objective , which was to create one single text for a European constitution , and in that we succeeded .

We followed the wise counsel of Jean Monnet , who said that writing down what should be is easy , but that what matters is writing down what can be .
The Convention did precisely that .
What we are putting before the governments is well-considered , balanced , and , above all , achievable if we have the will to do it .
Previous Intergovernmental Conferences and EU summits have always made themselves the yardstick for success or the lack of it .
That now belongs in the past .
The results of the Rome Intergovernmental Conference will be measured against those of the Convention .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is our success .
We have not managed to achieve everything that we wanted , and not all of what has been achieved can be counted an undoubted success .
We would have liked all future laws - including especially those on taxation - to be decided on by qualified majority in the Council .
We would have liked the Common Foreign and Security Policy to be another area in which the Member States would reach decisions by qualified majority .
We know how fragile some solutions are , the compromise on the size of the Commission and on voting in it being one example .
All this is on the outermost boundary of constitutional good sense .
We also know , however , that what is described therein is a compromise and not , moreover , one reached on the lowest common denominator .
This draft constitution has not become a mere list of compromises , but has remained an internally coherent piece of legislation , and so we must resist all temptations to repackage these compromises .
The governments were represented at the Convention .
They had a hand in what was finally agreed on .
The desire of some of them to withdraw from this consensus not only fills me with concern , but it is also dangerous .
The fact is , ladies and gentlemen , that we will not end up with a new and better draft , but with a second Treaty of Nice .
That is something we have to prevent .
The Commission 's evident willingness to play along with this leaves me astonished and baffled .
( Applause )
Do you really believe , Mr President of the Commission , that what you have said here has not also been said and discussed in the Convention ?
Do you believe that the Commission 's delegates did not put these ideas forward when they sat in the praesidium and the Convention ?
What you and they desire is perhaps the right thing , but you will get the wrong result .
What you have put forward will result in nothing more than a return to the old , traditional Intergovernmental Conference , to the same old horse-trading that we saw at Intergovernmental Conferences in the past .
Do not imagine that you will gain support for this , Mr President of the Commission , so abandon your game .
What the Convention has built up , you are pulling apart .
( Applause )
Finally , once this Intergovernmental Conference is over - and we hope it will be a success - I can only urge and implore Mr Fini and Mr Frattini , whose statements I welcome , to stand by what they said , to ensure that the Intergovernmental Conference makes this draft Europe 's constitution ; then , ladies and gentlemen , let us mobilise the people in our Member States .

Let us then tell them what is unique about what the Convention has brought forth , a constitution for so many states and peoples , separated from one another for half a century by the division of Europe and by Communist dictatorship , given by this Convention their first opportunity to play their part , through their representatives , in shaping Europe 's future .
To our parliamentary counterparts from the East , from Central and Southern Europe , who took part for the first time , I have this to say : not only did you follow the work that was done , but you gave something to the Convention !
( Applause )
For it is unique , this constitution for twenty-five - and more - states and peoples who , for centuries , have robbed and killed each other , waged war on one another and laid each other waste , and who now want to join together in shaping the future . It is a constitution for twenty-five - and more - peoples , each with their own traditions , tongues and histories , all desirous of retaining their identities , yet uniting in a common destiny .
That is the great thing about this draft constitution .
That is the great thing about the unification of Europe , to which we must hold fast and with which we must press on .
That responsibility is ours .
We face the same situation as did the fathers and mothers of Europe 's unification in the 1950s .
By joining in a European Community , they were courageous and far-sighted enough to set aside the thousand-year enmity between Germany and France and to make a start on uniting Western Europe .
We , as politicians of our generation , have , for the first time in a millennium , the opportunity to unite the whole continent in freedom and peace .
We must summon up the same courage and far-sightedness as did the founding fathers of European unity fifty years ago .
That , ladies and gentlemen , is our destiny .
( Applause )
I should like to acknowledge the presence in the official gallery of a senior parliamentary delegation from Ukraine , led by former Foreign Minister , Mr Tarasyuk .
You are very welcome here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our commitment to Europe has as its goal an active , democratic and transparent European Union , one that is founded on values , principles and rules .
This proposal for a European constitution sees us taking a decisive step closer to that goal , and it is a great joy to be able to welcome President Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , a former member of our group , to this House as President of the Convention .
I do not want to repeat what the Liberals have had to say on the subject .
President Giscard , I have a clear recollection of how , in January 1992 , when Egon Klepsch , the chairman of our group , was elected President of the European Parliament , I stood behind you as we together - you first , with me following modestly behind - cast our votes for Leo Tindemans as group chairman .
If , back in 1992 , somebody had said that Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing would , in September 2003 , put before the European Parliament a constitutional treaty , a constitution for Europe , I would have said that was wonderful , that it was a dream , a vision !
That this dream has become reality is something in which we can rejoice with all our hearts .
To you , President Giscard d 'Estaing , I want to address a special word of gratitude and appreciation .
I might add that I have never doubted that the outcome would be a good one , for you met in our group 's chamber , although I will readily concede that it was once home to another group .
I would also like to express warm thanks to our members of the Praesidium , Mr Iñigo Méndez de Vigo , Mr Klaus Hänsch , and , representing all our Members in the Convention , their chairman , Mr Elmar Brok , and our colleagues in the Convention .
You will all have the opportunity to take the floor at our second September sitting , when we will be discussing the reports by Mr Gil-Robles and Mr Tsatsos .
The Convention 's methodology has turned out to be the right one , as , post-Nice , we had said in the presence of the President of the European Council that we needed another methodology , and our group has always put the case for a Convention .
It is no secret that , within our group , which is a large one , the PPE component has priorities that differ from those of the DE element , which is made up of our British friends , but what I can say , on behalf of our group as a whole , is that it is the allocation of competences within Europe that is vital .
Our goal is an active Europe , not a centralist Europe .
Where common action by Europeans is called for , Europe must be able to act .
Not everything that calls for action in Europe calls for action by Europe , but , where Europe is required to act , Europe must be strong .
We are now defining what the areas for European action are .
It is now for the nation states to say where they have to act , what are the regions ' areas for action , and where action has to be by the municipalities .
It is very much to be welcomed that this constitutional treaty guarantees the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality and the right of appeal for all national parliaments , and that there is an elaborate network of balances interconnecting the different levels of the European Union .
We especially welcome the way in which a place has also been found in the constitution for local self-government .
I do not know the exact percentage , but Parliament will have equal rights of codecision on over 90 % of legislation , and transparency is at last introduced into the Council of Ministers , which must no longer legislate behind closed doors .
It is on the basis of the elections to the European Parliament that the President of the Commission must be nominated .
Even now , I call upon the Heads of State or Government to take into account the results of the 2004 European parliamentary elections - no matter what the result ; my concern is with the principle - when nominating the President of the Commission , even if the constitution is not yet in force by the time the elections are held .
We have , as a group , seen it as very important that the Foreign Minister , too , should be subject to approval by vote of the European Parliament .
We have not , of course , got everything we wanted , nor could we have done .
We would have liked the constitution to incorporate a reference to our Judaeo-Christian heritage .
We would have liked decisions in foreign and security policy to be based on the principle of majority voting , and we are well aware of the difficulties involved in working out the votes in the Council .
I believe that most of us will agree with me when I warn , in the strongest terms , against now undoing this elaborate compromise .
Mr Fini , Mr Frattini , we want the European Parliament to have representatives - I am deliberately avoiding the term ' observers ' - at the Intergovernmental Conference , who will have every facility afforded them to play their part in its work .
That is what I have to ask of you .
Let me conclude by saying that the project on the table before us is a great one .
At this Intergovernmental Conference , great responsibilities will rest upon your shoulders .
There are vast opportunities involved , but also immense dangers , and , on behalf of all of us , I wish you every success , for what this is about is our having , in the twenty-first century , a legal basis on which to peacefully resolve the differences and conflicts of interest that we in Europe have , so that peace may be secured by law , and I wish you great success at the Intergovernmental Conference !
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , President Giscard d 'Estaing , I am addressing you in your own language because I wish first of all to salute your consistency , together with your campaign for Europe which do not just date from the time since you were a Member of the European Parliament .
You were one of the creators of the European Council .
You worked for the direct election of the European Parliament .
You even gave the name ' écu ' to the future European currency .
Obviously , the name has changed .
You were right to choose the tortoise , representing perseverance , as a symbol during the Convention .
I had the opportunity to work with you as a Member of the European Parliament , notably when , as an initial experiment , the governments and the Council were opened up as an integral part of the preparatory interinstitutional conference that we set up and that anticipated the Convention before the term existed .
Our group thinks that you have done some good work as President of the Convention .
Having a tortoise made of jade was felicitous . If it had been a flesh and blood one , you would have been sorry to see it disappear .
I am not now going to analyse the work of the Convention , something we shall do in the course of the second September part-session on the basis of the Tsatsos report .
Allow me to comment on your quotation from Montesquieu .
Indeed , the great historic originality of our work is to devise a democratic structure that goes beyond the nation state in the era of globalisation .
Montesquieu is , to be sure , a philosopher who talked about democracy and the nation state .
Now , let us not forget that Montesquieu began by writing about the grandeur and decadence of the Rome to which we are now returning .
I also salute the fact that you began the draft constitution with a quotation from Pericles ' funeral oration .
Indeed , all Europeans , both men and women , could identify with this speech made 2 500 years ago .
It shows that we have made our contribution to history , on the pattern laid down by Montesquieu .
The Constitution has served Parliament , in its capacity as a legislative power , best , according it its central statute .
I share the reservations expressed about the fact that essential areas are still subject to the unanimity rule .
Where the executive is concerned , I think that it made sense to have divided the Council into a legislative council and an executive council , but that the solutions proposed at the end of the Convention are not as satisfactory .
I concur with a number of the criticisms made by my colleague , Mr Hänsch , concerning the President of the Commission , and I am also in favour of more flexible solutions for revising the Constitution , given the historic situation we are in .
I would add , especially , that the spirit of the Convention was already present at the end of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Otherwise , I should be at a loss to explain why so many foreign ministers actively participated in the Convention .
Mr President , President of the Convention , I too have the honour of congratulating a predecessor for the impressive work he has done , but I cannot continue in the vein of Charles Aznavour and say ' You are for me , formidable ' .
Mr President , at the next part-session , we shall have an in-depth debate on the strictly institutional dimension of the draft Constitution .
Then , my group will emphasise what it considers to be positive advances : new parliamentary prerogatives , a willingness to encourage ordinary people to get involved , and certain elements of transparency .
It will also express views on other , much more controversial institutional aspects and explain why it is making the case for ratification through referendums .
Today , I am going , however , to tackle a more global problem and ask a sort of preliminary question .
A constitution is , in principle , a fundamental law determining a country 's form of government .
It is also able to lay down a number of benchmark values and fundamental rights .
In no circumstances can it aspire to restrict for thirty to fifty years - for that is the lifespan of this document , as promised by President Giscard d 'Estaing - the freedom of sovereign nations to choose their own model of society .
Democracy means choice .
Now , what we have before us , in addition to reform of the institutional system , is a process whereby the model of a liberal Europe is given constitutional status .
We thus learn from as early on as Article 3 , and I quote , that ' [ t ] he Union shall offer its citizens ? a single market where competition is free and undistorted ' .
On four occasions , there subsequently recurs the liberal theme of an open market economy characterised by free competition .
It is , however , precisely against this obsession with all-out competition and against this inclination to reduce the whole of life in society to the level of a commodity that a growing number of our fellow citizens are protesting and mobilising .
A factor further to the discredit of the Praesidium of the Convention is the fact that most of the provisions setting up the model of a liberal Europe as inviolable appear in the third part of the document .
Unbeknown to most people outside this House , the 340 articles comprising this part - in other words , three quarters of the entire draft Constitution - have not been subject to any discussion within the Convention during the 16 months of work , the results of which were presented to the Thessaloniki European Council .
It has to be said that they were added on the quiet and after the event , right in the middle of July so that the majority of editions of the Constitution in circulation quite simply ignore them .
That is , as it were , the hidden face of the draft Constitution .
It is , however , this part that defines , in particular , economic and monetary policy and the inordinate powers of a European Central Bank obsessed with price stability and the rise in salary costs .
In other words , it is the most disputed content of the Treaty of Maastricht that you have thus taken up and perpetuated .
These articles also list the drastic restrictions placed upon social policy , as well as upon the conception of public services , tolerated in terms of mere , and I quote , ' reimbursement for the discharge of certain obligations ' and as departures from the rules of competition and from the provisions prohibiting state aid .
Deeply convinced as I am that , now as never before , there is a European need for hope in transforming the world , I think it would be very damaging to provoke , in this way , many anti-liberals into becoming anti-Europeans .
That is why I would ask you this question , President Giscard d 'Estaing : might nothing therefore change concerning future trends in the European Union , whatever the political developments in one or other European country ?
Is that not a legitimate question ?
It is valid in terms of the economic and social dimensions of this project , as well as in terms of its political dimension , since Article 40 , for example , foresees the common security and defence policy being , and I quote , ' compatible with the ? policy established within [ the ] framework [ of NATO ] . '
Is NATO to be a constituent part of European identity ?
We can , emphatically , do better in terms of European ambition , the rehabilitation of politics and the promotion of responsibility on the part of individual citizens .
As you very rightly stated , never forget the citizens , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
I await your reply .
Mr President , the text adopted by the Convention indisputably represents a step forward for European democracy .
Many of our demands have been complied with : the incorporation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the improvement of the legislative process , including the introduction of the citizens ' right of legislative initiative ; the inclusion among the Union 's goals of a number of aims , and we will fight and enlist the citizens ' support to see them achieved ; full employment , fair trade , pluralism , the protection of human rights , conflict prevention , the sustainable development of the earth .
It is thanks to results such as these that we can now claim this text as our own too and undertake to defend it in the coming months .
Clearly , however , for us , this European constitutional process is not yet finished .
We do not share the opinion of those who believe that this was the best that the Convention could do .
In particular , it failed to bring instruments and policies into line with its most innovative objectives , it preserved the unanimity requirement and it further increased the Council 's supremacy in key areas of the Union 's competences .
While we acknowledge the high quality of its work , we feel that the way in which the Praesidium and you , yourself , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , conducted the Convention 's work , the rules chosen to govern the process , must be carefully assessed and analysed , for they have had a definite effect on the quality of the text adopted .
It was a serious strategic error to agree right from the beginning to the Convention being polluted by the very intergovernmental method that it was trying to leave behind .
Clearly , this shifted the emphasis of the debate from what the Union should do and how to who wins and who loses under the new rules , which is typical of an Intergovernmental Conference and the basic cause of the regrettable failure of Nice .
We have two practical proposals for the future : the Chairman of the Convention must be elected by the Convention itself and its work must be conducted more explicitly according to the Parliamentary method , which , although based on the search for consensus , is also based on the rule of majority voting .
We have two extremely important challenges ahead , the first of which is certainly to prevent the positive results achieved by the Convention being nullified during the Intergovernmental Conference by the endeavours of those same governments which were opposed to the Convention and now want to challenge its work .
That would be unacceptable and , I would venture to say , unlawful .
Over and above the provisions of the Treaties , it is clear that the most important innovation of the Convention has been to take away the governments ' monopoly on reform of the Union .
It is unthinkable that we should have to go back on this achievement , and it is not acceptable that essential parts of the text should be amended without the explicit agreement of Parliament , at least : this is clearly quite different from merely inviting a couple of observers to the meetings .
In this sense , it would appear to be particularly important to highlight Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's proposal to make the different phases of the work of the Intergovernmental Conference completely transparent and public .
Lastly , Mr President , it is absolutely essential to abolish the unanimity requirement for revision of the Constitution and to introduce power of ratification for the European Parliament .
If it is not possible to do this , if the unanimity safety mechanism is preserved , it is not difficult to predict what will happen in the future : the Union will be unable to move forward , unable to act , and , in the long term , it will become increasingly insignificant and divided .
The actual historic import of the Convention 's work will depend , not least , on the Italian Presidency .
Mr Fini , Mr Frattini , you must defend the text adopted by the Convention from some of your impetuous colleagues . You must be open to improvements and endeavour to make it a text that can be developed and changed .
In this you will have our full support .
Mr President , please do not imagine , because of the brevity of some of what I have to say , that I am being in any way malicious . It is simply that I have a limited amount of time in which to speak .
I should like first of all to say that no midwife , be it in the field of obstetrics or politics , has the ability to get rid of congenital deformities .
Whatever the intellectual virtues of the Convention and of its President and of those of our eminent fellow MEPs who have taken part in this work - most notably the vice-presidents of my group , Mrs Muscardini and Mr Queiró - it was certainly very naïve to believe , or to lead others to believe , that a European Constitution might in itself permit the transformation of a technocratic European structure into a democratic political body .
Everyone agrees in thinking of the European Union as a democracy .
If there is in fact to be a constitution , it can , therefore , only proceed from the constituent power , that is to say the sovereign people , and it can only be ratified by that same sovereign people .
Now , where is the constituent power ?
No one in this Convention has been given the slightest popular mandate to devise a constitution , and I am also surprised to hear members of the Convention , including the most eminent among them , say that no modification whatsoever to the document that has been drawn up would be acceptable , either at the Intergovernmental Conference or , even , at European Council level .
That is an outrageous claim .
Given the importance in principle of a constitutional document , I would add that only a referendum would be able to legalise this great institutional change in the EU .
What referendum , however ?
Of necessity , a European referendum , that is to say a consultation organised on the same day in each Member State .
Apart from the fact that the referendum procedure is not anticipated in all the Member States , how , in any case , would the outcome be assessed ?
At European level as a whole ? At national level ?
In that case , what would happen if the majority of people in a single Member State voted ' no ' ?
No satisfactory answer has been given to any of these questions .
A political impasse has been reached , since the two questions upon which success depends have not been asked .
How is the power of the populations to approve or reject the stages of this construction to be preserved ?
Moreover , do the peoples of Europe want to construct an independent Europe capable of influencing the balance of world power ?
That is what I wanted to say to you on behalf of a group united in its diversity .
Let us , therefore , keep our feet on the ground and stick with the principles forming the basis of genuine European integration : the peoples and the nations .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , Mr President of the Convention , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , having taken great pleasure in the excellent things Mr Pasqua had to say , I should like to remind you that , as history teaches us , it is better to design a constitution once the revolution has been carried out , rather than the other way around .
Sadly , that was not the case when it came to devising this would-be European Constitution which amounts in practice to what is , so far , a friendly game of musical chairs between old and new , small and large countries and within and between the European institutions themselves .
There were , however , Mr President , many revolutions we could have engaged in .
We could have effected an economic and social revolution , overturning what President Prodi called the stupid dogmas , established in Maastricht and reinforced in Amsterdam , that , increasingly with every day that passes , manifestly condemn Europe and , in particular , the euro zone to deflation and unemployment .
We could have effected a political revolution by declaring our independence , affirming our vision of a multipolar world and defending the central role of the United Nations in world affairs .
We could even have effected a cultural revolution by establishing , in opposition to the commercial organisation of the world , the right of peoples freely to choose their way of life and their own allegiances .
We might , above all , have effected a democratic revolution by turning Europe into an extension of our national democracies , instead of arranging the latter 's demise , and by creating a genuine political space peculiar to Europe through the Congress you proposed and by having recourse to a referendum .
In order to do this , however , we ought no doubt to have been inspired more by Rousseau than by Montesquieu .
Everyone knows that you chose a tortoise as a symbol , no doubt , of punctiliousness and perseverance , but not really of revolution .
That is a pity .
That is why I doubt if the peoples and citizens of Europe - they amount , moreover , to more or less the same thing - would identify with this Constitution that there is a desire to impose upon them .
It remains to be seen , moreover , who will be courageous enough to organise a referendum .
I should like to add a small PS for the attention of the Intergovernmental Conference : ' Do not abandon Strasbourg ' .
Mr President of the Convention , you once asked the Convention a question that was simultaneously pertinent and impertinent and to which we have never had a reply .
When the working party 's report on legal personality was presented , you asked : ' To what exactly would you accord legal personality ?
To a state or to an international organisation ? '
It was an excellent question , but an inconvenient one .
The Convention never replied , preferring not to commit itself .
If , however , it was possible to say at the start that European integration had a character all of its own and that it was a question of a non-identified legal object , the object would now appear more and more easily identifiable as the treaties have come and gone and , above all , at the conclusion of the Convention .
In essence , it takes the form of a state , of a central and supranational decision-making power with its unique institutional framework , its law superseding the national constitutions , its common law majority decision-making procedure and even , now , its Constitution with its constitutional super-court .
Perhaps a number of these elements - in certain lights and considered in isolation - may suggest an international organisation .
They all obviously combine , however , to form the outline of a European state , given the strength , intensity and broad sweep with which they are being applied .
I should also like , in my turn , to ask you a question : do you think that this European superstate really is what our peoples want ?
You who quoted surveys to us just now should know that the answer is ' no ' .
Our peoples certainly want to see European cooperation . They even want to see more policies with cross-border implications dealt with at European level .
At the same time , however , they want their countries to retain their freedom to take decisions and the freedom to choose their national democracy , the only form of democracy in the full sense of the word to date .
In these conditions , do you not think that the European superstate is a very poor response to a good question ?
Mr President , my reply will be brief , since I believe you now have other questions on the agenda .
Do not therefore accuse me subsequently of not expanding upon matters sufficiently .
Consider , rather , that it is a gesture of courtesy in view of the work done by your House .
Mr Fini , I should like to thank you for two things : first of all , your contribution to the work of the Convention , because you have been very much involved .
You are Vice-President of your government , you came to all the sessions , you remained in your seat , you listened , you took your turn to speak and you were - together with others , of course - a model participant in the Convention .
I would also thank you for having given your approval - on behalf , of course , of the Italian Presidency - to the project as a whole and for having emphasised that it was indeed a coherent project .
That is a crucial point .
In fact , we have just heard - and I shall return to this matter - proposals for partial changes .
The disadvantage of these partial changes , however , is that they disturb a balance that we have meticulously constructed together , with a view to ensuring that the project has a cohesion - to use your own expression - that must not be distorted .
Hence , balance must remain the reference point .
You have approved the idea - taken up by a number of members of the Convention , notably by your compatriot - of work that is open and transparent .
I hope that , in regard to the press and public opinion - and I am replying here to Mr Pasqua - this constitutional debate will indeed be an open one .
What I would ask you is , not to dismantle things , not to disappoint and , at the same time , not to be content to adopt a negative attitude , because that is naturally not enough .
Rather , it is necessary to take the lead .
The great moments of political excitement are those of progress rather than of disintegration .
At the last session of our Convention , moreover - rather curiously , because no explosion of political emotion was expected - those from a variety of political backgrounds present on all the benches had come together because of the feeling there was that perhaps the new unified Europe had an opportunity to move forward .
Mr Frattini , you will of course have a lot of technical work to do at this Intergovernmental Conference .
I believe that your three principles are sound .
Stick , therefore , to your three principles : respect for the timetable and respect for what you have very properly called the store of wisdom accumulated by the Convention , namely the major legacy of our 1 800 speeches .
It is necessary to make use of these , and the task is therefore one of improving and supplementing .
Improving , yes ; supplementing , yes ; putting a question mark over , emphatically no .
Mr President of the Commission , we have had debates .
I came to visit you , on my own initiative moreover , in Brussels when our work was almost complete in order to take note of your personal reactions to what our document contained .
You stated that this compromise was incomplete .
We shall see what will be added because , if it is cut drastically , this compromise will be still more incomplete .
You are yourselves parliamentarians from all the Member States , old and new .
Now , it has to be emphasised that the fact that the Convention reached a compromise , with just six dissenters , signified that the compromise was almost complete .
You raised the issue of qualified majority voting .
First of all , whenever , throughout the work of the Convention , qualified majority voting was demanded , I would ask what type of qualified majority was meant .
This point has not been raised .
Now , there are in fact two systems of qualified majority voting .
There is the Nice system , based on a scale , and there is the draft Constitution system , based on a double majority : a majority of the Member States and a majority of the represented population , which we have set at 60 % .
It has to be specified , therefore , what type of qualified majority is being talked about .
We are told we should have gone further in the difficult debate on the number of questions that are to be subject to qualified majority voting .
In fact , we have doubled the number , and we have not in fact been able to adopt the universal rule because of obstacles that were insurmountable for one group or another .
I would cite the case of taxation .
Six states participating in the Convention were making taxation an insurmountable obstacle .
We debated with them .
I visited London twice in order to see the British Prime Minister .
We talked about the matter with our other colleagues , since , as you know , other Member States had major reservations about the tax issue .
I hoped right until the end that we might introduce qualified majority voting for market taxation , since the latter is very much linked to the operation of the single market .
In the end , we were able to make a certain degree of progress , since we provided for qualified majority voting in the cases of administrative cooperation and the fight against tax fraud and tax evasion .
We were not able to go any further on the basis of consensus .
Mr President of the Commission , we shall see if any further progress is made on the basis of unanimity .
I should like to remind you of a central innovation that has been little talked about : the content of our article on the transition from unanimity to qualified majority voting .
This point is very important because we have put in place an arrangement that , over time , will permit the transition to qualified majority voting .
I would refer you to Article 24 ( 3 ) , enabling us to do in the future - and I also say this with Mr Barón Crespo in mind - what we have tried to do as much as possible in the Constitution : the European Council will be able to decide unanimously , as specified by the Treaty , to transfer a certain number of framework or European laws to the sphere of qualified majority voting .
In other words , what you are seeking to obtain by negotiation , the European Council will be able to achieve through the exercise of its powers in application of Article 24 , paragraphs 4 and 5 .
I am not talking about the composition of the Commission .
I would simply say to you , Mr Prodi , that I have here the amendments that have been lodged .
The Convention is familiar with the proposals you have made just now .
They were the subject of debates within the Convention .
Moreover , the new Member States that , at the beginning , were understandably very keen that there should be as many Commissioners as Member States - leading to figures bearing no relation to the number of responsibilities to be exercised by the Commission - have accepted , as we proposed , that the reform should only apply as from 2009 .
In other words , all the new countries will have Commissioners for the period 2005-2009 .
They will be equally well placed when it comes to constituting a genuine European college whose composition will reflect the number of tasks to be exercised by the Commission and the number that , as President Jacques Delors said , will enable it to retain its collegiate character .
Finally , you talked about natural disasters .
On the initiative of a working party chaired by Commissioner Barnier , Article 42 introduces into the Constitution the opportunity of exercising European solidarity in relation to natural disasters .
Just a word on the problem of the revision procedure , taken up by other speakers .
A number of members of the Convention - even a large number of them - would have liked it to have been possible to deal with this subject , because the revision procedure is going to remain that laid down by the treaties .
Now , it is obvious that , within the framework of a Constitution , there is some sort of internal revision procedure that bypasses the general circuit of treaties and of the twenty-five or twenty-seven ratifications .
We had no mandate for dealing with this subject , but the problem remains unresolved , and I have a sense that , in the years to come - perhaps not within the next 30 years , but certainly in the years to come - the question of a possible future constitutional revision procedure will have to be addressed .
In Europe 's current political state , I believe it would be unrealistic to imagine that the views of the Member States might be ignored .
A time will come , however , when , just as the transition has been made from unanimity to qualified majority voting , a new procedure will be required in this regard .
I now turn to MEPs ' speeches .
I would thank Mr Méndez de Vigo both for his work within the Convention and for his vision of the role he wishes to see the European Parliament play , a role indeed that the Convention will not be able to perform but that Parliament is in a position to assume .
I shall turn to you , Mr Hänsch , last .
I would say to Mr Poettering that he is from a country that has contributed a lot to music .
Whenever there is a concert - I had the opportunity in Brussels , during the Convention , of hearing the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra - the conductor of the orchestra asks for applause for the musicians .
He asks the musicians to stand so that the audience might applaud them .
That is why I would thank you for the compliments you have paid me , but I should like to share them with the members of the Convention .
The document with which I am presenting you today is a collective , rather than individual , work . It is the fruit of a joint effort .
We have been diligent , Mr Poettering , in dealing with the issues of competences , of the stability of competences and of the monitoring of subsidiarity .
The request that this issue be dealt with was particularly strong in those EU countries that have federal structures .
It was therefore given particular prominence by the German members of the Convention and also by our Spanish partners .
Mr Barón Crespo , who speaks all the languages of the EU - a factor that obviously simplifies the debates - was right in saying that ours is a first attempt at democratic construction going beyond the nation state .
It is therefore an original structure , and those who say it would be enough to copy the institutions of the nation state are mistaken because the nation state model would not enable us to deal with the problem of the double legitimacy of the Member States and of the populations .
You wanted to see an open IGC , or Intergovernmental Conference .
I believe that everyone here , particularly the representatives of the Presidency , concur in wishing to respond favourably to your wish .
By a twist of fate , Mr Watson is seated beside Mr Poettering .

My experience enables me to share both their cultures , and I thank Mr Watson for the contribution of his group , which included several influential members of the Convention , among them , incidentally , Mr Duff who has been one of the people most active in carrying our work forward .

Mr Wurtz , your quotations from our document were chosen specifically in order to show that , as you said , the document in a way constitutionalises the liberal economic system in Europe .
Now , if you take Article 3 on the objectives of the EU , which we have debated at length , what do we read ?
We read first of all that the EU is an area of freedom for people , an area of freedom in the economic sense of the term with , indeed , the four freedoms laid down by the basic treaties .
We would , however , add to the objectives of the EU a social market economy , highly competitive and aiming at full employment and social progress .
We foresee the EU combating social exclusion and discrimination , promoting equality between women and men - which is a crucial point in our documents - and protecting the rights of children .
Alongside economic freedom , which is a spatial freedom , the Constitution therefore carefully describes social objectives .
You talk about articles on EU policy and say that some of these are secret .
They are not secret , but they have to be translated .
At the end of the month , we shall present all of our documents translated into the EU 's future 22 languages . That is the explanation for the fact that we have not been able to forward them very quickly .
Whatever the case , the articles in question have not been modified .
These are the articles from the treaties , since we had no mandate to modify them other than to take account of the changes : a new institutional system , changes of name , European laws , framework laws , voting procedures and the legal base for policies .
The actual description of the policies is , however , unchanged except where four of them are concerned : policy relating to economic and social governance , on which considerable progress has been made , even if more might have been wished for ; common external policy ; common defence policy ; and policy relating to security and justice .
Mrs Frassoni , whom I had met in the course of our debates in the Convention , talks about intergovernmental methods .
We have done away with this term , which goes back to the beginning of the Convention .
On the contrary , we wanted to revive the institutional triangle .
There is no intergovernmental element . There are three institutions at work : Parliament , which expresses its opinion ; the Commission , which proposes legislation and engages in administration ; and the Council of Ministers , which takes the decisions entrusted to it by the Constitution .
That is not an intergovernmental procedure . It is a case of Community decisions being taken by one of the bodies of the EU .
You talk about having the President of the Commission elected by the European Parliament .
You will see that , next time , matters will still take place in accordance with the Treaty of Nice , that is to say that you will do nothing other than give your approval . Your sole power will be that of giving your approval .
With the Constitution , you would be able to vote in an election , and you could refuse the option proposed to you .
Mr Pasqua was wondering about the progression from technocratic structure to political body .
We have tried to progress down that road as far as we could .
He was wondering about our constituent power .
Where , however , are the constituents ?
Mr Pasqua , how was the constitutional committee composed that , during the summer of 1958 , drafted the constitution of the Fifth Republic ?
It was composed of named people .
What is important in the constituent procedure is ratification .
The constituent is whoever ratifies .
In the event , the constituents will be , successively , the European Parliament , the referendums in all those countries able to have recourse to this procedure - as I hope France will - and the national parliaments in cases where this is required by constitutional procedure .
I shall finish , then , by turning to Mr Abitbol , who expressed himself fully within the Convention .
He was , therefore , able to observe that it was a place of free expression .
He was in favour of the congress .
So was I , so we have both failed .
That being said , I believe that the question will arise again .
The absence of a ' European political constituency ' is a mistake .
There needs to be an arena in which European politicians , both at European and national levels , can meet on an organised basis .
President Barón Crespo must remember the conference that he organised in Rome and that was very fruitful for having been constructed on that model .
Mr Abitbol is a revolutionary of the kind that every assembly needs .
He reproaches us for having devised the Constitution before having carried out the revolution .
Certainly , the two methods exist , but we ourselves prefer to carry out a revolution under the law .
Many of you will , I hope , take your places in the next European Parliament .
If things happen the way we want them to , your debates will be with a stable President of the European Council who will have to come and provide you with an account of the activities of the EU following each European Council .
You will have an EU Minister of Foreign Affairs to question and , when situations arise such as you have already experienced , there will be someone to whom you can put your questions about why one particular argument is to be defended and not another , or one action participated in and not another .
It will therefore be a revolution under the law and , to use Mr Barón Crespo 's analogy , it will be a revolution à la Montesquieu , but on a continental scale .
My last reply is to Mr Hänsch .
I much appreciated your contributions during the Convention because you defended neither particular interests nor lobbies .
Rather , you were inspired by the common European good ; and , although , on certain points , we did not always follow up your proposals because we were seeking balanced , compromise solutions , you have nonetheless inspired many of our advances , particularly in the area of social governance .
You drew attention to the fact that , if the debates we have already had were re-opened , there would be no chance at all of reaching a balanced compromise .
What would be the point of re-opening the debate in the case of each amendment already lodged and discussed , and either adopted in one form or another by the Convention or else ruled out by it ?
You made this point in no uncertain terms , and I hope your voice will be heard because - and these are my final words , Mr President - in the present situation , which is one of knowing whether , in a few months ' time , Europe will or will not have a Constitution , there are in fact two approaches : either Europe does not provide itself with a Constitution and goes on forever re-opening the same debates , or else it does provide itself with a Constitution , aware that it will be necessary to live with it .
That is why I do not want to see revolutionary fervour bursting forth from your Assembly but , rather , the momentum of a strong desire and a very great aspiration on the part of the peoples of Europe to make progress along the EU road .
( Loud applause )
We will continue our reflection on this matter in two weeks ' time when we debate , in depth , the report by Mr Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado and Mr Tsatsos on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .

I thank everyone who has taken part in the debate .
In particular I extend a special ' thank you ' to President Giscard d 'Estaing for leading and summing up the debate this morning .
The debate is closed .
WRITTEN DECLARATIONS ( RULE 120 )
Mr President , the proposal for the ' Constitutional Treaty ' has been produced by the most reactionary circles in the capitalist system .
The swaggering of Mr Giscard d 'Estaing and those behind him and the rejoicing of the then Greek Presidency and the current Italian Presidency do not suffice to refute the above reality .
Those promoting the anti-grass roots policy have the nerve to call by the name of ' constitution ' a text which not only fails to crystallise the democratic achievements of the people , but also reduces them to a text which establishes capitalism constitutionally , which redistributes power for the benefit of the strong , which hands over more national sovereignty to the imperialist , Euro-unifying centre and which dangerously extends the militarisation of the European Union .
The result does not surprise us .
It could not be otherwise , because it could not fail to reflect the nature of the ? U and its current political situation .
That is why the Communist Party of Greece is against the introduction of a European constitution , which strengthens the imperialist ? U to the detriment of the people and for the benefit of the exploiters .
Nor are we surprised at the lack of substantial information on the content of the ' constitution ' .
Despite the propaganda campaign , the people must not be deceived .
They must strengthen their fight to defend and extend their achievements , to demolish the structure being built by the exploiters and to finally change society .
With a right of withdrawal , recognised at the end of its first part , and with the need , recognised at the end of its fourth part , for ' constitutional ' amendments to be ratified unanimously , the ' European Constitution ' has in those ways incorporated two sane benchmarks into a document that , at the start , insanely took the law into its own hands by stealing the designation ' constitution ' in order to cover up its intergovernmental nature .
With more than 400 articles , progress is being made in the following areas : the classification of legal acts as European laws , framework laws or ' delegated ' laws ; and the creation of a Minister of Foreign Affairs and three Presidents - of the European Council , the Council of Ministers and the Commission - and of a whole orchestra of institutional instruments in which , although the conductor cannot be tracked down , it is easy to locate the big drum of the European Parliament which , once more , is gaining in volume without managing to gain in political credibility .
While making a lot of noise with its institutional ironmongery , the European Constitution still remains silent , however , on two subjects of major importance : on the one hand ,
the necessary protection of democracies crushed by the media power of empires ranging from Murdoch 's to Berlusconi 's ; and on the other hand ,
the protection of taxpayers against what will be ever more punitive taxes .
.
( FR ) Mr Giscard d 'Estaing emphasised that the core of the draft constitution drawn up by the Convention was the acknowledgement of the ' dual nature ' of the European Union , which is thereby seen as proceeding from both the citizens and its States .
This specious distinction implies that the States exist without reference to the will of their citizens .
The reality , then , is that it is preparing a future alteration to the States ' democratic legitimacy and changes the nature of the EU , which has up until now been a union of states representing their peoples .
An extremely pernicious bacillus has thus been introduced into the new ' constitutional treaty ' , which is itself founded upon a mythical being , the ' European citizen ' , reminiscent of the former ' proletariat ' , to which one can attribute whatever intentions one likes .
Mr Giscard d 'Estaing was doing no other when he declared that ' European citizens ' were awaiting with extreme impatience a European constitution , a European foreign policy , a European minister of foreign affairs , and so on .
Such a basis can be a hazardous one in all sorts of ways , all the more so in view of the character of the ' new man ' that the ' European citizen ' is , which is marked by oblivious barbarism , as demonstrated by the refusal of the members of the Convention to make reference in their text to the historic role played by the Christian faith in the real constitution of Europe .
The next item is the vote .
Report ( A5-0261 / 2003 ) by Göran Färm , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the Draft Amending Budget No 3 / 2003 of the European Union for the financial year 2003 , Section III - Commission ( SEC ( 2003 ) 0552 - C5-0289 / 2003 - 2003 / 2103 ( BUD ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0264 / 2003 ) by Juan Ojeda Sanz , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters concerning the extension of the 2000-2001 Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Government of the Revolutionary People 's Republic of Guinea on fishing off the Guinean coast for the period 1 January 2003 to 31 December 2003 ( COM ( 2003 ) 107 - C5-0128 / 2003 - 2003 / 0049 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0228 / 2003 ) by Rosa Miguélez Ramos , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on a communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on mid-term review of the fourth fisheries protocol between the EU and Greenland ( COM ( 2002 ) 697 - 2003 / 2035 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Report ( A5-0152 / 2003 ) by Bernard Poignant , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending European Parliament and Council Directive 2001 / 25 / EC on the minimum level of training of seafarers ( COM ( 2003 ) 1 - C5-0006 / 2003 - 2003 / 0001 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0226 / 2003 ) by Jean Lambert , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on coordination of social security systems ( COM ( 1998 ) 779 - C4-0137 / 1999 - 1998 / 0360 ( COD ) )
Before the vote :
I would like to ask you to make a change to the nominal list .
I would like Amendment No 42 to be put to the vote after Amendment No 55 .
This may seem illogical but it is not , as Amendment No 55 replaces what is stated in Amendment No 42 under a different article .
The rapporteur is in agreement with this .
We will ensure that all language versions correspond .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0247 / 2003 ) by Ilda Figueiredo , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the scoreboard on implementing the social policy agenda ( COM ( 2003 ) 57 - 2003 / 2097 ( INI ) )
Before the vote :
Mr President , with regard to the next paragraph , I believe that a minor editorial error has crept into Amendment No 15 , which was tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
This amendment states namely the following : ' asks for the laying down of the appropriate legal basis on which the social dialogue can be developed ' and then it continues .
As it happens , we already have an appropriate legal basis for the social dialogue .
I think this is a minor editorial error and that this legal basis was actually intended for the development of a societal dialogue .
If this is the case , my group can withdraw the request for a split vote .
Are you withdrawing the request for a split vote ?
Mr President , my question was whether this concerns an editorial error and the word ' social ' can be replaced by ' societal ' .
If so , we can withdraw the attempt at a split vote .
Some people say that I talk too much in this House , in my explanations of vote , but , as you know , Mr President , I represent the Italian Pensioners ' Party , and pensioners do everything , including eat pan-fried fish .
They said to me : ' We love eating fish from Guinea , which you are debating , but we would like it to be caught by fishermen from Guinea , not by European fishermen who pay to enter Guinean waters and to be allowed to catch fish who speak ' Guinean ' and make a profit out of them , leaving the fishermen of Guinea even poorer and more destitute ' .
Therefore , while I voted for the motion , I would stress that I am opposed to fisheries agreements of this kind .
. The Scottish National Party representatives in this Parliament today voted against the Miguélez Ramos report on the Greenland fisheries protocol .
This is not to deny the importance of fisheries agreements with neighbouring countries outwith the European Union .
Rather , we are seeking to deny the Union the right to plunder external fisheries resources at the whim of those fleets who will fish anywhere - and will fish until there is nothing left to catch .
Mrs Miguélez Ramos ' report calls for unused quotas to be reallocated between Member States .
This demand forms part of a concerted effort to break the link between fisheries resources and the fleets which have historically fished them .
Such a demand is unacceptable - and Parliament should not sanction the behaviour of those fleets who know no boundaries , and accept no limits .
The Union 's management of its own fisheries resources has been an unmitigated disaster .
We ought to learn from it .
Those countries which have best managed their resources are those which have respected historical rights from the past - and give their fishermen hope for the future .
We must not export our problems to waters outwith the Union - and we must limit the ambitions of destructive armadas .
This morning , before I came to the European Parliament , I met Mr Fatuzzo as he was aged 18 , who , many years ago , worked as a sailor on cruise ships sailing between New York and the Bahamas .
In order to be licensed to work as a sailor , I had to take professional examinations , like all the seafarers referred to in this document .
The tests included a swimming test and a rowing test , although I am afraid that it was customary to tip the man holding the oars so that he rowed instead of the aspiring sailor .
This is my question : does this document allow us to monitor how sailing qualifications are issued by third States applying to sign such agreements with Europe ?
I hope so , given that I voted for the text .
. ( EL ) It is important to set criteria , preconditions and limits in the matter of the employment of seafarers from third countries on Community ships .
These often resemble Towers of Babel , leading to anarchy and accidents .
The recent shipwrecks of the Prestige and the Tricolore prove the importance of safety at sea .
The Poignant report on the proposal for a directive on the minimum level of training of seafarers is a move in the right direction because it raises the issue of the recognition of seafarers from third countries .
This imposes an evaluation of the training system of each country , so that certificates of competency can be issued - and not simply an approach on an individualised basis - which will be valid for five years .
A shortcoming , however , in the measures being taken is the absence of a provision to deal with the problems of unemployment and deteriorating competition among Community seafarers .
. ( EL ) The Commission proposal promotes the legalisation of the unacceptable and dangerous deterioration in maritime training , satisfying the decision by big shipping business to increase its profits at the expense of the safety of the very lives of seafarers , shipping and the environment .
This deterioration has also been identified by experts in international organisations , who consider the basic cause to be the agreements drawn up on the instructions of shipowners , which form the basis for the proposed directive .
Separating diplomas from work permits in a bid to exploit cheap and basically unskilled labour is just one of the typical elements of the deliberate demotion of maritime education to simple training .
We consider that training for seafarers needs to be upgraded so that their knowledge reflects current requirements .
However , this requires a total break with big shipping business , a break that the EU cannot and does not want .
Seafarers themselves and other workers need to fight for a different policy of radical change , not only to the system and to the safeguarding of free state education , but also to international agreements and conventions , so that they lay down minimum education levels , introduce strict provisions for determining ships ' crews and fully safeguard the employment and insurance rights of seafarers .
Thus , in conjunction with the renewal of ships , we shall have safe shipping .
I support all the articles of this regulation and I voted for the motion , but I must express my great disappointment , as representative of pensioners throughout Europe , at the fact that , with Amendment No 55 , which we adopted , we are preserving the total ban on people with disabilities throughout Europe travelling in Europe , travelling outside the borders of their own State and taking up residence in another European State , because , in so doing , they would lose a large part of the allowances on which they depend to live .
Some progress has been made , some of the pensions which were not transferable between countries have been abolished , but the majority are still in existence , with the result that , when people with disabilities travel in Europe , they have to leave their pension for their government , which certainly does not need it .
.
I voted in favour of Mrs Lambert 's report on social security to signal my support for rationalising , simplifying and making the existing texts on Regulation ( EC ) No 1408 / 71 more accessible to the citizens of Europe and to those who are dealing with it on a daily basis .
Without Community provisions on social security , millions of European citizens would be without sufficient protection .
We need to ensure that EU citizens working , residing or staying in another Member State are properly protected .
Coordinating social security measures at EU level remains the way forward .
We are not seeking nor should we attempt to harmonise social security measures .
Attempts to include taxation issues are outside the scope of this regulation and I voted against such proposals to day .
The definition of the family in the Lambert report is unacceptable and this was why I requested a separate vote on this amendment .
Such issues are also outside the scope of the regulation .
The definition of ' family ' is a matter for the national legislation of the Member States .
Everyone is agreed on the desirability of reaching a final agreement on the regulation .
I hope this will be possible at second reading stage .
. ( NL ) This report is a welcome improvement on the existing situations of the different social security systems , particularly for border regions that experience a great deal of cross-frontier working , and the rapporteur has done a great job in this respect .
With regard to Amendment No 20 about the definition of the household / the family , a majority of the ELDR Group has voted in favour of this amendment and despite this , has not requested a roll-call vote , as we think it would be very undesirable to risk the whole report being voted out .
This would also be the reason for the rapporteur agreeing to reject Amendment No 20 .
I need to get something off my chest . This Parliament spends many session hours every month on fundamental human rights in countries outside of Europe .
We get involved in virtually every incident of what is unacceptable according to European standards .
However , when we discuss human rights within Europe , such as sexual orientation , we refuse to nail our colours to the mast .
It is a disgrace , in my view , for Parliament to want to retain the option of placing citizens outside of the law on account of their sexual orientation .
There are , of course , various arguments that can be used to support this view ; you could , of course , say that this is a case of subsidiarity , or that it is more important to adopt the report than the principled choice in Amendment No 20 .
To do so nevertheless infringes another right , namely the right of every European to be able to work within the European Union .
By rejecting Amendment No 20 , the labour mobility of a number of citizens is curtailed quite severely , and this in a progressive Europe , no less .
Fortunately , this selfsame Parliament has , probably unwittingly , recently adopted a similar amendment in the Santini report .
As a Liberal , I hope that this approval will offer sufficient guarantees for all European citizens .
. The EPLP will be voting for the Lambert report on social security because it seeks to coordinate social security systems for the benefit or ordinary Europeans who seek to work across the EU .
This report coordinates but does not seek to harmonise either social security or taxation systems , which are the responsibility of Member States .
The EPLP has not supported Amendment No 48 because it is outside the scope of Article 42 , which deals with social security systems , and introduces the idea of double taxation .
Similarly , Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 43 and 45 seek to go beyond social security coordination and therefore could not be supported by the EPLP .
I voted for the Gröner report , whose laudable intention is to combat violence against women and children .
I must , however , confess that , at Rome airport , whence I travelled to Strasbourg , a pensioner from Rome approached me and said : ' It is right for you in Europe to concern yourselves with combating violence against children , young people and women , but I would like you , Mr Fatuzzo , to point out that , in some institutions to which elderly people and non-self-sufficient people are admitted , I am afraid that , because there is absolutely no government monitoring whatsoever , these non-self-sufficient elderly people are also often subject to violence and oppression .
There should be a decision and European Parliament funding for their cause too , so that these kinds of violence can be combated as well . '
. ( FR ) As it aims to ensure that the current programme of action to combat violence against children , young people and women will continue after its expiry at the end of 2003 , it must be possible to implement this second phase of the Daphne programme without delay .
This programme cannot , however , be implemented in the most effective way possible with the level of funding provided for by the Commission .
The amount in question - EUR 40 million - strikes me in fact as quite insufficient if we really want to allow a larger number of non-governmental organisations to benefit from the programme and if the idea is to meet the needs of the new Member States .
It follows that funds commensurate with the issues at stake must be made available to enable the programme to be continued with and extended to the new Member States .
It also appears to me that it would be a desirable development in dealing with violence as a violation of human rights if the programme were on a more appropriate legal basis than Article 152 of the EC Treaty .
The justification of Amendment No 1 in the report mentions the concept of ' forced prostitution ' .
We are opposed to the use of this term because we think that prostitution is never a person 's free choice but always has to do with compulsion and dependency .
. The British Conservatives deplore violence of any kind and welcome measures to combat this , including some of those initiatives within the Daphne Programme .
Violence , especially against women or children , is completely unjustifiable and cannot be accepted .
However , some of the measures in this report encroach on areas better dealt with at Member State level .
There is no evidence that taxpayers ' money spent on projects at EU level is more effective than when it is spent on national programmes , although the sharing of experience and best practice may make a positive contribution to the reduction of violence of this type .
Whilst accepting the good work carried out by the Daphne Programme , the British Conservatives , for the reasons outlined above , have voted against further budgetary appropriations and abstained on the final vote .
. ( IT ) It is the moral duty of all citizens of all societies to combat child abuse and child pornography .
It is with pleasure and satisfaction that I welcome the Community programme , Daphne II , on the prevention of violence against children , young people and women , supported by the delegation of which I am head and by the entire UEN Group .
Indeed , the Gröner report has incorporated two proposals adopted unanimously today by the House here in Strasbourg , which advocate two further measures that the Community programme will have to develop : promoting awareness campaigns condemning violence and facilitating the provision of psychological , moral and practical support for victims , and , above all , exploring the possibility of creating filters banning the dissemination of information consisting of child pornography on the Internet .
This extraordinary means of communication and information provision , the Internet , can , indeed , be an inexhaustible , unregulated source of messages of violence and brutality aimed at minors and of which minors are often the instigators .
It would therefore appear necessary , in the name of the freedom of which society boasts and which is not true freedom if it is not respected by all and does not serve to protect all , to regulate the kind of information available on the Internet and to enable families , adults and minors to recognise the nature of the sites they are accessing .
( Text abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Like many people , Mr President , I love the country .
I am delighted that agriculture is to receive so much funding and aid from the European Community and that there is a concern to ensure accurate news , accurate statistics and uniform procedures for presenting Community agricultural expenditure in the 15 States .
If only the European governments were as diligent and if only the European Union were as willing to take the same interest and ensure the same accuracy in the statistics which relate to us , poor common mortals !
As you know , Mr President , the pensions deficit throughout Europe - so the Heads of Government say - is due to the fact that the average life expectancy of men and women has unexpectedly increased by at least 10 years .
Could they not have seen it coming ?
I voted for Mr Koukiadis ' report , Mr President , because what it asks and calls for is one of my long-standing dreams , when I manage to dream - which is not very often nowadays , given the approach of 13 June - for I sleep well .
Why is that ?
Because I would genuinely like European law to be genuinely a primary source of law .
It appears , for example , that Article 13 of the Treaty of Amsterdam is being breached in Italy .
There is discrimination against elderly people and people with disabilities , who are given - or not given - financial support just because they are over , or under , 65 years old .
I therefore welcome this report and I look forward to when European law is made a primary source of law .
. ( EL ) Behind the ostensibly neutral title ' on legal bases and compliance with Community law ' , the own-initiative report by the Committee on Legal Affairs hides the complete subjugation of national law to Community law .
Fully aligned with the philosophy of the ? U , the report maintains that the Community should have the facility to force the Member States to impose specific criminal sanctions in the event of infringements of Community law .
The term ' criminal sanctions ' carries a great deal of weight , which distinguishes it from the administrative or financial sanctions which the rulers of the ? U already impose .
The report also proposes that the Commission should be able to appear in national criminal courts in order to bring civil actions and even to force the Member States to impose prison sentences decided by the Community .
All we need now are Community gaols to carry out Community sentences !
This is yet another infringement of national sovereignty and the so-called ' rule of law ' of the bourgeoisie , in that a supranational body is being instructed to exercise criminal jurisdiction and to decide on the type and level of sanctions .
Of course , the anxious search for legal bases hides the ambition to serve the interests of the unifying monopolies in all sectors and the sweeping away of democratic achievements .
. As is explained in the report , there are a few instances in which criminal sanctions are imposed via Community law .
They are the exception rather than the rule , and it is most important that the Community , in responding to paragraph 10 of the report , does not acquire any general competence in criminal matters which should be left to the Member States .
. Despite a number of reservations about some of the proposals in Mrs Figueiredo 's report on the social policy agenda , I voted in favour in the final vote as there are many issues in the social agenda which rightly need to be highlighted .
The report was amended earlier in committee and several difficulties which arose at that stage of the procedure were overcome .
Issues such as continuing high levels of unemployment in some of the Member States , tackling poverty , combating discrimination on grounds of disability , promoting active ageing and providing childcare facilities are all important and need to be dealt with as priorities .
I voted against amendments calling for yet more directives and proposals that would hold back industry .
Building a social Europe requires consensus-building between the social partners , not creating new impediments .
I also welcome the focus on behalf of the applicant countries .
They will have much to offer to the development of our social policy agenda .
. The EPLP will be voting for the Figueiredo report , which seeks to make progress on the yearly scoreboard on the implementation of the Social Policy Agenda by keeping track of achievements and warning of delays .
The report highlights for example the continuing high levels of unemployment and poverty in some Member States and rightly calls for solutions to these problems to be treated as a priority in Community policies , not least in the forthcoming mid-term review of the CAP , the Structural Funds and the Stability Pact .
The EPLP will abstain on Amendments Nos 2 , 6 and 17 , as they are unclear on the Europe-wide right to take collective action , including the right to strike .
The EPLP supports long-term solutions on the management of collective actions across the EU , which will provide a fair solution to both EU workers and consumers .
In an ? U created at the demand of the big multinationals and which serves their interests , there can be no social prosperity for the working classes and no safeguarding of the rights of workers , women , young people , the disabled or the elderly .
The proof is that approximately one quarter of the population in the ? U is living below the poverty line .
The interest in wiping out poverty is hypocritical .
The objective is to conceal the barbarity of capitalist exploitation behind ' charity ' programmes and to avoid acute social outbursts .
The so-called social agenda is being implemented by extending flexibility and temporary work , by prolonging active working life , with lifelong learning , by reducing wages and linking them to productivity and by cutting back on the welfare state and social protection and on public spending on health and education .
Capitalism needs hoards of unemployed , which is why the objective of full employment is a total misnomer .
Especially today , under conditions of unbridled competition and company restructurings and relocations , which lead to mass job losses .
An attempt is being made to untie this Gordian knot with part-time and temporary employment and by sharing jobs between several workers .
We therefore call on the workers , the working classes and the progressive radical forces in the countries of the ? U to fight against the choices being made by the monopolies and to claim a different , pro-grass roots policy .
Mr President , on Mrs Lynne 's report , the European Union can present a great model to the rest of the world , in particular with regard to how best we treat those who are most vulnerable within our society .
Across the world today there are an estimated 600 million people with disabilities .
A lot of those people come from deprived backgrounds and a lot of them are resident in the developing world where many of the services that we take for granted are not available .
It is essential , therefore , that there are international rules and regulations with regard to the treatment , respect and promotion of people with disabilities .
One of the most important elements of our work here today , and the vote in favour of the Lynne report , has been that it sends out a clear message , not just from the 15 countries of the European Union but also from the 10 accession countries , that we want to establish common standards and rules .
I leave you with a short quotation by George Bernard Shaw , the Irish author , that I used on my first day in this Chamber : ' The worst sin toward our fellow creatures is not to hate them , but to be indifferent to them : that 's the essence of inhumanity . '
In today 's world we have too much indifference towards the plight of those who are most in need of our support - not our sympathy , not our charity , not our patronising - to allow them to live full and independent lives and to be treated as equals in the 21st Century .
I am sorry that I am having the last word on this document , which has been dealt with so admirably by Mr Crowley in his explanation of vote , but I have to say , Mr President , that I am deeply saddened - although I did vote for the document - by the fact that , in Italy , my beautiful country which has so much beautiful sun , there is , regrettably , still today , a law according to which those who become severely disabled and unfit for work , despite having worked and paid social security contributions , are to have an allowance of no more than EUR40-50 per month on which to live between the age of 30 , say , and the age of 65 or maybe 70 .
Would the government , which is currently the Presidency of the Council , kindly read what I am saying and remedy the situation .
. ( EL ) UN resolution 56 / 168 lays down equal opportunities in order to provide a binding framework for the protection and dignity of the disabled .
That is why it is important :
for there to be an effective monitoring mechanism , as with the other six conventions on human rights in the USA ,
for the convention to be based on promoting the various rights of the disabled , as stated in the Lynne report ,
for provision to be made for the participation of the disabled themselves and the organisations that represent them in setting up national and international bodies , always bearing in mind , of course , that bureaucratic distortions need to be addressed ,
for discrimination to be abolished ,
for there to be an urgent timetable for a Community directive .
. The ' European Year of People with Disabilities ' raises awareness of the concerns of over 40 million people in the EU with disabilities .
Without being complacent , we have established some protection for EU citizens .
It is also important that the EU leads the way in establishing fundamental rights for the approximately 660 million people world-wide who have some form of disability - almost 10 % of the planet 's population .
Many people with disabilities face discrimination , maltreatment and institutional confinement .
Europe should be sending a message beyond its borders that inhuman or degrading treatment of people with disabilities is utterly unacceptable .
10 years ago the UN adopted its Standard Rules for people with disabilities .
This is not a legally-binding document .
It is now clear that the rights of people with disabilities internationally should now be protected by a legally enforceable UN Convention .
This must cover the right to quality of life , to access to employment , education and training , the right to inclusion , civil and political rights , to financial support , to healthcare , to culture and leisure and the right to equal treatment before the law .
The EU must take the lead in the UN and must pursue these goals through EU development cooperation .
. ( FR ) We have had no hesitation in voting for this document in view of the manifest urgency , both in Europe and worldwide , of developing a policy of non-discrimination towards persons with disabilities , a proactive policy reaffirming their rights to employment , education , and to all that makes up social life , including sexuality .
It has to be emphasised , though , that such a concern is largely at odds with current trends in the European Union and in the principal international economic organisations .
In real terms , these trends favour the dismantling of the public services , their privatisation and reductions in social protection and social budgets .
The integration of people with disabilities into society , including into the world of work , is required by a solidarity which it is difficult to reconcile with the profit motive .
The commitment to leave behind the separated structures , which only very inadequately prepare people with disabilities for integration and independence , in order to enable them to participate fully in society and to combat prejudice , has its price .
The fight against prejudice inevitably brings us up against the rapacity of private interests , masked by the high level of competitiveness which is , to currently prevalent thinking , the be-all and end-all .
. As a Member of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I have voted for the Lynne report , because I believe that it is important for the European Parliament to support the UN initiative and signal the view that a comprehensive EU directive on disabled people 's rights should be progressed by the Commission .
Real progress should also be made in mainstreaming disabled people 's rights within our development cooperation policy .
MEPs in the committee have stressed that the outcome of the UN process must be a legally binding convention with an effective monitoring mechanism .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Iraq .
. ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the lack of security and the serious attacks staining Iraq with blood are cause for very great concern .
I regret to say that they detract attention not only from the reconstruction work in progress and the necessary measures for a speedy return to normality but also from the many indications of a genuine renewal : exchanges of opinions , freedom of religious practice , institutions representing an initial , albeit hesitant , stage of democracy , and the attempt to re-establish equal opportunities and rights .
The most recent tragic events confirm how the fight against terrorism and efforts to establish security and stability in Iraq must continue to be a priority for all countries and for the international community .
Our enemies are those who are targeting the advocates of moderation and the decision to take up a new and difficult challenge ; those who targeted Sérgio Vieira de Mello because he was doing good , because he was toiling with his forces to set the country back on its feet : those who targeted him are the enemies of us all , the enemies of the project to build a democratic Iraq .
The task of rebuilding Iraq and restoring it to normality is therefore the concern of the international community ; the European Union cannot and must not shirk its responsibilities .
There must therefore be increasing support for this objective .
The reestablishment of law and order is putting great pressure on the coalition forces , but this is the time when it is necessary to draw in the threads of solidarity so that an increasing number of countries can work together to re-establish security .
After the cowardly terrorist attack on the United Nations in Baghdad on 19 August that claimed innocent victims from among those who served the cause of peace , including Sérgio Vieira de Mello , whom I have just mentioned , and after the bloody attack in Najaf on 29 August , it is the duty of us all to further increase our efforts to bring about the political , civil , social and economic reconstruction of Iraq .
In particular , we feel that the United Nations should play an increasingly central role , further consolidating its mandate in this difficult , post-combat phase .
The Presidency therefore hopes that , in the coming weeks , a broad majority in favour of a greater UN undertaking in Iraq will develop in the Security Council , and it is making every effort - I , personally , am making every effort - working closely with the principal players of the international community , to achieve this important goal .
Attempts to divide the international community or to destroy its cohesion are bound to fail since it is in everyone 's interest for the reconstruction of Iraq to succeed .
We must promote the development of multilateralism , of a multilateral approach to crisis resolution which is effective , capable of generating solutions .
The Presidency is making every endeavour to this effect .
We welcomed the Security Council 's adoption of Resolution 1500 and consider it to be a particularly important step forward in that it acknowledges the key role of the Iraqi Governing Council in the formation of new institutions in Iraq .
The Resolution gives the UN a specific mandate , entrusting it with the task of assisting reconstruction . We - and I , personally - have great faith in the role of the United Nations , and that has been confirmed by the experience demonstrated in recent weeks by the UN staff , who have acted with the highest professionalism and skill , and that skill can be increasingly deployed to manage the reconstruction of Iraq .
The Presidency is therefore convinced that , to achieve the objective of establishing a free , democratic Iraq , it is necessary for the entire international community to combine its efforts to give the Iraqi people a future of peace and hope .
The Donors ' Conference , scheduled for 24 October in Madrid , will be a good opportunity to consolidate this international cohesion , provided - and I appeal urgently to the countries taking part - that as many countries as possible are generous and willing to help .
Heaven help Iraq if the Donors ' Conference should be a failure .
It is important that the international bodies are assured a clear role in the economic and social reconstruction of Iraq .
Reconstruction should be carried out within a clear framework that establishes the forms of participation by the countries and international organisations , but it is equally desirable that , pending the emergence of the conditions for this shared framework , there should be no lack of contributions from a large number of countries willing to take part in the reconstruction of Iraq .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we must therefore endeavour to ensure that the Donors ' Conference will enable us to establish a general framework to do whatever is necessary to contribute to the reconstruction of the country ; the Presidency considers that , for Europe , which has already clearly indicated its desire to take part in the reconstruction of Iraq , this is a valuable opportunity to make use of its resources and experience .
Indeed , our commitment to the reconstruction of Iraq should not be limited to security but should extend to humanitarian aid , social services , all the Iraqi people 's needs and , last but not least , culture .
We therefore need to rebuild the country 's infrastructure and transport network , providing all the aid necessary but also - or rather , first and foremost - establishing the institutional framework for the future democratic Iraq , rebuilding the education and school systems and the academic world .
Reconstruction cannot and must not simply involve technical engineering of the social order : reconstruction must be the driving force for peaceful coexistence , and we must therefore promote , alongside the restoration of order , the spread of a liberal culture .
Once conditions of full security are re-established , it will be possible to start laying the foundations for a civil society based on freedom and mutual tolerance , with which Europe will be able to build relationships of cooperation and solidarity .
These are the major unresolved questions on which Europe must show that it is capable of making a political contribution and taking practical steps as a single entity , capable of taking direct responsibility for achieving security , capable of placing the emphasis on a culture of increasingly widespread democracy and focusing on its relationship with issues of security . A culture of democracy capable of dialogue with the worlds and traditions of the various ethnic and religious groups .
The reconstruction of Iraq can and must be achieved .
It is an obligation which we must not fail to fulfil , not only in the name of the great European tradition of undertakings in the field of peace , solidarity and aid to peoples in need , but also - not least , I would add - because Europe can and must do its part , calling for a substantial mandate to be given to the United Nations and making every endeavour to this end , in order to restore stability to Iraq and hope to the Iraqi people .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my agreement with the statements by Commissioner Patten and the President-in-Office of the Council , to the effect that we now need to make a joint effort to bring peace to Iraq and thereby stabilise the region as a whole .
Not only many European governments , but also Members of this House , have had differences of opinion on the war in Iraq .
The situation being what it is , these should now be set aside ; we will make no progress by looking for culprits , and our concern must now rather be the development of a common strategy that will help us to resolve today 's problem in a sensible way .
We must also see that what the increasing number of terrorist acts in Iraq demonstrates is that the end of the war has brought Iraq no real peace , and that the establishment of a legitimate and acceptable government there is still a long way off .
For a variety of reasons - about which there is discussion everywhere - the USA cannot achieve this objective using the means it has employed so far .
I believe that President Bush is right to call for a UN resolution on this subject now .
It is at this point that I would like to introduce a figure into the proceedings .
The USA reckons its monthly commitments in Iraq to be USD 4 billion , which amounts to almost USD 50 billion per annum , a fantastic sum when set against its budget deficit , which is in any case enormous .
That alone can scarcely fail to make it clear the need for cooperation in this area .
If Europeans can now speak with one voice , then the time is also ripe for us to sit down together and try to work out a new policy objective . This will make it possible to clarify where we go from here , to decide who does what in the civil , military and humanitarian spheres , and thus to divide up tasks in a sensible way .
If Europe and the Americans can do this together on an equal footing and work together with the UN in doing so , then I am sure that Parliament would be prepared to accept the Commission 's budgetary proposals and forward them , together with its mandate , to the Donors ' Conference .
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the staff of ECHO in Iraq for the fine work they have done , which , I believe , gives us a real opportunity to contribute to peace in the region .
There is no doubt that this is in our own interests , as there will be disastrous consequences in store for us too , in both the medium and long term , if it proves impossible to pacify the region as a whole .
Considerations such as these should also , however , apply to Afghanistan , and I believe that we should therefore attempt , by means of a new Petersberg conference , to bring about a truly fair balance of power and the equitable distribution of aid , including to the Pathans , in order to establish peace there as well .
I get the impression that in neither Iraq nor Afghanistan has such a strategy been in place before now .
So now is the time for us to take a deep breath and make a new start together , doing our best in the region 's interests and in our own .
( Sustained applause )
Mr President , I can well appreciate that there are many people who have no desire to look back . Nor , in a way , do I myself think it is much fun looking back .
We have here one of those situations in which it has to be said that , as time goes on , it becomes less and less pleasant to have been right . When representatives of my group , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the Group of the Party of European Socialists and the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities visited Baghdad in February of this year , we talked with the weapons inspectors , and it was our extremely clear impression that the inspection was working and that , if no weapons of mass destruction had then been found , it was first and foremost because they probably did not exist .
Six months on , it may also be seen that this view was probably correct and that the weapons inspection was , therefore , working as intended , with the UN on the right lines in this matter .
The second thing we discussed at that time was how such an attack would be taken in Iraq .
Would it be seen as a liberation or as an occupation ?
Our message was : probably as both .
Naturally , there is a desire to be free from a despot and dictator like Saddam Hussein .
Is there , however , a wish to see one 's country occupied by foreign troops in the process ?
I think it can probably now be stated that our fears at that time were justified and that the attacks that are now being made upon , for example , civilian targets , the UN building and the Iraqi police are a sign that the Iraqi people are experiencing the current situation as an occupation .
Another thing we wanted to be considered before an attack was made was the internal tensions that would be triggered in Iraq . Recently , we saw the killing of the Shia Muslim leader , Mohammed Baquer Hakim .
Not that I think he was a hero .
Far from it . This is , however , an example of how strong the tensions between the population groups in Iraq are , and it shows the enormity of the task involved in the headlong plunge into an attack on Iraq .
The demonstrations at his funeral were a mixture of protests against both Saddam Hussein and George Bush , meaning that , even among people who must have felt they were perhaps free of a dictator , there were very strong reactions against the American occupation .
Another thing we feared was that , with this attack , the UN would be fundamentally weakened .
That , it also has to be said , has unfortunately happened .
With a weakened UN , it can also be seen how much we in actual fact need the UN .
The United States must now recognise that even 180 000 soldiers are not enough to restore peace and order in Iraq . More is required .
The UN must become involved . We therefore now see it as a very important task to rebuild and strengthen the UN .
That is one of the reasons why my group proposes that we give this year 's Sakharov Prize to Hans Blix , Doctor El Baradei and Mr de Mello .
The idea is for Parliament to send a signal that what we wish to strengthen is international law .
We wish to strengthen the UN system , and we believe that this is the prerequisite for success in that rebuilding of Iraq that we all wish to see .
Mr President , how can the European institutions help the much-troubled Iraqi people ?
The Council can considerably enhance the internal and external legitimacy of the newly formed Iraqi transitional government by recognising this policy and giving assistance in any way possible .
The Commission can , in consultation with the Council and Parliament , offer bankrupt Mesopotamia generous financial and humanitarian aid .
This House can invite the newly-appointed Iraqi Foreign Minister , Hushyar Zibari , to Brussels or Strasbourg , to give us first-hand information about the situation in his country .
Such initiatives at European level would show our commitment to a better political future for the peoples of Iraq .
They would promote the stabilisation of a troubled region , contribute to the mutual settlement of the transatlantic discord over Iraq , and , all in all , would make a big difference .
This would , at the same time , be Europe 's response to the murderous forces of the old Saddam regime and the so-called jihadists .
They should not prolong the suffering of the Iraqi people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Cohn-Bendit has , I am glad to say , made a number of valid statements , and one of them is that - whether the US policy is right or wrong , and our US friends often make serious mistakes - the point is that we Europeans have no policy at all .
This is the basic situation which , I fear , despite the Convention which you all applauded this morning , will not , alas , change in the coming years : we Europeans have not established a policy , neither in the past nor , I regret to say , now .
I believe that the reconstruction effort and our financial generosity are more than appreciable , but that is not enough to constitute a policy .
I cannot see what we are proposing other than recourse to the United Nations , but the United Nations is no greater than its component member states .
For the moment , the Arab countries - many of which stand to benefit if things deteriorate for , indeed , it would mean going home for many of them if Iraq were to start functioning properly - are keeping a close eye on things and many countries of the European establishment are also standing by , maybe waiting for the Americans to fail .
It disturbs me when I hear terrorist attacks described as legitimate resistance .
I am concerned by these ambiguities at which , quite frankly , I am amazed , to say the least , even just hearing the terms used .
Tell the Iraqis who have died that this is legitimate resistance .
It may well be that we too continue to be undecided , even at a time when success in Iraq is in everyone 's interests , first and foremost the interests of the Iraqi people , who have suffered 20 years of martyrdom at the hands of Saddam Hussein .
They , like all of us , have the right to a different kind of life and a different kind of development .
Our cowardly actions will not help them ; our cowardly actions will certainly not take us even half a step forwards along the road to democracy .
I wish you luck , Commissioner .
Reconstruction is necessary , but Europe has yet to conceive a policy for the region .
Mr President , the prophets of doom , such as myself , you , Mrs Frahm , and many others , unfortunately seem , at present , to have been right during the debate on possible intervention .
Following the attack on the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad and the attack on the sacred Shiite sites in Najaf , the faint hopes of a lull that would make it possible to gradually legitimise the authorities established by the coalition are disappearing , and with them the prospect of a more or less short-term transfer of the coalition 's current responsibilities .
I do not believe that it is sufficient to catch Saddam Hussein , which needs to happen soon , in order to put an end to the chaos that the dictator on the run is so keen to maintain , but that many others with him and , if need be , after him have decided to magnify further .
I am thinking , of course , of the religious extremists who are prepared to die in order to fight the United States under the banner of Al Qaeda and other fundamentalist organisations .
I am also thinking of its large neighbour , Iran , which cannot remain unaffected by the situation in Iraq .
I am thinking , above all , of the Iraqi people themselves who , rightly or wrongly - as many have said here - consider the occupation of their country to be unacceptable , regardless of the justification .
In this latter , mainly psychological field , in my view the international community , which quite rightly hopes to end this chaos as soon as possible , has no option but to legitimise its action by voting on a new Security Council resolution that entrusts the United Nations with the task of restoring order in the country and preparing the necessary transition to a legitimate Iraqi Government .
This was your objective , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , and I welcome the fact that the latest known US proposals seem to be moving in that direction .
Mr President , Mr Frattini , Commissioner Patten , I was one of those who , like Mr Morillon , warned of what could happen after such a war .
I wish I had been wrong in my predictions , and take no pleasure in having been proved right .
This is not about establishing who was right , who was to blame , or anything else of the sort , but about finding a way to resolve this situation .
Most of us , I believe , take the view that an international solution is the only way out , but that requires international legitimacy , and that must first be established .
It is because of the absence of such legitimacy in the past that the UN and the occupying powers must determine who does what , when , and where , and must clearly mark out their areas of responsibility .
I agree with you entirely , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that the Iraqis themselves must be involved at the earliest possible stage if , instead of concentrating on security and waiting until it is established , we consider as a whole the reconstruction measures that will be necessary - by which I mean the process of democratisation , the re-establishment of government , the creation of order , and of course the safety of all the people in Iraq , along with the rebuilding of infrastructure such as electricity , water , and roads , as well as hospitals and schools .
The sooner the people of Iraq themselves take on responsibility for the rebuilding of their country - its political system and democracy , not forgetting of course the technological , social and cultural dimension - the sooner we can expect the situation to return to normal .
If they are to do that , I believe , they will have to have a definite prospect of taking their destiny into their own hands in the very near future ; that is why we have to set very tight deadlines in the expectation that a constituent assembly will be elected in Iraq , perhaps by the end of this year , giving the Iraqis a sense of working together with us on these matters .
I think that if international legitimacy is established and the Iraqis are enabled to share responsibility for what happens to them , we in the European Union will be able , by means of common action , to make what is in fact an important contribution ; today 's debate has shown that the great political and national differences of the past are no more , and that we all agree , in principle , on the same objective , that of seeing this country rebuilt .
Mr President , it is too late now to discuss whether the war in Iraq was right or necessary .
If anything , it is the responsibility of the United States of America to think about whether mistakes were made in this context .
Unfortunately , what has happened is what we feared .
The dictator Saddam Hussein has been ousted , but the country is not at peace , conditions are chaotic , and aggression on the ground is increasing , not only in Iraq .
That is why it is important to play our part , together with the USA , in bringing peace , order and hope to the people of Iraq .
As Europeans , with our experience , our culture of peace and our economic opportunities , we too are called upon to make our contribution towards a better future for Iraq .
A retaliatory or ' I told you so ' attitude is counterproductive now .
I say this as someone who visited Iraq shortly before the war and warned about precisely the outcomes that we are witnessing today .
Our duty , our responsibility now is to rebuild the country , and it is probable that we Europeans will be judged by whether we can now find a solution to the problems in Iraq , and that means policies .
We must find a solution if we are to regain any credibility in this context .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the developments we are currently witnessing in Iraq are , in some ways , reminiscent of what happened in the former Yugoslavia .
Once the totalitarian regime that had suppressed them had been toppled , all internal forces were unleashed , sometimes violently .
It is the same with Iraq .
Under these circumstances , an ' I told you so ' attitude or gloating is inappropriate and unwarranted ; rather , the situation is something for us to be concerned about .
A regime of criminals has been ousted and that is a good thing , and it was necessary , but we are certainly not on a direct road to peace , stability and the rule of law .
That is why the Europeans need to play a part .
In my view , it is not enough to point out to the Americans the obvious fact that they are incapable of restoring peace by military means alone .
That is why Europe 's hour has come .
We must provide help .
It is our responsibility , and it is also in our interests to do so .
I therefore want to say this to Commissioner Patten : he can count on the support of the CDU / CSU delegation in this House , both for his commitment and for the fact that we must put our money where our mouths are - for it will cost money .
We will have to justify why we are spending the money .
So let me say again : it is in our interests to make an effective contribution , together with the United Nations and , of course , with the United States of America and Great Britain , to support the road towards peace , stability and the rule of law in Iraq .
Mr President , as we discuss the war in Iraq we should realise immediately that never in the history of the world has there been a war in which the vast majority of victims have not been innocent civilians .
For that reason , it should be our primary objective now , as we enter the new century and the new millennium , to do all in our power to ensure that Iraq is the last war in the history of the world .
The way to do that for the European Union should be as follows : instead of sending armies to areas of conflict , we should be sending the philosophy and principles of peace , plus a large team of officials to promote dialogue .
I know what I am talking about in this regard .
The European Union is in a very powerful position to do this .
Look at the century we have just left .
The first half was the worst in the history of the world : two world wars and 50 million human beings slaughtered .
Who could have forecast that in the second half of that century all those countries would be together or that we would be all together as we are today ?
Therefore , we should study how that was done and how the philosophy behind it was sent to every area of conflict .
Principle number one of the European Union is respect for difference .
What is all conflict about ?
Difference in religion , nationality and race .
The answer to difference is to respect it .
Principle number two is to have institutions to do that .
Principle number three creates the circumstances in which they can then all work together in their common interests and break down the barriers of the past .
Those are the three principles we have in our peace process in Northern Ireland .
The European Union and all the world 's major countries should come together to create that kind of world and to take the necessary steps to prevent war .
The European Union itself , as I have said before - given that it is the best example in the history of the world of conflict resolution - might begin by creating a Commissioner for peace and reconciliation , backed up by a department of peace and reconciliation , which could be sent to areas of conflict with the principles of conflict resolution that are the heart of the European Union .
In doing that , let us build a world for the new century and the new millennium in which there will no longer be any war or any conflict but total respect for diversity .
Because when you look at humanity no two human beings are the same .
Difference is the essence of humanity , and it should therefore be totally respected and never fought over .
Mr President , I am pleased that Mrs Frahm and Mr Messner drew attention to the warnings given by those of us who were in Iraq in February .
I am glad that they did so because they must form part of our reflections upon how the future is to look .
Now that the United States has realised that it will require far more money and forces to maintain the occupation of Iraq than there is the grass-roots and political will to provide , the possibility is in fact emerging of a multinational force , which the United States wishes to command .
That is , of course , completely and utterly unacceptable , however , just as it is that the coalition should continue , with a larger number of countries helping out .
No , the task in question must be continued by the UN . It must be carried out under the auspices of the UN , just as it is the UN that must now go in and support the holding of democratic elections in Iraq so that Iraq might , as soon as is humanly possible , assume responsibility for its own future .
.
( IT ) Mr President , I would like to thank all the Members who have spoken and , in particular , Commissioner Patten and many of the speakers for their undertaking to further the success of the Donors ' Conference to be held in Madrid , and I would like to thank the House for the many comments made , which I will not repeat .
I would like to say , however , that the instability and the attacks on the US and UK forces are a problem for everyone - they have been right from the start , right from the first attack - and not just for the coalition forces .
It needs to be made quite clear - I do not think anyone has any doubts on this matter - that terrorism is never justified , that retaliatory action carried out using bombs , using suicide bombers , is never legitimate : this is one of our fundamental principles .
Clearly , however , in addition to tanks and weapons , now we have to take to Iraq a roadmap for democracy , a roadmap for political and institutional reconstruction and for a new Iraqi Government .
That is why the Presidency has said and continues to say that we need a UN mandate ; that is why , because Europe currently feels the need to reinvigorate UN action but , at the same time , wants the United Nations to be more effective , more capable of taking decisions and shouldering responsibilities than it was during the eventful weeks preceding military action .
I believe we must look to the future , to when Europe will be able , for instance - as someone has said - to express in the Security Council opinions which have been discussed beforehand and agreed upon by the 25 European countries .
I feel this is a necessary experiment . We must make every effort to this end , so that we may come closer to realising the dream - for that is what it is - of having a European seat in the United Nations .
That is why the Presidency will report , next Friday at the General Affairs Council , on the positions - which I hope will converge and coincide - of the UN , Russia and the United States on a new resolution , giving the UN a central role , and then attempt to set out alongside these evaluations and opinions the unified position of Europe .
It would , I believe , be an excellent , exemplary way of boosting Euro-Atlantic cohesion , to which the Presidency is committed , doing so precisely on the matter of Iraq , an issue which has damaged the relationship between us Europeans and our US friends in recent months .
The Presidency therefore confirms that it will make every endeavour to this effect .
. Mr President , first of all in the presence of the Commissioner who is presently responsible for humanitarian assistance , and also in the presence of the Commissioner who was responsible for humanitarian assistance before that , I would like to say how pleased I was that so much support was declared in this debate for the work of ECHO in Iraq over the last few months and indeed years .
There have been a number of very good and relevant speeches .
We listened with interest to the contribution from the honourable Member Mr Hume , whose own personal record in the area of conflict prevention speaks volumes .
He rightly pointed out that in modern warfare most of the victims are civilians .
I agree with much of what he said about conflict prevention , but perhaps I part company with him on one point .
If one wants to see an international rule of law , one must , from time to time , accept that it needs the sanction of force if it is to be effective and if it is to be applied .
I am sure the whole House has noted the tribute paid by my honourable friend Mr Evans to his constituent , and we all know the enormously important and difficult job undertaken , as part of nation-building , by those who seek to establish judicial authorities and policing authorities where there has previously been chaos .
Building an Iraqi police service is going to take a great deal of professionalism and a great deal of the sort of bravery shown by the honourable Member 's constituent .
I join him in offering my condolences to his family and friends .
I agreed with much of what was said during this debate .
I agreed with what the honourable Member Mr Cohn-Bendit said about the regional dimension of the problems in the Near East , the Middle East and Central Asia .
I agreed with what the honourable Member Mr Collins said about the importance of the UN role .
This is a point underlined by the International Crisis Group report , to which I referred earlier .
I am only sorry that those two honourable Members are not able to be with us to hear me paying those glittering tributes to them .
I also very much agreed with what the honourable Member Mr Sakellariou had to say about involving the people of Iraq as much as possible in shaping their own destiny .
We have to face the fact that you cannot drop a fully-fledged democratic system from the air into a country .
You have to build democracy from the bottom up .
You have to build democracy through local elections and regional elections , municipal elections , elections for professional bodies , trade union elections , elections in all those functional organisations .
That is the way we will embed pluralism in due course in Iraq and , I hope , in other countries in the region .
Of course , the honourable Member Mrs Bonino was entirely correct - she has a way of pointing out from time to time that the emperor is decidedly lacking in clothes .
She was right to say that we need a policy framework for what we do .
It is not simply going to be enough to sign cheques .
I would like to say one other thing about the Madrid conference .
We want to be clear about what we need to achieve at Madrid .
I do not think the contents of the collection box is the principal issue .
The principal issues are these : we have to have a proper assessment of the needs of Iraq over the next 14 or 15 months .
We have to know what is going to be required .
Secondly , we have to agree on the circumstances in which we can best and most effectively contribute to meeting those needs .
There are three things that I want to mention again .
The first is that for the international community , it is imperative to have a multilateral umbrella for our contributions .
It is imperative to have an international trust fund which operates transparently and separately from the Iraqi Development Fund and the Coalition , though properly co-ordinated with what they are doing .
I repeat that unless I can give those guarantees to the budgetary authority it would be very difficult to persuade people to make the budgetary switches which will be required in order to achieve a reasonable level of generosity within the bounds laid down in the financial perspective .
Secondly , we need reasonable security in Iraq .
It is not a very sophisticated point to make .
It is impossible to develop a society if there are bombs going off .
It is very difficult to reconstruct and to build democracy and pluralism if there is violence and instability .
We need to ensure that the security situation improves .
We must not be deterred from making commitments , but we must recognise that the amount of instability will affect the amount of progress in reconstruction .
Thirdly , the sooner we can transfer real authority to Iraqis in government to manage their own affairs the better .
I hope that is going to follow from the appointment of the Iraqi cabinet the other day : they need not only titles , but also bureaucracies that they can run , policies that they can frame and services that they can deliver .
We are at the beginning of a long road .
It is going to be a rocky road , but the sooner we get started the better for everyone .
Mr President , the present situation in Iraq and all that has preceded over the last 12 years are not only the result of the world-domination policy of the USA and its closest allies .
A great deal of responsibility and complicity also lies with the EU which , despite many proclamations by its members about respect for international law , has legalised the above crimes and is continuing , as today has made clear , to legalise the barbaric occupation of Iraq , hoping to secure a share of the spoils .
For the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece , this unacceptable situation goes against the feelings of our peoples , as expressed - including in the European Union - in the past and present mass demonstrations .
It will only change with the immediate withdrawal of the occupying armies , so that the Iraqi people can take their fate in their own hands , and on payment by the invaders of the compensation needed in order to reconstruct Iraq .
This should have been the stand of the ? U if it wanted to respect international law instead of helping to flout it .
Everything else is a ' pretext for evil ' .
Any attempt to continue to use the UN to get the USA ' out of a fix ' and to continue the occupation is bound to fail .
It is certain that the resistance of the Iraqi people against the conquerors , under any guise , will continue with increasing international solidarity .
. ( NL ) Where human rights in the world are concerned , the European Union should play a leading role .
We are , after all , a community of values and a major economic power , but we are unfortunately leaving something to be desired .
The European Union is not lacking in good intentions or policy resolutions .
There is , however , a yawning gap between rhetoric and reality .
The criticism is mainly aimed at the Member States and concerns incoherence and a lack of decisiveness .
The Council recognises the shortcomings and has expressly promised improvements , so far with little noticeable result .
Political dialogue with third countries is still optional .
As long as economic or strategic interests are paramount to human rights for us , one can continue to enter into dialogue until the cows come home , but obviously little will change .
Specific goals must be developed and the governments involved must be called to account .
Not only sanctions , but also positive incentives , in particular , can help progress on its way .
What are the options for improving the dialogues according to the Council and the Commission ?
The Council is required to consult Parliament and take its opinions on foreign policy into consideration .
Unfortunately , though , this is hardly ever done in practice , something that we in this House , of course , find unacceptable .
The European Union 's role in the world concerns the European citizens and therefore their representatives .
Success or failure outside of the European Union has repercussions for many sectors within the EU .
According to my research , there was only one single occasion last year when the Council discussed a human rights resolution from this House .
Of all our written questions , not one was answered in time .
I welcome the fact that the Council is present in this debate , in the person of Mr Antonione .
Let this be the start of a new , constructive and intense relationship .
I should like to ask the Commission for a schedule for the long term and a systematic impact assessment of the projects .
I should also like to ask the Commission to finalise the internal reforms , intensify staff training and finance in a balanced manner the fight against torture and the rehabilitation of its victims .
On our part , we as a parliament may be very active in condemning many human rights violations across the world , but we do not give enough consideration to what comes next .
We must organise our work in such a way that we continue to monitor the human rights situations discussed and , if necessary , sound the alarm again .
My report also asks for particular attention to be given to freedom of religion and conscience , and to the abuse of religions for political ends .
Religions are still being suppressed across the globe .
Half of the world 's population lives in countries where freedom of religion is restricted .
Moreover , it is particularly disturbing that human rights should be violated on a massive scale in the name of religion .
Almost half of the violent conflicts in the period under scrutiny have a religious dimension .
Over the past decade , religions have been experienced more intensely , but not , unfortunately , only in a peaceful manner .
In all major world religions , radicalism is on the rise , something mainly attributable to globalisation .
The revolution of global contacts does not immediately lead to more understanding and respect between communities of faith .
On the contrary , people feel threatened by what they experience as an encroachment on their own standards and values .
Radicalism , too , is the result of dissatisfaction among the masses of young people .
Irresponsible leaders exploit these feelings of unrest , sometimes with the help of major financial sources and terrorist networks .
Clashes among , and within , religions represent a very serious threat to human rights and world peace , with , moreover , the risk that religious confrontations outside of Europe will have repercussions on our own multi-religious societies .
Given the seriousness of the threat , it is of the utmost importance for the European Union to chart the problem and to design a strategy .
The President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , has already set the tone for this .
What is the opinion of the Commission and the Council ?
What do they think of the specific recommendations I have made in this respect in my report ?
Finally , two topics that are also very close to my heart .
The objectionable caste system .
Worldwide , more than 260 million people suffer discrimination , violence and exploitation on a daily basis , purely by reason of their origin .
The European Union should make it policy to promote the abolition of these immoral practices .
Children .
All over the world , children are being exploited , neglected or exposed to violence .
More than 300 000 young people are currently taking active part in armed conflicts .
Every three seconds , a child dies of malnutrition .
In a fully-fledged EU development policy , the child should occupy centre stage .
Finally , modesty does not become the European Union as a community of values and economic power where human rights are concerned .
We in Europe should have the nerve to stick our necks out ; the victims are eagerly waiting for this .
. ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome this great opportunity to address you as President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , and I am particularly happy that it has come in the context of a debate on human rights .
Before I proceed , I must offer my condolences and the condolences of the Italian Presidency for the death of Sérgio Vieira de Mello , who , in his capacity as United Nations High Commissioner , had already established himself as a valiant champion of the promotion and defence of human rights at international level .
The protection and promotion of human rights is one of the fundamental pillars of the European Union 's foreign policy and it is a constant reference point for its activities on the world stage .
The Union adheres to the fundamental principle of the universal nature of human rights , which cannot be challenged or distorted by any cultural influence .
Human rights are one of the key factors in addressing the major challenges of our time : I do not need to mention the close connection between peace , security and stability , on the one hand , and respect for human rights , fundamental freedoms , democracy and the rule of law , on the other .
Similarly , there is a close connection between the fight against extreme poverty and underdevelopment and measures seeking to secure fundamental human rights , starting with the right of every human being to life , integrity and dignity .
In this context , we therefore believe that it is of key importance during this six-month term to set the north-south dialogue on a more constructive basis , for it has deteriorated considerably in recent months , particularly as regards the subject of human rights , which must continue to be an essential part of the dialogue .
The Italian Presidency 's human rights programme has been made public and so I do not need to illustrate it at length . I will confine myself to mentioning a few key points .
They include mainstreaming human rights into the widest possible external projection of the Union and taking concentrated measures worldwide to promote a moratorium on and the abolition of the death penalty . They also include a range of constructive political initiatives to eliminate the use of torture and to promote an agreement on the human rights of people with disabilities .
A particular boost needs to be given to the structured dialogue with Iran and China , and a thorough debate needs to be launched on the work of the Commission on Human Rights .
Then the Italian Presidency attaches great importance to the tragic phenomenon of child soldiers .
I would mention , lastly , the initiatives that the Union is going to take in the General Assembly third committee and the provision of the European Union 's annual report on human rights , as well as the annual meeting with non-governmental organisations , which we want to make more constructive this year .
I would now like to congratulate Mr Bob van den Bos on drafting the European Parliament 's annual report , which is full of ideas , analyses , proposals and recommendations .
It is a document that warrants extremely thorough analysis , which , of course , is impossible to achieve in this sitting .
However , it will be analysed in a careful assessment by the other elements and bodies of the European Union .
On this occasion , therefore , I will , if I may , focus on just a few of the report 's ideas which I feel deserve particular attention .
I will start with a general point made in the report with which I , personally , agree : despite the prodigious efforts of the Union and other countries , the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the world is , still today , marked by serious abuses and violations .
The causes of this can be traced back to a number of factors .
The report focuses on some of them , such as the prevailing of political and economic interests over human rights and the need to achieve compromise positions in international fora to the detriment of positions of principle .
Indeed , if we are now convinced that the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms lie at the very heart of democracy and civilised coexistence , we cannot , at the same time , fail to be of the opinion that the pursuit of legitimate political and economic goals demands the consolidation of democratic institutions and the principles of freedom and justice .
It is well known that dictatorships , which are based on terror and violence , reject the democratic ideal , denying fundamental rights and freedoms , seeking to abuse their power with regard to other peoples and , ultimately , proving to be unreliable consultative partners .
What strategy should the European Union pursue in relations with these regimes ?
The report states : ' The ? political ? dialogues which the EU undertakes with third countries have so far not led to many results . '
Should we , therefore , see them as an instrument which is not effective , admit that the policy of human rights dialogue with third countries has not , in many cases , led to appreciable results and give up on them ?
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr van den Bos 's report contains the answers to this question , and I endorse them .
We have a duty to condemn publicly the unacceptable practices perpetrated by certain regimes , for , in this way , the perpetrators are placed in a position where they are forced to justify themselves at the very least , to face the judgment of the international community .
With regard to the approach of structured human rights dialogue with third countries , the line proposed in the report is precisely that which the Council intended to take on this instrument .
In my view , this is not permissive dialogue which is an alternative to forms of political condemnation , but it fully involves civil society , including NGOs and figures from the academic world who are active in the field of human rights , and it is based on the pursuit of precise goals whose implementation is monitored carefully and regularly .
I also endorse the point contained in the report on the need for political dialogue and condemnation to go hand in hand with proactive programmes and measures in the field of combating poverty , support for institution building and education .
Monitoring , resolutions , dialogues , human rights clauses and cooperation and technical assistance programmes in the field are all instruments for achieving a single objective - the unceasing defence of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the world .
The Union 's human rights dialogue underway with China and Iran does not mean that it cannot condemn violations and abuse through ad hoc resolutions too , where it considers that to be necessary , in the United Nations Commission on Human Rights or the UN General Assembly , nor does it mean that it cannot provide them with technical assistance in the field intended to consolidate respect for human rights .
The same applies to the part of the report which levels severe criticism at the Council for failing to publicly condemn the regimes responsible for repeated , serious human rights abuses in its work .
I would not presume to reject these criticisms point blank , but I do , however , feel that some clarification is necessary .
It is certainly limiting to assess the Union 's activity on the basis of the number of resolutions per country that it presents to the Commission on Human Rights or to the General Assembly , or even on the basis of the resolutions which achieve sufficient consensus .
In any case , the part played by the European Union in the field of human rights within international fora is fully recognised .
In actual fact , as has already been pointed out , the Union 's activity in this field covers a very wide range of different initiatives , from the measures contained in the reports of the Heads of Mission to public statements .
This European activity targets a large number of countries .
There is another aspect I would like to focus on which is dealt with in particular depth in the report : intercultural and inter-faith dialogue .
The report specifically highlights the key nature of this issue for the wider framework of the protection of human rights .
I represent a country which , because of its location , culture and traditions , has always been particularly sensitive to this issue and which has now acquired influence and importance which it has never known in the past .
What might at one time have been considered an opportunity to be seized has now become absolutely vital .
Ideological opposition to and political exploitation of human rights and fundamental freedoms are , I am afraid , a fact , however much we might condemn them .
The atmosphere of antagonism that increasingly marks dialogue in the United Nations Commission on Human Rights , which is also dealt with at length in the report , is an issue on which the Greek Presidency has already launched a debate , which we intend to pursue and develop .
The action of the Union and the western countries , in general , in the field of human rights is clearly perceived by part of the international community , particularly the southern hemisphere , it would appear , as a manipulative attempt to pursue political and cultural abuses of power .
The very principle of the universality of human rights and the conviction that they cannot be constrained or limited by any social , economic or cultural group are challenged .
Fundamentalism , whatever its origin or nature , is , in part , the result of an inability to communicate , to search for common values based on mutual respect and tolerance .
I do not believe it is enough , in this regard , for the Union to limit itself to firmly rejecting the accusations of using double standards which are often levelled at it .
Rather , there needs to be a discussion on these matters , to which the European Parliament could contribute .
In this connection , I would inform you that , at the initiative of Italy , a convention on the universality of human rights and intercultural dialogue is to be held in March 2004 in Milan .
In drawing up the guidelines for our six-month term of office in the field of human rights , one of the essential points we considered it necessary to highlight , as I said before , is mainstreaming .
It must be our objective to integrate , harmoniously and coherently , the issue of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms into all the Union 's policies on third countries .
I am therefore particularly pleased to note that this concept is expressed clearly and forcibly by Parliament in the report .
In this connection , I fully support the idea that the human rights clause contained in association and cooperation agreements should be implemented unfailingly whenever the conditions for its application arise .
I also feel that a relationship of cooperation with a country at all levels - political , economic , scientific and cultural - must , of necessity , include open , constructive dialogue on matters of protecting fundamental rights and freedoms .
The report contains interesting , practical proposals on which I have already ordered studies and technical analyses to be carried out .
I would , moreover , like to say that there may be different ways of achieving the same goals and objectives .
Experience has taught us that setting up committees or working groups may often be the most immediate , obvious solution but it sometimes proves not to be the most effective way of proceeding in practice .
Another theme of the report which is worthy of mention is transparency .
It is right to pay tribute to the Danish Presidency for encouraging and promoting the practice of regular , unfailing consultation with civil society , which has undoubtedly contributed to raising the profile of the European Union 's work .
This practice was taken up by the Greek Presidency and will continue to be a firm reference point for the Italian Presidency in its work .
I feel that , ultimately , it represents proper , appropriate recognition of the essential , indispensable role played in this field by NGOs , which are and will continue to be the European Union 's necessary , privileged consultative partners .
Lastly , I would like to focus on a criticism made in the document , relating to institutional relations between the Council and the European Parliament in the area of human rights .
We will analyse in more depth the opinion expressed by the rapporteur to the effect that there needs to be an improvement in relations between the Council and Parliament , and I hereby commit the Italian Presidency to continuing the work started by the Greek Presidency in this area .
The invitation extended by the Greek Presidency to the rapporteur to take part in a meeting of the Human Rights Committee is representative of an approach which seeks to involve the European Parliament more closely in the Council 's work .
The Italian Presidency is fully in favour of this , and I confirm that we intend to continue along the path already marked out , identifying appropriate solutions to the problems and inadequacies highlighted in the report .
In this sense , I hope that I will be able to report to the House at the end of the six months on the measures taken by the Council in the area of human rights .
The governments of the Member States of the Union now recognise the imperative need to guarantee the European Parliament 's role as a driving force in the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms and to foster forms of closer cooperation .
There will therefore have to be a proper debate on the constructive proposals put forward by the rapporteur .
I am happy to end by noting - and this is the point of most political significance - that the Council and Parliament agree on the importance and central nature of the issue of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the Union 's policy and external relations .
It is an important fact which reflects our constantly-evolving approach to these issues , which are no longer confined to ethical statements and declarations of principle but are increasingly going to influence political decisions in relations with third countries .
The statement that international peace , security and stability are founded on full respect for fundamental rights and freedoms is not just empty rhetoric but reflects the reality that human rights are increasingly going to influence governments ' decisions in the area of foreign policy and the strategies of international organisations at all levels .
. Mr President , I wish to begin by paying tribute to Mr van den Bos for his excellent report .
The engagement of the European Parliament on human rights issues serves as a critical stimulus to EU policy , and there is much food for thought in this latest publication .
The Commission will , as usual , respond in writing to all the recommendations addressed to it in this report .
First , some remarks on the principal themes of the report - freedom of thought , conscience and religion .
We tried to work on these issues in several different ways .
First , through efforts in international fora .
With EU support , Ireland tabled the resolution on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance at the UN Commission on Human Rights and the Third Committee of the UN General Assembly , which urges states to guarantee freedom of thought , conscience , religion and belief , facilitate worship and combat intolerance .
The EU 's statement on human rights in the world at the last CHR highlighted concerns relating to religious freedom or freedom of expression in 12 countries , including China and Iran .
Second , thorough dialogue with third countries .
Dedicated human rights dialogues offer a particularly valuable opportunity to address the issue .
In evaluating the dialogue with Iran , for example , the General Affairs and External Relations Council of 18 March 2003 underscored its concern at discrimination against religious minorities - particularly Baha 'is - and the need for more progress as regards freedom of opinion and expression .
Corporal punishment and the abhorrent condemnation to stoning , pronounced in the name of Sharia , have also been the cause of in-depth debates with representatives of the Iranian Government , judiciary and clergy .
Thus far , the EU has noted with satisfaction that the de facto moratorium on stoning is still a reality .
I hope further results will be achieved with our Iranian partners .
Freedom of expression will form the main subject for discussion at the next round-table under the human rights dialogue on 15 and 16 September 2003 .
Thirdly , the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights offers concrete support to projects in this field .
It has supported campaigns to promote freedom of expression - for example , a continuing project in the ASEAN countries , - and freedom of expression has been identified as a priority for 11 EIDHR focus countries in 2002 and 2003 .
The Commission is also making significant efforts to establish a solid basis for effective intercultural dialogue , not least in the Mediterranean - a focus for the new neighbourhood policy - with the imminent report of the High-level Advisory Group and the proposal for a Euro-Mediterranean Foundation .
I noted the rapporteur 's reference to the Cotonou Agreement .
This is a good , relevant reference .
The Cotonou Agreement shows that a comprehensive system can be negotiated with as many as 77 countries , but it also illustrates that there are some challenges and real problems to be dealt with .
However , the system is interesting .
I agree with Mr van den Bos .
Turning now to the human rights clause , I am pleased that Parliament 's report emphasises the potential for the clause to induce positive change in the human rights situation in third countries .
That is precisely the goal of recent innovations .
Last May saw the launch of the first working group dedicated to governance and human rights in the context of the Cooperation Agreement with Bangladesh , with the inaugural meeting tackling a wide variety of issues , including the death penalty and the judicial system .
The Commission communication on Reinvigorating EU actions on Human Rights and democratisation with Mediterranean partners offers the potential for similar initiatives in the framework of the Mediterranean Association Agreements , with a range of initiatives - such as the systematic inclusion of human rights and democracy issues in the meetings of the Association Councils and National Action Plans on human rights - designed to effect change on the basis of the clause .
Turning to the UN Commission on Human Rights , the human rights clause not only constitutes a commitment to human rights in a domestic context , it also pledges the EU and third states to the promotion and protection of human rights in the international arena .
This leads me to the UN Commission on Human Rights .
Mr van den Bos ' report acknowledges the high degree of congruence between the priorities identified by the European Parliament for the 59th session of the CHR and the action undertaken there by the EU .
That is heartening , as the EU 's voice is immeasurably strengthened when its institutions speak with one voice .
However , I share the concern articulated in the report about the direction of the CHR and the need to make every effort to ensure that it addresses human rights violations effectively .
The EU has its work cut out : only 47 States have issued a standing invitation to the CHR 's thematic procedures - 28 of which are EU Member States , accession states or candidate countries .
Moreover , 80 states have not ratified all 6 major international human rights instruments .
The EU has made a good start in efforts to improve the impact of its actions at the CHR ; for example , this year 's session saw earlier finalisation of draft EU initiatives allowing more scope for effective lobbying of third countries .
EIDHR funding has also played its part , with recent projects bolstering the work of the human rights treaty bodies and that of several UN rapporteurs .
These efforts will continue in the knowledge that it is only by marshalling all the resources at the EU 's disposal - political , diplomatic and financial - that we will really be able to effect the necessary change .
Finally , I would make two remarks .
The first is about children in conflicts , an issue which has already been commented on .
We are trying to do everything possible to change the situation , but it is extremely difficult in the northern part of Uganda to get into contact with the Lord 's Resistance Army .
It is almost impossible to do anything meaningful on the ground , because there is no society surrounding the conflict as a basis for action .
There is nothing but the conflict .
However , in post-conflict cases - for example , Sierra Leone - we have been quite successful in the resocialisation of children and other related work .
The other point I would make relates to torture .
We can support rehabilitation centres .
This is also an instrument that keeps the public aware of the issue of torture .
The documentation coming from these centres is the most necessary element in our attempt to address the problem we are up against and deal with the terrible regimes that carry out torture .
So there is more to it than the primary objective of helping the victims of torture .
Establishing facts , which is the secondary output of these activities in rehabilitation centres , is also a powerful instrument which we are pleased to be funding , and we will continue to be an active donor in this area , which definitely strengthens efforts to which we have to give high priority .
I thank you again for this comprehensive report .
We will do everything possible to respond in a very direct manner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr van den Bos for his excellent report and for his willingness to cooperate with the other groups .
The degree of consensus in this House also shows that all the political families continue to view the commitment to human rights throughout the world as a core element in achieving democracy , social progress and the peaceful coexistence of nations .
I would also like to extend my thanks to the human rights organisations , with which the cooperation is always very good .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats considers that the focus of this year 's report - freedom of thought , conscience and religion - is a good benchmark by which to measure the state of democracy and human rights in every country and in every society .
This includes the freedom to practise one 's religion just as much as it includes a religion 's duty to show tolerance towards the other faiths which exist alongside it .
The freedom to change one 's religion or religious denomination must also include the right not to profess any faith .
Democratic thought and action should also preclude any situation in which it is only the members of a specific religion or denomination who are viewed , in effect , as full or fully accepted citizens of a state .
I also do not know of any world religion which is fundamentally intolerant or hostile to other religions or , indeed , towards its own believers .
Criticism of religious intolerance therefore cannot be directed towards a religion as a whole , but must be directed towards those who practise or interpret their own religions in a truly inhuman way , generally out of a desire to achieve or remain in power .
Such criticism of those who are responsible for human rights violations is something which we must also demand , over and over again , from the Council and the Commission .
Does the Council think that stability in the world is enhanced if the issue of human rights is confined solely to nicely phrased human rights clauses ?
Why do we find it so difficult to enforce these clauses - such as those contained in the Cotonou Agreement ?
What are the advantages that some governments think they have wangled for themselves if they delay or circumvent sanctions , for example against Zimbabwe ?
Do you think we are serving the interests of people in China , or our relations with that country , if we pigeon-hole human rights issues as an element of a dialogue on the rule of law which takes place behind closed doors ?
This approach gives carte blanche to anyone visiting the country , be they politicians or businesspeople , to point to this scenario and absolve themselves of any further responsibility for human rights .
After all , raising the issue might adversely affect the climate in which business is done .
The same applies to relations with Russia and other major countries .
Yet we all know that countries which do not respect human rights at home are structurally weak , whereas respect for human rights has a stabilising effect at home and abroad .
Pressure from the EU to enforce human rights is ultimately a better method of achieving domestic and external stability than policies which I would describe as a slavish adherence to the status quo , which give preference to short-term superficial stability and only change when conflicts actually spill over to other countries .
This Parliament will continue to demand statements on unpleasant issues , and it will continue to demand compliance with the content of our resolutions , for we believe that words and deeds must go hand in hand in human rights as well , and that without a pro-active human rights policy towards the states in question , it will be impossible to reduce the conflict potential in the world .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr van den Bos on his report , but may I state quite categorically that , in addition to freedom of religion , we must be equally committed to freedom of conscience and the freedom , as Mr Gahler said , not to follow any religion .
We must remember that over the centuries and , indeed , even now many atrocities are carried out in the name of religion .
Fundamentalism and intolerance are growing threats .
That is why the role of human rights defenders in the world is vital .
We must do all we can to protect them and humanitarian aid workers around the world .
That is why we must remind ourselves of the appalling attack in Baghdad on the UN mission , express our deep condolences to the families of those who have been killed and injured and note the appalling , tragic and untimely death of Mr Sergio Vieira de Mello , an outstanding human rights defender .

We must defend freedom of thought and freedom of conscience .
And what of our relations with third countries ?
We should say yes to dialogue , but action must follow from that dialogue .
We have increasing numbers of death sentences in countries with which we have close relations .
That is why we need an end to the death sentence .
With our association agreements - Egypt and Israel spring to mind - if we do nothing , we condone human rights abuses .
What use are our agreements , in particular the human rights clauses , if we do not enforce them ?
In Egypt homosexuals are being entrapped on the Internet and incarcerated for no other reason but that they are homosexual : this is appalling .
We must defend freedom of the press , the rights and freedoms of the child , the rights and freedoms of homosexuals , of minorities , the rights of women , ethnic minorities , the rights of refugees , and , yes , unfashionably , those seeking asylum .
Let me make a special reference to Aung San Suu Kyi , now on hunger strike in Burma .
We must do all we can to release from detention this brave and honourable woman .
We must respect also the human rights of disabled people , included in our report for the first time .
I shall finish by saying that the Council , Commission and Parliament must speak with one voice .
Our message is clear : these are our values .
If you support them we will engage with you .
If you do not , we will pursue this agenda until human rights are totally and finally respected .
I should like to congratulate Mr van den Bos on his very balanced report , which is in keeping with the human rights reports of the past few years and gives very thoughtful consideration to such delicate topics as freedom of religion .
I fully subscribe to his appeal for more consistency and coherency in human rights policy .
After all , the European Union is at risk of losing all credibility if it does not succeed in speaking with one voice , even if strategically or economically important countries , such as China or Russia , are involved .
Mr van den Bos is right in condemning the most important human rights forum , the UN Commission on Human Rights , for becoming highly politicised .
I myself have had the opportunity of attending this UN Commission on two occasions and I could never shake off the impression that the governments systematically conspired to exonerate one another .
The motto appears to be : if we spare others , we do not run the risk of being condemned ourselves .
During the latest sessions in Geneva , it transpired once more that it is the foxes that have to watch the hen 's eggs .
It is highly worrying that countries such as Libya , Sudan , Zimbabwe and Cuba should play a leading role in the UN Commission on Human Rights and that the European Union , the key sponsor , should hardly have any impact left .
It therefore delights me that the rapporteur has adopted my amendments on this matter .
On the one hand , conditions should be prescribed for membership of the UN Commission , such as the signing , ratification and observation of human rights conventions and the admission of special UN human rights rapporteurs .
On the other hand , the decision-making process must be reviewed and the unanimity rule should make way for a two-thirds majority rule .
If these conditions are not met , the European Union should seriously consider withdrawing from the human rights circus .
It will otherwise run the risk of legitimising , rather than condemning , human rights violations , and surely that can never be the intention .
Mr President , I should like to praise the rapporteur most warmly for his excellent work , which is also very interesting from the point of view both of principles and of practice .
He is trying to lift Parliament 's efforts above the level of positive testimonies .
After all , if we speak our minds , then we will also need to do the follow-up .
Too often , we do not take heed of our own criticism and we lack the tools to find out what has become of our indictments .
We should finally do something about this follow-up , even though I fully understand the objections - some of them practical - that the Commissioner mentioned .
This certainly applies to the support to which the winners of our Sakharov prize are entitled .
After all , they are in many cases the heroes of civil liberties .
This very week , timely support has once again been shown - and rightly so - to Aung San Suu Kyi , and so it is odd to notice that Mrs Leyla Zana is always receiving so little attention from us .
Is it not so convenient politically speaking ?
If this is the reason , then the criticism levelled by the rapporteur at the Commission and the Council also applies to us .
Upholding human rights is not all that simple .
Defending people with whom you see eye to eye is not difficult .
It is only when the rights of people with whom you do not agree are upheld , that campaigning for human rights becomes an issue .
This also holds for freedom of conscience .
To my surprise , some of my fellow-MEPs get along better with that concept than with freedom of religion .
I find this a bit worrying , to be honest .
I should , however , like to ask for attention to be given to my amendment on freedom of conscience , which I tabled immediately , of course .
After all , very positive things can be mentioned in this area too .
In the amendment , reference is made to the wide range of conscientious objections , with which we do , or do not , agree .
After all , in the framework of respect for conscience , the latter is not at all interesting .
I therefore hope for wide support from this House .
In my view , the rapporteur has handled the topic of religious freedom in his articles very proficiently .
It is all the sadder that plain prejudice on the part of the press has often led to only this 1 % of the text that deals with violence in religion being given so much attention .
I hope that the rapporteur will not give this too much of a hearing and simply continues unstintingly along the path that his report has mapped out .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , like Mr Caudron and all of us here , wonder what we can do to stop this annual event of our report on human rights becoming a ritual .
I feel that there is something we could do , and that is to press on with our practical monitoring and condemnation of human rights abuses , to implement the resolutions adopted in this House without confining our duties to the declarations of principle that we write on our cards , to provide - as the Commissioner , too , has said - funds and practical resources , as well as training and support , for those who work in the field of human rights , starting with the United Nations , and , lastly , to support journalists - many journalists have been killed in the past year , Commissioner - whom I believe are a source of witness and verification which is important , not least for Parliament .
With regard to Mr van den Bos ' report , it would appear clear that we need to prevent religion becoming a divisive factor once again in the third millennium , as it has been for a long time .
We need to avoid fresh forms of intolerance and new forms of discrimination developing in the name of God , not least in some highly civilised countries , in some highly civilised Western democracies : a world divided and traversed by new crusades would be a terminally ill world , and we must prevent it .
Today , Mr President , I believe that the battle for human rights can no longer be seen as a battle of principles , that it cannot be won by cunning or by taking short cuts .
We therefore call upon the Council to make every endeavour to ensure that the human rights clause - we have already heard this in the Council 's speech - is not seen as just a minor addition but represents a firm ideal of legal and democratic civilisation which Parliament will ensure is never diminished .
Mr President , the EU and US should be the two principal forces leading the fight for human rights internationally .
We can only do that if we are united in our assessment of what constitutes full respect for human rights and if we are credible through consistency between what we do at home and say abroad .
There is a gulf of mutual incomprehension between the EU and the US .
We think ' how can Americans insist on executing people , insist on boycotting the International Criminal Court and insist on denying Guantanamo bay detainees a fair trial ? '
There are about 18 EU citizens and residents incarcerated at Camp Delta .
One of my London constituents , Feroz Abbasi , is among them .
There must be joint EU pressure on the US to secure civilian trials with normal safeguards .
The war on terror must not become an onslaught on civil liberties .
If we permit unjustified surveillance , detention and discrimination against minorities , especially Muslims , we will weaken our moral credibility as well as foster more terrorism .
The best maxim is ' practice what you preach ' .
Together , the EU and US are a formidable team .
Divided , we weaken our power for human rights .
Mr President , when the European Union talks about human rights , the people have every reason to worry .
Memories of the criminal invasions of Yugoslavia , Afghanistan and Iraq are still fresh .
The problem , of course , is that the peoples suffering the ' benevolence ' of the European Union and its imperialist friends insist on resisting their liberators .
The same applies to the people of Cuba , who are not convinced of the advantages of the free market .
The European Union , which has appointed itself as the global defender of human rights , uses them selectively as a lever for exercising pressure in order to impose its policy .
It has in its sights regions and states which are of geostrategic and economic importance and states such as Cuba , Vietnam , China , Belarus etc. with inconvenient social and political systems .
Even religious freedom is being used for this purpose , while the Turco resolution reaches the point of proposing an ' offshore ' law with punishments and sanctions in accordance with the US standard .
On the other hand , the European Union and the report turn a blind eye to the violations of human rights in the USA , with the anti-terrorism legislation allowing secret arrests and special courts martial .
They do the same for Israel , Turkey and the candidate countries which prosecute and ban communist parties .
There is an urgent need , ladies and gentlemen , for the people to put an end to this hypocrisy .

Mr President , I should like in the short time at my disposal to put a question to Minister Antonione and Commissioner Nielson , which has to do with paragraph 135 , which stresses the central role of education to mutual understanding and so forth .
We are at the start of the school year ; in the occupied part of Cyprus , there was only one school , in Rizokarpaso , which was allowed to operate .
Today , Mr Denktash 's occupying authorities are not allowing the secondary school to operate and two or three days ago they also expelled the primary school teachers .
This is an urgent matter .
The school year is starting , the children may be left without a school and families will probably leave to go to the part of the Republic of Cyprus where all the schools are allowed to operate .
That is why I should like an answer from Mr Nielson and Mr Antonioni as to the extent of the action they will take in order to raise this matter with the occupying authorities .
Mr President , Mr van den Bos is to be congratulated on his work , but the trouble with a wide-ranging report like this is that it eventually includes everyone 's pet hobby-horse and the key messages may be obscured .
It is a cliché now to state that human rights are indivisible .
But I am not convinced that the human rights of mass murdering terrorists or those that aid and abet them in any way deserve the same consideration as those of decent law-abiding citizens .
We are reminded that in the fight against terrorism our democracies must take care not to abuse civil liberties and human rights .
This is , of course , true , but equally , we must not allow human rights to become a political weapon in the terrorist armoury .
It is the terrorists and their apologists that are the biggest abusers of the human rights of our citizens .
It is very easy for us to wring our hands over all the human rights abuses around the world .
To my mind , the European Union should focus more precisely on some achievable objectives where it has leverage .
It should concentrate action on a few areas where there is the possibility of getting results and then act with consistency and determination .
I think of Burma - on which I shall speak tomorrow - and Zimbabwe , where millions of people are suffering under Mugabe 's tyranny , a situation shamefully tolerated and encouraged by leaders in some African countries in the region .
Resolutions of this Parliament have too often been ignored by the Council .
Some countries have tried to exploit the situation to their own advantage .
Instead there should be a consistent , coherent approach based on a clear strategy to remove Mugabe 's boot from the neck of his people .
It could be done .
Corrupt and brutal governments in failed states are usually the main source of human rights abuse of millions of the world 's most disadvantaged people .
As British Conservatives , we are insistent that , in return for enhanced development assistance , recipient countries should implement their side of the bargain , namely good governance , the rule of law and respect for human rights .
Maybe then we would have some progress .
Mr President , if human rights form the core of European values , this annual report on human rights represents one of the most important dates of the year within this European Parliament .
I congratulate Mr van den Bos on his work , struggling as he was with the large number of competing priorities and demands .
It remains a problem for Parliament on how far individual countries should be named in this report .
Why should , for example , freedom of religion be criticised in Laos , Vietnam and Pakistan , but not in Turkmenistan or Saudi Arabia ?
The resolution identifies some structural changes at EU level which could genuinely improve enforcement of human rights , including better operation of the human rights clause between the EU and third countries , inclusion of the European Parliament in discussion of the operational programme on human rights , and the introduction of benchmarks which enable EU action short of the two often blunt instruments of sanctions policies or suspension of aid .
I hope the Commission will consider these in detail .
Finally , just as Parliament voted earlier today in favour of a UN Convention on disability , it is right that the abuse of the human rights of people with disabilities are represented within this comprehensive resolution .
This is not just about economic and social rights , but about people all over the world who have lost their lives or who have been subject to abuse simply because they are disabled .
For example , abuse occurs in residential institutions where people are deprived of basic human dignity , including the use of caged beds in psychiatric institutions in countries which will next year become full members of the European Union .
On this and all the issues identified in this report , human rights are indivisible within Europe as well as elsewhere in the world .
Mr President , although satisfied with the report , my group too feels that it must use the time available to stress that it is essential that the European Parliament continues to make use of all the resources available to it more resolutely to ensure that the issue of human rights is given greater prominence in our decision-making and that the policies we follow are more effective .
I believe that , as far as human rights in general in the world are concerned - and I would single out in this broad category the rights of the child and women 's rights - there is still potential which has yet to be fully exploited in the decisions that we take regarding all the aid policies , not least in respect of developing countries , potential which we must exploit with greater determination and resolution to promote the need to respect human rights .
I believe that there is a problem of information here , too , and I agree with the statement in the report regarding the need for Parliament in general and the committees handling the decisions relating to these countries ' policies , in particular , to have greater , quicker , more certain access to absolutely up-to-the-minute daily information on what is happening in those countries .
To conclude , I , too , want to mention the death penalty , which is an ongoing concern for everyone and on which everyone must continue to develop a policy .
.
( IT ) Mr President , I should like , very briefly , to reply to Mr Alavanos , who raised an issue of which the Council has no knowledge .
Within the bounds of the Council 's powers , I can assure you that we will investigate the matter .
I will respond to Mr Alavanos in writing , if necessary .
. I only need make one final , general remark .
I sensed quite a lot of frustration in many of the contributions reflecting the lack of clear decisions with binding effect and the lack of effective instruments to enforce respect of human rights in the world .
Some of it almost had an air of extra-territoriality , even coming close to unilateralist language .
We have to take care and stay faithful to other values that are important for our self-esteem and our project .
We have to remain multilateralist .
And when addressing these difficult issues no short-cut is possible .
When the poor from the Third World look at us in Europe - even if they do not understand the figures , this illustrates their image of us - they see that every cow in Europe gets two euro per day in subsidy .
Over there , 1.2 billion people live on less than one dollar a day .
More than half of the population in the world gets less than two dollars per day .
This is not to move away from the core theme of this debate , but when we talk about perceptions and how this world sees itself , we have to keep it in mind .
Everybody talks about the international society .
We do not have one .
We are trying to create one .
This is where we have a good case for being Europeans at this time .
We have to combine that with the issues we discuss here .
.
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Sylla for his thorough report on the situation of the fundamental rights in the Union in 2002 .
The length of this report makes it clear that the European Union , which constantly preaches respect for fundamental rights to the rest of the world , is not yet free from breaches to these rights within its own borders .
As the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport for this report , I am happy that in paragraph 38 Italy is finally and explicitly named and shamed concerning its media concentration and the influence in this regard of its Prime Minister , without any rules at all on conflict of interest being adopted .
I say I am glad because the majority of Members on the Culture Committee sadly voted against making an example of Italy for its bad record in media concentration , which poses a very serious threat to democracy everywhere .
We all know that individual media conglomerates control a significant portion of the national news media in several European countries : Bertelsmann and Kirch in Germany , Rupert Murdoch 's empire in the United Kingdom and Vivendi in France .
But Berlusconi 's combination of media influence and political power is unique in Europe .
A recent report on media conflict of interest in Italy by the NGO Reporters Without Borders quotes Freimut Duve , the OCSE 's representative for media freedom , who has repeatedly condemned the concentration of so much of the Italian news media in the Prime Minister 's hands .
The OSCE says it is both a challenge to the European constitutional architecture and a bad example for new democracies in transition .
The Council of Europe 's Parliamentary Assembly also holds that the potential conflict of interest between the holding of political office by Mr Berlusconi and his private economic and media interests is a threat to media pluralism .
I could elaborate further , but I am sure you all understand the problems that media ownership concentration in Italy poses to democracy and freedom of information .
I sincerely hope , therefore , that you all agree that the case of Italy should be included in this report .
.
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Sylla , who has brought a very difficult job to a close .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights , I should like to express our deep satisfaction with the comments and recommendations in the report on safeguarding and applying democracy and equality in daily life and practice , in the sense of a balanced participation of the sexes in democratic institutions and respect for the human rights of women .
It is not possible , Commissioner , for women to be treated as human beings and citizens with restricted rights in twenty-first century Europe .
It is unacceptable for there still to be professional sectors and areas in the European Union in which Community legislation , democratic rules and fundamental freedoms only apply to men .
My committee has repeatedly condemned gender-based discrimination and discrimination based on sexual orientation or national or social origin .
In other words , we condemn the different weights and measures which derive mainly from cultural traditions and social stereotypes and which today refer to dark and sad periods in the history of mankind .
We insistently and constantly call for the self-evident : for human rights and fundamental freedoms to apply equally to men and women , with no discrimination whatsoever .
Only then will we be able to talk of the universality of human rights and mainstreaming .
I should also like to take the opportunity of today 's vote on the report on the DAPHNE programme to prevent and combat violence against women , Commissioner , to call once again on the European Commission and the Member States , to put combating violence against women , which is the worst form of violation of women 's rights , high on their political agenda .
I do not think that any policy should carry greater weight than the protection of human rights .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur and saying that the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports the report .
Even though we may have different views on certain parts of it , we should be able to agree that this survey is useful and significant .
I should nonetheless have liked to have seen more practical examples .
Mr Cornillet , I wonder for what purpose we should have this report if we did not single out a number of countries .
If the EU is to set an example to the world , we cannot put blinkers on and not put our own house in order .
What credibility would we then have in the surrounding world ?
The question to the Commission and the Council is , of course : what practical measures are you taking to tackle the problems ?
I wish to comment on three areas .
The first is the EU 's and the Member States ' asylum policy , which deserves to be criticised .
There is a political anxiety whereby all the countries apparently feel able to compromise fundamental legal principles .
Naturally , we must put an end to human smuggling and prevent the asylum system from being misused , but we cannot send refugees back to be tortured or ill-treated .
We must give all children who find their way to the EU the chance of a life of dignity .
There are many deficiencies in this area , including in my own country .
The second area is prison conditions .
We have overcrowded prisons , extensive violence and increasing problems involving ex-prisoners ' readjustment to society .
Europe must have prisons that are fit for human beings .
The third area concerns a sensitive but important issue .
The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights states clearly and unambiguously that ' [ t ] he freedom and pluralism of the media shall be respected ' .
I agree with Mr Eurig Wyn on this matter and wonder if it is perhaps an irony of fate that it is the Italian Presidency that is to get the Member States to agree upon a constitution that Italy , through its prime minister 's monopoly on the media , clearly and unambiguously violates .
We cannot have this situation .
I want , in conclusion , to ask you , Commissioner , what you are doing about this sensitive matter .
The situation in the Italian media is the whole of Europe 's responsibility , including yours , Mr Vitorino .
Mr President , I would like to welcome this report , which is an informative instrument on more than one level : it is an excellent compilation of the existing legislation , it monitors accurately the development of the legislation and , in particular , the effects of 11 September , and it provides clear proof that the perception of danger has changed the terms of the balance between freedom and security , that the increase in the number of exceptional laws has substantially limited our fundamental rights and held them up to ridicule .
With the adoption of European provisions such as the framework decisions on terrorism and the European arrest warrant , or even the freezing of assets of certain entities and individuals considered to be terrorists , the European Union is consolidating the many anti-terrorism and repressive laws adopted by the Member States .
However , if the need to combat terrorism must not be an excuse to adopt discriminatory and arbitrary laws , the absence of a clear and precise definition of terrorism in European legislation today allows the implicit criminalisation of social movements linked to freedom of expression and freedom of association .
A simple suspicion can result in detention .
Entire populations that were already vulnerable have been even more so since 11 September : nationals of third countries , asylum-seekers , Roma and Muslims .
With disregard for fundamental rights and public freedoms , these populations are often treated as if they pose a threat or a danger to state security and it is easy to blame it on 11 September .
It allows us to ignore the real issues society must face : integration , xenophobia and immigration and asylum policy .
Today , the fight against terrorism serves as a pretext for the fight against immigration , which is no longer considered to be anything but illegal .
The association agreements with Algeria , for example , are a good illustration of this amalgam of terrorism and immigration .
The same applies to the agreements on the readmission of sans-papiers sent to third countries .
The list of violations carried out within the European Union by the states and institutions is a long one : xenophobia , double punishment , arbitrary detention , discriminatory practices as regards hiring and housing , and offences based on identity .
Yet human rights have no borders , so we must be frank and begin by putting our own house in order .
We must stop using human rights as a currency with third countries ; the aim of the European Union is to promote peace , the values of freedom , justice and solidarity and the welfare of its people .
We must now make all efforts to ensure that human rights are at last respected in the European Union for all residents , regardless of their nationality .
Mr President , one of the problems with reports of this kind is that fundamental rights are given a politically flavoured explanation , which is subsequently prescribed as absolute standard .
This annual report contains yet again many painful areas .
For example , in paragraph 33 , the Member States are requested to promote the principle of secular neutrality , which does not rule out the teaching of the history of religions in school , but this in fact flies in the face of the rights enshrined in the Dutch Constitution by outlawing religious classes themselves .
Indeed , it is possible to opt for special education in the Netherlands , a right which is assumed by many , including Christians , people with non-religious ideologies and now also Muslims .
It is downright ridiculous to find such a thoughtless , ill-formulated statement in an EP report .
What is it anyway , this principle of neutrality ?
Politics , and therefore a government , is never neutral .
This once again sums up what happens every year when this report comes out .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in our opinion , it would be a mistake to take the blinkered approach of looking at the issue of the protection of human rights solely in terms of the rights of individuals , seeing them as the one and only matter of any significance to anybody and disregarding the rights of peoples , their traditions and their cultural identities .
This can lead to blunders and completely the wrong line being taken , as , for example , where , examining the problem of widespread crime among immigrants from third countries , the report states that this is surely due to poor integration policies while completely disregarding the rights of the communities on the receiving end of this kind of unregulated immigration who suffer the damage and the harmful effects , not least in terms of their culture , of what is , in some cases , a genuine invasion and abuse of the rights of the people of the country of reception .
We are therefore extremely critical of a report which also seeks to introduce euthanasia by the back door .
Mr President , Mr Fodé Sylla , this House gave you the very clear brief of examining whether and to what extent fundamental rights are being upheld in the Member States of the European Union .
What you have delivered is unfortunately an ideological wish list , a shopping list of left-wing ideologies .
I say ' unfortunately ' because it was an important and substantial report .
We can discuss the issues you raise in it , and we can be for them or against them , but the point is that they do not belong in the report about fundamental rights and respect for these rights in the European Union .
For that reason , and as a matter of principle we , in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , will vote against this report .
You also , however , criticise a number of Member States , and as a rule you do so unfairly .
You have quite simply failed to inform yourself adequately about the real situation or you are criticising because the rules they have in place do not conform with your ideological preconceptions .
We reject the criticism - and that includes your criticism of Austria - because it is quite unjustified , and we therefore reject your report for these reasons as well .
Thirdly , I reject the report on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party because we do not support your substantive demands .
These range from the expansion of the right of asylum , to access to education and healthcare for illegal immigrants , the regularisation of the status of illegal immigrants , and recognition of the equality of all partnerships in the EU - we reject all these demands unequivocally .
Finally , we reject the report outright because of your demand that homosexual couples be given the right to adopt children .
You can think what you like about such partnerships : I tolerate them , but in the interests of the children , we must ensure that such a demand is never put into practice .
The Group of the European People 's Party resolutely rejects your report for all the reasons I have stated and will vote against it .
Mr President , I would first like to stress the importance of this report , and in contrast to what some fellow Members have just said , to say how courageous it is to identify countries guilty of failure to respect the most basic human rights .
I say that because , unfortunately , we have to recognise that Mr Sylla 's report is full of such examples , and it is not enough for us as Members of the European Parliament to denounce violations of fundamental rights in countries outside the EU if we do not point the finger at violations in our own countries .
Our good name is at stake here .
Furthermore , the conclusions of the report are extremely important as regards the other challenges we face .
For example , the current economic crisis and the many redundancies associated with it mean that we have to be particularly vigilant about respecting social rights .
For example , we are unfortunately having to contend with the closure of an assembly plant in the Somme region of France .
Recent events both in France and in other European companies also demonstrate that the freedom of the press is often violated .
That certainly happened during the summer heatwave .
On an entirely different point , I would also like to support what some of the previous speakers have said : if the war on terror is to be legitimate , it should not involve flouting the most basic rights .
To conclude , Mr President , given that the Annual Report on Human Rights is the fourth of its kind , I would like to ask the same question as my colleague Mrs Swiebel : what is the human rights situation , and what changes has the report brought about ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , do not mention rope in the house of the hanged .
This Parliament is making a hopeless fool of itself by entrusting this report to a Communist .
It is an insult to all victims of the criminal Communist ideology .
It is tantamount to asking Mrs Claude to write a report on moral corruption , or to ask Mr Bernard Cantat to write a report on violence against women .
Mr Sylla has been elected on a Communist list ; he must be the last person to talk to us about our fundamental rights .
This was demonstrated once again in this Chamber this morning .
I would refer in this connection to the shameful statements made by some of his group colleagues during the debate on Cuba this morning .
These were like a slap in the face of the many poor souls behind bars in Cuba .
Mr Sylla , take yourself to Havana to preach about fundamental rights , but not here in Europe , not here in Strasbourg !
When I hear the rapporteur call for the freedom of expression , I wonder whether we have ended up in the world of Orwell , because it was his party , no less , which in France continually took the lead to scale back the freedom of opinion , via totalitarian acts such as the Gayssot Act .
It was the party of this rapporteur which , some time ago , commissioned the bulldozing of a home for immigrants in Vitry-sur-Seine , so please let us remain serious .
Communists must be the last people on earth to give us lessons in what Europe should look like based on the principles of a constitutional state .
( Applause from the right )
Personal comments have been made about the rapporteur .
I will allow him 30 seconds to make any comment he wishes to make .
You are aware that we have freedom of expression here , even to be tactless at times .
Mr President , I would simply like to say that it is possible to have a debate without stigmatising people and without insulting and humiliating them .
I think that the least we can expect is tolerance , and failing that then at least respect .
That , however , is asking too much of the person concerned .
I will not reciprocate by name calling and hurling insults , but I think she is the one who is unfit to sit in this House .
Mr President , Mr Sylla 's report provides an excellent opportunity to recall that immigrant communities resident in the European Union are particularly exposed and are the main victims of breaches of fundamental rights .
Measures intended to create a genuine and coherent Community policy on illegal immigration are experiencing delays in being adopted that are incompatible with the urgency and the gravity of the problems facing these individuals .
Measures designed , on the other hand , to guarantee security or to control illegal immigration , measures that are generally repressive , have shown themselves able to bring about consensus between governments more easily than measures that are positive or which seek to integrate communities .
We can see the progress made in 2002 with the adoption of various instruments that constitute the first steps towards a common immigration and asylum policy .
Amongst these instruments , I would highlight the directives on minimum standards for the reception of asylum-seekers in Member States , the directive on refugee status , the Dublin II regulation and the directive on reuniting families .
These instruments are not sufficient , however , to remedy the weak legal and social position of the several thousand immigrants who have settled in our countries and whose situation is extremely precarious and exposed to all types of abuse .
One fundamental instrument is still awaiting final approval by the Council : the European Statute on Long-Term Residents , which applies to immigrants who have lived within the territory of a Member State for more than five years and which will give those concerned the right to a set of benefits in the same conditions that apply to nationals of that country .
Mr President , finding a way out of these dead ends is crucial if we are genuinely to raise the level of protection of fundamental rights within the Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , some of us are extremely concerned : ' Our children , our children , our children ? ' .
Our rapporteur warns them that 87 % of cases of child abuse occur in the family , according to figures never discussed ; another 4 % occur in seminaries .
Maybe we should give homosexuals a chance - it might be better for the children .
A moving speech from Mr Borghezio : the right of peoples should prevail over the right of individuals .
Whether you are talking about our Benito Mussolini , Saddam Hussein or any of the others , the right of peoples has always prevailed over the right of individuals .
The right of peoples , indeed , of peoples fighting each other .
Our President has declared inadmissible , unacceptable , an amendment calling for freedom of access to documents .
If these are the sorts of things we are doing , then hurrah for Commissioner Vitorino !
Hurrah for this democratic scrutiny which we have achieved for the first time in 2003 !
Hurrah for the rapporteur !
We will gladly vote for the report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , once again , we have before us a report which has now become rather a routine event .
We should therefore all be sitting here calmly , but , as you can see , it is a report which still provokes heated debate after four years .
Moreover , we are discussing principles which distinguish a civilised society from a tribal community , and , in this respect , the Charter of Fundamental Rights would seem to be the most appropriate , most equitable , most reliable reference when it comes to principles and values .
I endorse the broad lines taken by the report : no to terrorism , protection of prisoners , combating the trafficking of human beings , data protection and protection of privacy , provision of accurate information , immigration , asylum and many other issues like , once again , combating all forms of discrimination .
It is a shame that all these issues , these principles , are jeopardised somewhat , adulterated by invasive ideological and political views when they warrant greater respect .
Consider , for example , the safeguarding of Christian roots and the traditional family unit - a man and a woman united by the common goal of procreation .
Once again , we are attempting to impose on 15 Member States a model which is only accepted by three countries in Europe , and we are doing so , ladies and gentlemen , with force which , although purely verbal , is , nonetheless , violence .
It is a shame where the information sector is concerned too , where a serious issue such as this has been defiled by pure political propaganda such as the contribution of the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport - whom I will not name so as not to give them the right to reply - who has defiled an extremely serious subject with the tone and content of a vulgar party propaganda leaflet , behaviour which , moreover , condemns itself .
I am glad to say , ladies and gentlemen , that this is only an opinion , or rather a set of opinions , which has no legal effect .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report , which each year gives us an opportunity to examine the fundamental rights situation in the European Union , provides an excellent reminder for those who would prefer to forget the universal nature of fundamental rights .
It is sometimes a very bitter pill to swallow , but it can teach us some very salutary lessons .
I would particularly like to single out the strengthening of European citizenship , which undeniably involves the right to vote in local and European elections .
This right is denied to legal residents in several Member States on the grounds that they are not national citizens or are non-EU citizens .
At a time when we are drawing up a constitutional model which ensures that exclusion and discrimination have no place in the enlarged Europe , we must put an end to this situation , failing which our European project and the values that we advocate will lose all credibility .
The time we have available is very short , but this House must take up this major challenge over the coming months .
Mr President , a practical approach to this report will immediately highlight its most important virtue - the fact that European institutions will no longer be able to ignore the pitiful situation of human rights protection in daily life in the Member States .
As the rapporteur says , this annual report will , in future , be valued and possibly even feared .
Though I fully share Mr Sylla 's view , I must confess that I have some reluctance in accepting a report subjected to the pressure of current standards of political correctness , which passes over in silence more important considerations such as evident breaches of human rights and political freedoms in some Member States such as the Kingdom of Spain .

Commissioner Vitorino , in paragraph 22 , the report clearly calls , as an urgent matter , for action to be taken in favour of prisoners who suffer from serious diseases .
Bautista Barandalla , a Navarrian prisoner , suffers from an incurable illness .
His case is the object of my written question to the Commission tabled last March .
I invite everybody to take a look at Commissioner Vitorino 's response on 11 June 2003 .
If I were you I would feel very ashamed of it , Mr Vitorino .
Mr President , I would like to clarify one point : I certainly accept responsibility for this report , but I must point out that it was adopted in committee by 24 votes to 17 .
Furthermore , it was the subject of a number of amendments , which I discussed with the Chairman of my committee once again this morning .
That means that not all the proposals and amendments were of my making .
I believe that some caution is called for .
Debates do take place and some points are not clear-cut .
Nevertheless , that does not mean that I am not considering this issue .
I find it really shocking that the role of the rapporteur should be reduced to a duty of responsibility .
My intention was quite simply to emphasise those points that I regard as important , and in particular the aftermath of the attacks on 11 September 2001 , conditions in prisons and discrimination .
Various proposals were subsequently made , however , which I did not originate .
I am neither for nor against the adoption of children by same-sex couples , it is quite simply not a clear-cut issue .
Thank you very much to the rapporteur .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
WRITTEN DECLARATIONS ( RULE 120 )
Question No 1 by Camilo Nogueira Román , which has been taken over by Josu Ortuondo Larrea ( H-0433 / 03 )
Subject : Migrants tragically drowned off the Union 's southern Mediterranean and Atlantic coasts
In the last few days 70 African migrants have been drowned , this time off the coast of Sicily .
Such tragic events have become a frequent occurrence , off the Union 's southern Mediterranean and Atlantic coasts , especially near the Canary Islands and Andalusia , and are a black mark on Europe 's conscience .
Thousands of migrants , many of them pregnant women and young children , have died in this way in recent years .
What non-repressive political action does the Union intend to take to prevent such catastrophes ?
. ( IT ) I am afraid I must start , Mr President , by saying that I have a plane to catch and so I cannot grant your request .
However , all the questions will receive a written answer so we will be able to fulfil our obligation .
With regard to Question No H-0433 / 03 , the Council condemns the tragic incidents mentioned by the honourable Member .
The immigration strategy followed by the Union is intended not only to draw up and implement measures to combat illegal immigration and to prevent and control this phenomenon but also to strengthen relations with third countries of origin and transit of immigrants .
We must , therefore , remember that the conclusions of the Seville European Council of 21 and 22 June 2002 noted that it is crucial for the European Union and its Member States that migration flows should be managed in accordance with the law , in cooperation with the countries of origin and transit of such flows .
They also noted that combating illegal immigration requires a greater effort on the part of the European Union , with the use of all appropriate instruments in the context of the European Union 's external relations .
To this end , they stated that an integrated , comprehensive and balanced approach to tackling the root causes of illegal immigration must remain the European Union 's constant , long-term objective .
They also pointed out that closer economic cooperation , trade expansion , development assistance and conflict prevention are all means of promoting economic prosperity in the countries concerned and thereby reducing the underlying causes of migration flows .
In line with the Seville European Council , the conclusions of the Thessaloniki European Council of 19 and 20 June 2003 reaffirmed that the EU dialogue and actions with third countries in the field of migration should be part of an overall integrated , comprehensive and balanced approach .
It should also be mentioned that , in December 2002 , the Commission produced a communication entitled ' Integrating Migration Issues in the EU 's Relations with Third Countries ' , which stressed , in particular , the relationship between migration and development .
This relationship and synergy are , moreover , recognised and stressed by the Council in the conclusions relating to the communication adopted on 19 April 2003 , in which the Council states specifically that an effective , coherent development policy is an essential part of an effective migration policy and recognises that , if properly managed , migration can be a positive growth and development factor for both the European Union and the countries concerned , while illegal migration has a damaging effect on both the individuals in question and the countries of origin , transit and destination .
The Council therefore notes that , in order to establish an effective migration policy , we need to develop a genuine partnership with third countries to bring about more effective , common management of migration flows .
Moreover , I must mention the Commission 's working document of July 2003 on closer cooperation with countries of origin with a view to managing migration flows .
This document , intended to implement the conclusions adopted by the Council on 19 November 2002 , examines the state of cooperation with a number of third countries and makes proposals for closer , improved cooperation .
The implementation of the conclusions of the Seville and Thessaloniki European Councils on the basis , in particular , of the guidelines which emerged from the Commission 's communications is the subject of an in-depth analysis carried out by the Council organs .
. ( IT ) This is a question to which we will certainly give consideration ; moreover , it has already been discussed at a number of European Councils , which attached due importance to it .
We will undertake to return to this question to explore it in greater depth and see how we can respond more fully .
Question No 2 by Manuel Medina Ortega ( H-0439 / 03 ) :
Subject : Operation Ulysses
Can the Council provide information on the success of Operation Ulysses in curbing illegal immigration in the western Mediterranean and the Atlantic ?
.
( IT ) As I pointed out in my answer to Question No H-0086 / 03 by the honourable Member , a final report on the implementation of programmes , ad hoc centres , pilot projects and joint operations was presented at the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 5 and 6 June 2003 with a view to it being sent to the Thessaloniki European Council .
The European Council has taken note of the results of the various operations described in the report .
As far as the Ulysses project is concerned , the Council was informed that it was to be implemented in two stages : the first stage , in the Mediterranean , took place between 25 January and February this year , and the second , which was to be implemented at the beginning of April , also this year , was temporarily suspended because of the war in Iraq .
The second stage was finally implemented between 27 May and 2 June this year and consisted of the surveillance and monitoring of the territorial waters off the coasts of the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean .
A number of Member States took part in both stages of the operation .
Italy , France , the United Kingdom , Portugal and Spain played an active role in the first stage of the project , while Greece , Norway , the Netherlands , Germany and Poland participated as observers , together with Europol .
The second stage saw the active participation of the United Kingdom , France and Spain .
The added value of the Ulysses project lies in the fact that various human resources and pieces of equipment were pooled and deployed jointly in a number of practical tasks , and in the fact that information was exchanged using advanced technologies .
It was reported that , overall , 454 illegal migrants were caught and 15 swimmers intercepted as a result of the coordinated efforts of the air , land and sea forces .
. That is a very good point .
Coordination is absolutely essential if we are to obtain better results , and we can therefore endorse your recommendation .
. ( IT ) This is a subject which has already been debated .
Of course , there was a general position to that effect - advocating the creation of a European police force with a view to better control .
To date , no decisions have been taken on the matter , but I am sure that the Council will come back to the issue .
When it does , we will be able to be more specific regarding the decisions it intends to adopt .
Question No 3 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0449 / 03 ) :
Subject : Position of the Italian EU Presidency regarding clandestine immigrants
According to press reports ( Financial Times , 25.6.2003 ) , Umberto Bossi , President of the Northern League and member of Italy 's governing coalition , called for coastguards to fire on vessels transporting clandestine immigrants into Italy , frequently including many women and children .
Does Umberto Bossi 's attitude reflect the position of the Italian Presidency and if not , how has the latter expressed its disapproval ?
.
( IT ) It is not for the Council to comment on statements of the kind reported by the honourable Member in his question .
However , I would point out that , as it states in its programme , the Italian Presidency will endeavour to promote joint management of migration flows which preserves a proper balance between the policy of integrating foreigners legally residing in the European Union - not least promoting social , cultural and religious dialogue - and resolutely combating illegal immigration and the trafficking of human beings .
This measure is part of the endeavour to create a genuine , inclusive joint European immigration and asylum system , in line with the measures decided upon at the Seville and Thessaloniki European Councils .
Thank you Minister .
Although I expected some sort of denial , in other words that no such statement was made on the part of the Italian Government , I want to believe that its position is that expressed by the Minister and not that expressed in the article in the Financial Times .
Question No 4 by Malcolm Harbour ( H-0435 / 03 ) :
Subject : Competitiveness in the EU
The European Council Conclusions of 21 March 2003 called for the Competitiveness Council ' to be effectively consulted within the Council 's decision-making processes on proposals considered likely to have substantial effects on competitiveness ' .
On how many proposals has the Competitiveness Council been consulted , and what action has been taken as a result ?
With further reference to the European Council Conclusions , what practical steps has the Council taken to ensure that the Competitiveness Council may ' actively assume its horizontal role of enhancing competitiveness and growth as part of an integrated strategy for competitiveness to be developed by the Commission ' ?
How are Council formations ' assessing the impact of the work field ' in competitiveness ?
.
( IT ) As the honourable Member is quite aware , the Competitiveness Council formation was established following the agreement reached at the Seville European Council of June 2002 on a number of measures , in order to enhance the way the Council works in preparation for enlargement .
With the decision to combine the three previous Council formations - Internal Market , Industry and Research - in a single Council formation responsible for issues relating to the competitiveness of European enterprises , both horizontal issues and individual political measures , with a view to introducing new legislation , a major step has been taken towards a more effective Council structure for the sectors concerned .
As the honourable Member mentioned , at the Brussels meeting in March 2003 , the European Council stressed the role of the Competitiveness Council formation , stating that it should be effectively consulted within the Council 's decision-making processes on proposals considered likely to have substantial effects on competitiveness , alongside the responsibility of all Council formations to assess the impact of their work field .
The agendas of the sessions of this Council formation held thus far and the results of these sessions adequately reflect the objectives established by the European Council and the Presidencies ' desire to create the best possible conditions for achieving them .
Under the previous Danish and Greek Presidencies , the work of the Competitiveness Council was organised in such a way as to allow the fullest possible integration of the three principal sectors within its scope and greater efficiency in addressing related issues .
A group of high-level Council officials known as the ' Competitiveness and Growth Group ' was set up in order to ensure proper coordination .
The Italian Presidency certainly intends to further develop and enhance the work of this Council formation on the basis of experience gained thus far .
The Italian Presidency intends to follow up the constructive , fruitful debate held at informal ministerial level in Rome on 11 and 12 July 2003 with appropriate measures , with the aim of paving the way for an integrated competitiveness strategy , a strategy which will have to be debated and adopted in one of the November Council sessions .
As has been pointed out , a number of initiatives and some practical steps have been taken to ensure that the Competitiveness Council can fully play its specific role alongside and in close coordination with the work carried out in the other Council formations , although it is , as yet , too early to come to any definitive conclusions .
However , there is no doubt that the European Parliament has a major role to play in this regard and the Italian Presidency fervently hopes that there will be constant dialogue with Parliament on how best to implement the joint competitiveness programme , not least on the basis of the proposals announced by the Commission within the framework of the integrated strategy .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for the reply , but I am rather disappointed that he was not able to give me more specific details about the number of proposals that they had been consulted on .
The competitiveness , or rather , the declining competitiveness of the European Union is the biggest challenge that we are facing .
His report rather smacks of complacency .
Could he assure us , first of all , that the Competitiveness Council is taking an active role in looking at Commission proposals that fundamentally undermine Europe 's competitiveness , particularly in the fields of chemicals policy , for example ?
And could he assure us that they are taking the Commission to account for producing proposals that have not been properly subject to the sort of impact assessments that the Commission has pledged to carry out to ensure that the business and competitiveness burden on proposals is properly looked at ?
This Parliament is looking to the Council to take the issue of competitiveness seriously .
His reply has not given me a great deal of confidence that it has the sort of priority that we expect .
I can confirm that this is , indeed , one of our priorities .
My reply was not intended to be evasive : the lack of detail in the information I gave was precisely because we have not yet had sufficient time to assess the capacity of the Competitiveness Council to be able to provide all the information the honourable Member has requested .
Nevertheless , I can assure you , Mr Harbour , that we will be paying great attention to the issue of competitiveness , which we regard as being of strategic importance for the development of the European Union .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , competitiveness naturally has to do with employment as well .
What interests me , therefore , is how far the Council deals with taxation issues .
We all know that taxation has very substantial impacts on national economic development .
Is there an opportunity here , using benchmarking and best practice , to ascertain how taxation can influence competitiveness , not only in Europe but internationally ?
In this case , too , I would like confirm the priority that the Italian Presidency gives to competitiveness , and to assure you that the forthcoming European Council will examine this entire issue in depth , including those aspects that the honourable Member has stressed are vital if we are to achieve a general improvement in competitiveness within the European Union .
For this reason , there will also be an in-depth discussion of the issues of taxation and employment .
Question No 5 by Piia-Noora Kauppi ( H-0437 / 03 ) :
Subject : Continuation of the eVote initiative , which represents interactive Internet democracy , during Italy 's Presidency
During its Presidency , the Greek Government has successfully promoted interactive Internet democracy by means of the so-called ' eVote ' initiative .
By means of eVote , 170 000 EU citizens have expressed their views on the way ahead for the European Union .
A particularly positive aspect of the eVote program is that the Greek Presidency has been incorporating feedback from the public in its daily work .
Opinions and recommendations put forward by members of the public feed in directly to EU-level meetings , negotiations and conclusions .
It would be a pity if the eVote initiative did not continue in one form or another during the Italian Presidency .
Will Italy therefore continue the eVote initiative ?
Might the Italian Government perhaps introduce any other programs or measures during its Presidency in order to promote the application of new technology particularly as a means of increasing political participation by citizens ?
How will the Italian Government convince the citizens of the EU that the Union is functioning as an emanation of the will of its individual citizens and is doing things which the ordinary people of Europe , above all , regard as important ?
The Presidency recognises the importance of dialogue with our citizens on European integration .
This was particularly important during the Greek Presidency given that , inter alia , that period marked the final phase of the work of the Convention , culminating in the presentation of the EU Draft Constitutional Treaty to the Thessaloniki European Council .
The Greek Presidency 's e-Vote initiative , and other instruments created by the EU institutions , such as the Futurum website and the Convention website , have made an effective contribution to ensuring that our citizens ' views on the future of Europe are heard .
At its meeting in Thessaloniki in June 2003 , the European Council called upon the Italian Presidency to initiate the procedure laid down in Article 48 of the Treaty in order to allow the Intergovernmental Conference to be convened in October 2003 to approve the Constitutional Treaty .
During that Intergovernmental Conference , the Presidency will endeavour to keep the public properly informed about the progress of the proceedings .
The Italian Presidency 's website will be one of the instruments used to disseminate information about both the IGC and all the other work carried out during these six months .
I would accordingly like to emphasise that the Italian Presidency attaches great importance to the participation of young people in European integration .
As regards the implementation of the Commission White Paper entitled ' A new impetus for European youth ' , which is designed to follow up the Council Resolution on the framework for European cooperation in the field of youth , the Presidency intends to support the process of awareness-raising to increase the involvement of young people in policy-making and decision-making in areas which affect them .
It is also proposed that suitable strategies should then be drawn up taking these considerations into account , following an analysis of the results of the consultation on the participation of and provision of information to young citizens of the European Union .
I regard this as an interesting proposal which merits reflection and in-depth consideration .
As Mr Fini and Mr Frattini stated earlier today , there is an enormous commitment to transparency on our part in order to maximise participation in the important process of creating a new Constitution for the European Union not only by Members of this House and all the institutions , but also by Europe 's citizens .
Your comment will , therefore , certainly be taken into consideration , Mrs Kauppi .
I shall ensure that we ascertain how this proposal might be adopted .
Question No 6 by Mihail Papayannakis ( H-0443 / 03 ) :
Subject : Detainees in Iraq
In a recent press release Amnesty International expresses serious concerns regarding the conditions under which hundreds of Iraqis are being detained ( in the Abu Ghraib prison and in specially adapted detention areas in Baghdad airport ) . These detainees have been arrested by the occupying forces in Iraq .
In particular , the humanitarian organisation 's charges relate to the absence of legal assistance for detainees , the impossibility of communication with their families and the lack of proper access to drinking water and hygiene facilities .
At the same time , the organisation states that there are well-founded suspicions that a considerable number of those being held suffered cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment immediately after and during their arrests .
What does the Council consider to be the legal status and responsibilities of the occupying forces in Iraq , and how can they guarantee the fundamental rights of the inhabitants of the country 's occupied areas ?
The Council , which never makes statements on the basis of press stories , has not received any official information about the events referred to by the honourable Member in his question .
In particular , the Council has not discussed the situation of prisoners in Iraq , although the issue of human rights in Iraq continues to be of enormous concern .
The Council is closely following all aspects of the situation , including , of course , the issue of human rights .
The responsible authorities and specific obligations under applicable international law of the United States and the United Kingdom as occupying powers are the subject of Resolution 1483 ( 2003 ) of the United Nations Security Council .
This resolution also calls upon all concerned to comply fully with their obligations under international law , in particular the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the 1907 Hague Regulations .
Mr President , as you can see , the question by my honourable friend , Mr Papayannakis , starts with a press release by Amnesty International .
There is a legal problem with the detainees , but there is also a problem with their fundamental rights , their inability to communicate with their families , with drinking water , sanitation and so on .
One of the occupying forces , the United Kingdom , is a Member State of the European Union .
Would the Council be prepared to put Mr Papayannakis 's questions to the government of the United Kingdom so that it can give a reply ?
I think that the whole of Europe is open to criticism as the result of this situation .
I would like to check the accuracy of the comments you have just made , since , as I have already said , we have not , in actual fact , received any official information or communications about this .
We will therefore check to establish exactly what the situation is and we will then proceed on that basis .
Question No 7 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0446 / 03 ) :
Subject : Euro-Mediterranean dialogue and the status of women
The 19-20 June 2003 Thessaloniki European Council Presidency conclusions include the following : Paragraph 66 ( Relations with the Arab world ) : ' The European Union is convinced that it must strengthen its partnership with the Arab world .
It intends to promote a closer political dialogue , pluralism and democratic reform ? '
Paragraph 68 : ' ? the civil society of the countries of the region , including women , is expected to play an important role in promoting democratic values , social awareness , education and development . '
However , the personal status which women in some eastern and southern Mediterranean countries still have constitutes nothing less than an infringement of the human rights of the individual .
Modernising such societies involves including women in democratisation processes .
The leaders of countries who try to modernise in technological and economic terms alone whilst leaving the structures of obsolete , patriarchal societies untouched will fail .
Nowadays , women are the most important factor in the modernisation process , since when women bring themselves up to date , society as a whole follows suit .
What form , therefore , is the Italian Presidency 's action going to take as it endeavours to promote women in the Mediterranean area ?
The Barcelona Declaration of November 1995 recognised the vital role of women in development and the need for them to play an active part in economic and social life and in job creation .
Similarly , the MEDA II Regulation referred to the need to recognise and strengthen the economic and social role of women and to the importance of education and of the creation of jobs for women .
One innovative feature of the Barcelona Process is the regional cooperation aspect , with regional programmes open to everyone .
The promotion of opportunities for women in this context was highlighted by the Euro-Mediterranean Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs held in Brussels in November 2001 , and also by the ministerial meetings in Valencia and Crete , which took place in April 2002 and May 2003 respectively , which welcomed the efforts made in the Euro-Mediterranean context to promote equal opportunities for men and women .
This has led to the creation of the Euromed regional programme on the role of women in economic life , scheduled for 2004 , with a budget of EUR 5 million , which is intended to promote opportunities for women by encouraging capacity building and information provision .
The programme seeks to have action plans drawn up at national level , focussing on access and participation for women in the job market , supporting legislative reforms and drawing up policies that foster active training and the active development of the job market .
It also encourages the promotion of women in the business world by creating networks for women active in the liberal professions and in business , and by facilitating access for women to financial instruments .
During the Italian Presidency , we will see the completion of the process of defining priority cooperation sectors in which intervention is envisaged , and , during the second half of 2003 , the Commission 's EuropeAid Cooperation Office will publish a call for proposals for this specific programme .
This is certainly a highly important subject and we are aware of the need to make progress in this direction .
There is also scope for greater emphasis on women 's issues in the political dialogue , and such emphasis is justified .
We will therefore be sure to take your comments fully into consideration , Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , and we will also commit ourselves to seeking to achieve the best possible results .
As the time allotted to questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 8 to 32 will be replied to in writing
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports , produced on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation :
A5-0273 / 2003 by Mr Paul A.A.J.G. Lannoye , on the Communication from the Commission on water management in developing countries : policy and priorities for EU development cooperation ( COM ( 2002 ) 132 - C5-0335 / 2002- 2002 / 2179 ( COS ) ) ;
and
A5-0277 / 2003 by Mrs Luisa Morgantini , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council on trade and development - assisting developing countries to benefit from trade ( COM ( 2002 ) 513 - 2002 / 2282 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , we have before us the motion for a resolution adopted by the Committee on Development and Cooperation on the Commission communication on water management in developing countries and priorities for EU development cooperation , and on the establishment of an EU water fund , which the plenary is to vote on at noon tomorrow .
In practice we are considering two related motions .
I would firstly like to recall the situation in which a substantial minority of our fellow humans on this planet find themselves as regards access to water .
In all , 1.7 billion people do not have access to drinking water .
Three billion people have no access to sanitation .
The number of people who die each day from diseases linked to a lack of drinking water and of sanitation is put at 30 000 .
Water is an essential natural resource for life , health , food and general well-being .
The United Nations Committee on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights has enshrined access to water as a fundamental human right .
The 145 countries that have ratified the International Covenant on Economic , Social and Cultural Rights have an obligation to ensure that everyone has access to water , equitably and without discrimination .
The issue that is therefore becoming ever more pressing is this : what sort of cooperation policy is needed to help poor countries to meet the vital challenge of making drinking water available to everyone ?
Back in 1991 , at the end of the World Water Decade , an international commitment was declared to provide safe drinking water for all by 2000 .
Two years after that deadline , it had to be recognised at Johannesburg in 2002 that this commitment was a long way from having been met , despite the efforts of the World Bank in particular .
The situation could even be said to have deteriorated somewhat .
A new , scaled-down objective was agreed at Johannesburg : to halve the number of people without access to safe drinking water and sanitation by 2015 .
The European Union wishes to play an active part in achieving this objective and the Commission has set out its priorities in the communication before us .
In the motion for a resolution to be voted upon at noon tomorrow , the Committee on Development and Cooperation suggests that the following priorities should be adopted , aware as it is that it would scarcely be credible to continue along the path mapped out by the World Bank in 1993 in its report on Water Resources Management .
It has in fact become apparent that the privatisation of water services in accordance with the ' full cost recovery ' principle has generally led to an increase in charges , preventing the poorest communities in the poorest countries from having access to drinking water .
This means that the solution identified in no way solves the problem , and if anything exacerbates it .
We therefore think it is essential for water distribution to be regarded as a public service .
The public-private partnership system may be one means of improving access to water , but it should not be viewed as a panacea .
We also believe that a pricing system should be adopted which allows everyone access to the water required to cover essential needs and ensures efficient use of water by giving users responsibility .
As regards management , the countries concerned have both the right and the duty to adopt a policy that clearly involves local populations in management .
Given that the Committee on Development and Cooperation believes that significant financial resources need to be devoted to achieving the necessary investment in the countries concerned , it welcomes the establishment of a European Water Fund .
Nevertheless , it considers that the main aim of this fund should be to support the beneficiary countries ' water policy , which should be based on democratic management and fair distribution .
We therefore propose that the management of the fund should be based on an EU-ACP partnership .
Furthermore , the Committee on Development and Cooperation is of the view that the success of the fund depends on participation by its beneficiaries , who must be involved in the processes of design , implementation , monitoring and assessment , as well as in the management and control of the fund , as I have already said .
We also believe that it is important to devise new categories of financial instrument , based on international solidarity .
The first thing that comes to mind here is to call for the ACP countries ' debt to be cancelled .
The money thus released would allow these countries to fund basic water supply and purification infrastructures .
We would also like the Commission to study - and please note that I am saying ' study ' , we are not talking about a proposal as such - the scope for introducing a tax on bottled mineral water in the EU countries and in the relevant ACP countries , a very low tax , about half a euro cent , which would make an important contribution to the fund .
Lastly , I would like to offer the various political groups my views about the amendments that have been tabled .
Amendment No 1 , tabled by the Socialist Group , complements the existing proposals very well , even if the report was adopted unanimously in committee .
As regards Amendment No 2 , which relates to recital L , I would prefer it if the Socialist Group would eliminate certain terms that weaken the text .
I also find Amendment No 11 , tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , perfectly acceptable .
Furthermore , I myself tabled Amendment No 5 on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , and this amendment seems very important to me on the eve of the Cancún Summit : in line with what I have just said , my group invites the Commission to withdraw the demand , made in the context of the GATS Agreement , that water distribution and purification services should be liberalised .
We regard this demand as running counter to the essential objective of providing access to water for all in poor countries .
If it is adopted , this amendment will strengthen the European Parliament 's political message .
I therefore urge you to support it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that my report reflects the balance between the various viewpoints in this House , although the key point is of course the fact that trade is not the solution for development .
I would like to thank everyone , Members and Secretariat staff alike , because there have been a great many amendments and we managed to achieve an agreed position in committee .
We are on the eve of the Fifth World Trade Organisation Ministerial Conference , which is to be held in Cancún .
In 1999 , in the run up to Seattle , Commissioner Lamy , who will be negotiating on behalf of the 15 EU countries at Cancún , was given a specific mandate .
However , the issues up for negotiation were different .
I believe that the WTO now has enormous influence and that it has assumed too great a role , so much so that it almost seems to have become the new United Nations .
In fact , this is just one of the reasons .
I think that a new mandate is desirable , bearing in mind , not least , the objectives and commitments entered into by the European Union in different international forums .
Furthermore , the Doha Round , which was called a development round , has not been followed up ; in fact , the proportionality relationship between liberalisation and development has not been proven to be correct .
Quite the opposite , in fact : indiscriminate liberalisation and deregulation in developing countries have , in practice , proved to be extremely damaging to development objectives .
Even where liberalisation has led to an increase in GDP , the distribution of wealth within the countries concerned has very often deteriorated .
For this reason the report calls for regional integration between developing countries , and a model of symmetrical market opening , so that the developed countries can dismantle their barriers to trade , including non-tariff barriers , giving the countries of the southern hemisphere the time they need to step up their production , make it more competitive , and expand their markets .
I also think it is important to remember , inter alia , how much we , the countries of the northern hemisphere , have benefited historically from protectionism on the way to our present level of development .
Nevertheless , every now and again we are surprised by the fact that the Commission insists , for example , and despite the resolution adopted by this House on 3 July 2003 , on embarking on negotiations on the Singapore Issues .
I do not have time to list all those issues , but they include public procurement .
I do not think it is appropriate to open negotiations on these issues .
The reasons for this relate , on the one hand , to the competences and power of the WTO , and on the other hand to the problem that I have already mentioned , namely the developing countries ' lack of negotiating capacity .
Indeed , these same countries stress in their reports that they are not in a position to support further negotiations .
I believe , in fact , that it is vital to tackle other issues and to give the special and differential treatment clause some real substance , by implementing a global system of guaranteed prices to support producers of commodities such as coffee and cotton .
The issues that need to be dealt with in terms of development are achieving and promoting fair trade - something that is , in fact , being pioneered in civil society - and the provision of assistance to countries to enable them to diversify their production without creating enclaves in export sectors , by actually promoting the integration of those sectors with the rest of the economy .
It is my belief that development objectives should , above all , be related to the well-being of the population .
I therefore consider that the Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement , which states that the agreement may and should be interpreted so as to preserve the right of the Member States to protect public health , should be implemented without delay and without resorting to agreements stipulating procedures that are so restrictive and bureaucratic as to be unworkable .
This aspect was covered thoroughly in Mr Lannoye 's report , and in my own report , I , too , have , for example , stressed that it is important for essential goods such as water not to be left to market forces alone and that the European Union should pursue a policy of public funding not only for water distribution , but also to bring about the democratisation of water management as regards the management of springs , rivers and basins .
Any discussion of development should include the issue of debt , which was not , in fact , covered in the Commission document , although I concede that it was not strictly relevant .
Highly indebted countries have debt-servicing obligations that can siphon off as much as a quarter of the value of their exports .
I believe that the EU should commit itself to cancelling developing countries ' debt , whilst providing for mechanisms for monitoring how capital sums resulting from debt cancellation are invested , so as to ensure that the benefits are genuinely felt by the population at large .
Another issue is the enactment of a code of conduct comprising ethical , social and environmental clauses intended for European undertakings that make direct investments .
With regard to the negotiations to be held in Cancún , it must be pointed out that we need a democratic , transparent system within the WTO and sufficient negotiating capacity for all countries , which do not exist at present .
These conditions are therefore virtually indispensable if we are to establish a level playing field .
I believe that we have a long road ahead of us .
We must act so as to correct the enormous disparities that exist , which means that we need not unrestrained trade but , rather , trade designed to meet the social and economic needs of all the people on this earth .
. Mr President , I cannot help but say that one of the problems in this world is that there is too little jungle left .
On the subject of water , the Conference of the Parties to the Convention to Combat Desertification is currently taking place in Havana and the Commission is represented there .
The big problem is that the desert is expanding and tropical forests are in bad shape , threatened by greed and crime .
We are trying to do something about that .
This has an influence on the balance of water .
Watershed management is directly influenced , micro- and macroclimates are changing and all this relates to the first of the two reports we are discussing tonight .
Perhaps in some years from now the law of the jungle will sound more like a reference to a paradise lost , because the jungle is a symbol of unspoilt nature .
But I am sure this is not what Mrs Morgantini wanted to discuss .
I am faced now with the problem of having to address two different subjects at the same time .
I will start with Mrs Morgantini 's motion for a resolution .
It calls on the Commission to reduce its pressure on developing countries to indiscriminately liberalise and deregulate their markets .
There is no such pressure .
The Commission is collaborating with developing countries to help put in place a sound regulatory framework for the provision of basic services .
I want to draw the attention of Parliament , and especially members of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , to the communication on the reform of state-owned enterprises that we have pursued in the Commission .
This is also extremely relevant to Mr Lannoye 's report .
We are issuing this communication in order to have firmer ground in our battle against , amongst others , the World Bank and the IMF , concerning privatisation .
If we talk about water and the conditionality of privatising the management of water resources , my reaction has been that for a country like Burkina Faso the national responsibility of the government there to manage water carefully and in the interests of its citizens is as important - or more important - a national priority for that country as the missile defence shield is for the government in Washington .
That is the approach .
This Commission has been able to make sure that Burkina Faso was not forced to privatise its national water company as a condition for the big Ziga dam project providing water for the capital .
A project where the World Bank is one of a handful of big donors and partners , and where this was initially a condition from the Bank , it has been implemented without that condition being kept , or insisted upon by the Bank , because others - i.e. the Commission - stood behind the government of Burkina Faso in resisting this condition .
You will see in this communication a much more nuanced approach to this whole issue .
However , when I hear Mrs Morgantini arguing that , as far as water is concerned we should move away from the commercial way of thinking - I say yes and no !
What does ' commercial ' mean ?
A private , commercial , short-term , profit-maximising philosophy is clearly detrimental to handling water in developing countries .
But if by ' commercial ' you mean that ends have to meet , that is , it has to have economic sustainability , then there is no way whatsoever of escaping that commitment .
This is what makes things so extremely difficult .
Kinshasa now has more than seven million inhabitants , of which not many more than one million have access to sanitation or safe sewage treatment .
Therefore , most of the population , not only in the big slums in the exploding mega-cities of the south , but also in the emerging middle class , does not have even near-normal sanitation .
They get fresh water and pay for it by the litre , but it is almost impossible to organise the next phase in the cycle economically .
It is too long-term and too expensive .
The real picture is not that some water companies from the north are out for quick profits in the south .
There are no quick profits .
Therefore , the divisive image of the past round of the international water debate , especially among NGOs in Europe , has been wrong - it is easy to warn against the risk of undue profiteering from more donor-funded activity in the water sector - but this is not the real problem .
The real problem is to attract long-term , humble , down-to-earth funding for the necessary investments .
We are nowhere near achieving that .
It is very similar to the problem of the health sector .
Annual public health sector spending per capita in Sub-Saharan Africa is somewhere between one and six US dollars .
You do not get very far with that kind of money .
It is exactly the same proportion when we look at water and sanitation .
In many ways it is easier to do what needs to be done in the rural villages .
We know what to do there .
It is not that difficult and our technology is quite overwhelming .
With deep-bore holes or pipes for transportation , our ability as a donor is quite fantastic .
However , I see a big problem in provincial towns and the big mega-cities of the south .
That is where cholera and other problems sneak in as a collateral problem because of bad sanitation .
Deciding on how to organise this takes much more than repeatedly mobilising well-established divisive images of private or public money .
It is also too easy to take a shortcut by cancelling all these countries ' debts .
Please be realistic .
We are doing everything we can on that front .
Only the genuine addition of real money from the pockets of taxpayers in the north will make a difference .
That is the real battle .
We won some rounds in that battle over the European contribution at the Monterrey Conference .
That is where we are looking for more money for water and sanitation .
This is why we urge Member States to accept our proposal to accelerate spending and to create a water facility to ensure that the money , which is still conditional for the 9th EDF - the EUR 1 billion that depends on performance - could be accepted and mobilised to accelerate our action on the water issue .
On trade , we are forced to be optimistic and constructive and to push for Europe to stay on a line of progressive constructivity from the WTO meeting in Cancún and the Doha development round .
I am still somewhat optimistic .
It has to succeed .
In Mrs Morgantini 's report there should be a stronger reference to the work immediately in front of us and the challenge and the potential for our partners - especially our ACP partners - to do what is immediately possible by opening up more regional markets between them .
Who will invest in producing paint or soap in Uganda if such products cannot be exported to neighbouring countries ?
We tried to find out what happened regarding mosquito nets .
Why were no mosquito nets being produced in Africa ?
The answer was that , as there were 17 % tariff barriers , they were imported from Hong Kong .
Regional liberalisation is the name of the game and this is what we have on the table in the Economic Partnership Agreement negotiations .
Parliament should give more of a helping hand in this .
We are taking the safe route .
Whatever happens in the WTO , the Cotonou route is there and it would be highly beneficial for our ACP partners to engage strongly in it .
I have cut across the themes .
I look forward to listening to the next contributions and , as always , to engaging in dialogue with this Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I should like to extend a warm thanks to Mrs Morgantini and Mr Lannoye for their interesting reports , but I would like to make some observations .
I should even like to shift the focus in some cases .
For example , Liberals believe that fair trade , in particular , is one of the best ways of fighting poverty .
Needless to say , this does not mean that we must impose our diktat on the developing countries .
The WTO forums offer the opportunity , in joint consultation , of reaching agreements that are fair for all partners .
We therefore expect Cancún to create better world trade conditions .
Something that the developed countries certainly have to offer is knowledge .
International companies have extensive know-how , which they can pass on to their partners in the developing countries .
As my party has already highlighted in an amendment , contributing this know-how results in increased economic activity , which promotes a considerable diversification of products .
It is also to be welcomed that many businesses commit to improving education and health infrastructures for the local population .
This is with good reason .
It is also in their interest to have a healthy and educated labour force , but this must be stimulated .
I should specifically like to call for greater involvement of industry in development cooperation , provided this is done according to the normal criteria - in other words , wages must be reasonable and child labour must be banned .
I also think that too little attention is being paid to the trade options at regional level .
There are quite a few sticking points there too .
Water management is a perfect example of this .
Worldwide , there are some 260 reservoirs that are shared by various countries .
Over the past 50 years , some 1 800 conflicts , armed or not , as the case may be , have broken out over these .
Mutual consultation and sound agreements could have prevented these .
Access to drinking water and proper sanitary provisions are fundamental rights of the population .
That goes without saying .
My group calls for sound cooperation between local and national governments and the private sector , and this is where the European Union must take the lead and have a highly stimulating effect .
My group does object to the rapporteur pointing an accusatory finger at the World Bank and the IMF .
We emphasise that the grant of aid to developing countries must be commensurate with the needs of the country in question , and have tabled amendments to this effect .
Liberals believe that the condition for partnership must also apply to the water fund that Mr Prodi proposed .
We deem participation of the countries concerned highly important .
With regard to the previously mentioned water fund , I should like to repeat that the EP 's lack of involvement in this proposal was a missed opportunity .
We therefore demand full involvement in its implementation .
After all , this is the best guarantee for democratic legitimacy .
Mr President , in all the EU 's key documents , combating poverty is held up as the primary goal of development policy .
It is undisputed that the EU spends substantial sums of money on development assistance and makes every effort to conclude a variety of partnership and cooperation agreements in the different regions of the world , for both sides ' benefit .
What is also undisputed is that despite all these efforts , poverty in the world has increased , especially during the last decade , and there appears to be no imminent prospect of any change in this trend .
This is especially worrying in light of the fact that this rising poverty is one of the sources of terrorism .
Parliament has before it a number of reports covering extremely important aspects of development policy .
What is at issue is no more and no less than the use of increasingly scarce global resources .
Today , wars are still being fought over oil , as in the Gulf , but violent conflicts are already emerging on the horizon over water .
The USA and other industrial powers declare those areas of the developing world where there is oil and gas and other strategically important resources to be part of their sphere of interest , which apparently even gives them the right to wage war , but it is primarily among the developing countries that water is a problem - either because the resources are inadequate or because access to water is denied .
There is still time to prevent the impending catastrophe with a careful strategy and targeted expenditure .
Mr Lannoye 's report identifies possible constructive approaches which deserve to be given greater attention .
The situation in the health sector is no less precarious .
Already , in some countries of the EU , the motto seems to be that if you are poor , you die earlier , because the reforms aim to establish a two-tier system , but the situation in the developing countries is far more acute .
Millions of people in Africa are dying every year of diseases capable of being treated with drugs that have existed for years in the industrialised countries .
The newly-negotiated WTO compromise on the import of cheap generic drugs comes too late , for a start , and , secondly , it is so hedged about with formalities that it has doubtful prospects of success .
Mrs Morgantini 's report highlights problems concerning this aspect of trade in particular .
The rapporteur and , indeed , the entire Committee on Development and Cooperation are seeking to bring their experience and authority to bear in order to combat growing poverty with all its manifestations and impacts .
We expect the same and more from the Council and the Commission .
The twenty-first century has only just begun , yet the signs point to storms ahead rather than peaceful co-existence based on solidarity .
Development policy must be redefined with greater depth and scope , and a new approach is also needed if humankind is to have any chance of life and survival on earth .
Mr President , we have just heard Mr Lannoye and Mrs Morgantini present their excellent reports , which we totally support .
This also gives us an opportunity to adopt the reports before the WTO Ministerial Conference opens in Cancún , and I hope that Commissioner Lamy , who will be representing the EU next week , will oblige us by taking the reports into account as part of his negotiating mandate , especially as regards the key issue of preventing water privatisation .
I am sure my friend Mr Lannoye will not hold it against me if I say I attach particular importance to Mrs Morgantini 's report .
The Commission wants to help the developing countries to take advantage of trade .
The question is , will the WTO 's rules allow them to do that ?
I am not sure , given the disagreements that currently divide the developing countries and the western countries over the Singapore Issues , for example , that the European Union is best placed to support the position of the countries of the South , as it has its own interests to defend , the most striking examples being agriculture and fisheries .
Helping the developing countries to take advantage of trade first and foremost means changing the rules governing trade to make them more favourable to developing countries .
The countries of the South were first encouraged to export commodities with low added value , only to have restrictions imposed on them , and they are now reeling from the impact of the fall in commodity prices and the problems in accessing markets in the countries of the North .
As for the WTO , it does not so much regulate markets as liberalise trade .
For example , the common market organisations for coffee and cotton and the price stabilisation systems for raw materials have at present simply disappeared .
What is more , does helping countries really mean helping their populations ?
Do the hypothetical benefits of trade really go to the poorest people , or do they get no further than the top of the ladder in these countries ?
Promoting fair trade is still the only viable long-term strategy .
On the one hand , we have to pay the producers in the countries of the South a fair price for their commodities ; on the other hand , there is an urgent need to open up our markets to imports from developing countries and to abandon subsidies to our farmers .
To that extent , the Cancún conference gives some room for optimism .
I hope they will not be disappointed .
It is only by changing and diversifying their production that the developing countries will really be able to establish their independence and play a key role in world trade .
The Commission 's efforts should be directed towards achieving that objective , and this is the issue that the Cancún conference should focus its work on . Helping developing countries to develop their trade above all means helping the populations of those countries to try to live a better life .
Can trade be a means of ensuring a better life ?
I do not doubt that it can , but it is certainly not the only way .
Mr President , nobody can dispute the need to create a fair global trading system , but we should not delude ourselves in thinking that fully-liberalised trade will in itself bring about fairness .
In terms of agricultural policy , for example , abolishing all market support and protection would remove about two-thirds of EU farmers from the land .
This is in nobody 's interests in either rural or urban areas .
The current development round at the WTO is supposed to give special attention to the needs of developing countries and their desire to better integrate themselves into the global trading system .
This is positive and should , in my view , be fully supported .
Sixty per cent of the world 's population lives in rural areas and the vast majority are in developing countries .
It is worth noting , at the same time , that trade in agricultural products represented less than 6 % of total global trade in 2000 .
Economic growth , in the initial stages , depends more on developing countries ' internal markets than access to markets elsewhere .
The experience of agricultural trade liberalisation in Mexico should serve as a warning against the promotion of fully open markets as a solution for the needs of developing countries .
Two decades of this policy in the North American Free Trade Area have led to an increase in rural poverty , malnutrition and emigration .
It has also caused increased workloads in agriculture , particularly for women , and an increase in consumer prices .
Increased profit and market control by multinationals has been at the expense of small family farms .
If we add to this lost national revenues and damage to the environment and to biodiversity we see that Mexico 's experience of seeking to develop its agricultural sector through trade liberalisation has had devastating consequences .
In terms of creating a fair trading system , the EU has made a significant contribution with its everything-but-arms initiative .
We have committed ourselves to eliminating the customs duties applied to the exports of the world 's 48 poorest countries .
I should certainly hope that the Commission will be forcefully urging other rich countries to follow this lead .
Mr President , Mrs Morgantini broaches the right subjects in her report .
Firstly I should like to consider the medicines for health crises in developing countries , for AIDS and malaria for example .
Countries without a pharmaceuticals industry of their own are dependent on the import of cheap medicines .
Last weekend 's agreement has been characterised as unworkable by health organisations because of the complicated import procedure .
The European Union is therefore going to have to continue working for a simplification of this procedure in Cancún to ensure that in practice these countries do not remain reliant on expensive medicines .
Secondly we need to make trade in general fairer .
Not by supporting fair trade financially , but through fair rules .
In other words , standards not just for working conditions , but also for animal welfare and the environment .
Working conditions , including child labour , merit more specific detail in the Commission document .
These standards will only lead to fair trade if we help the developing countries to produce and to trade in accordance with them .
For imports into the European market , in particular , to some extent similar standards must be employed to prevent an improper difference in competitive conditions .
This will also encourage other countries to increase the quality of their products and production methods .
After all protectionism is not the purpose of standardisation , as many developing countries fear .
Finally , the low prices of raw materials and agricultural products constitute an impediment to development in many countries .
Overcapacity is leading to extreme difficulties in a number of sectors , such as the coffee sector .
The rapporteur rightly says that Europe must make an effort to bring about a trend towards higher prices for these products .
Restricting production is a useful tool in this regard and must be recognised as such by Europe in Cancún .
Free trade is after all not the solution for these problems .
Both the Commission document and the report recognise this and consequently deserve our full support .
Mr President , I stand here tonight conscious that in Cancún the Commissioner and others will have to battle to protect very poor people .
I would like you , Mr President , to count to ten .
When you end that count , 80 people in the world will have died of starvation .
Every second , eight people die of malnutrition .
What is it that these people can do to make all of us better off ?
The only thing they know they can do is to grow more food .
But the one thing we prevent them from doing is to grow food that they can export to us .
Because we want to protect our cows and our farmers and our industry , we give more money to a cow each day than 600 million people have to live on .
We give two dollars a day to a cow .
The poorest people in this world have to live on one dollar .
In Cancún we can make a difference .
When I came to this Parliament from the British House of Commons , I came with great expectations .
I came with the expectations that the European Union meant what it said .
I came with the expectation that the Doha Round was a development round .
I came with the expectation that the Commissioner sitting there would have a spine to go and fight , that Mr Lamy , who had introduced ' Everything But Arms ' , would go and fight .
Well , I want to see them fight .
Because if they do not fight , what are their lives about ?
What are our lives about ?
What is all this about when we know that now , for the first time in our history , we can make a direct link between poverty and the propagation of terrorism ?
We must understand that link and we must start doing something about it .
I come from a very privileged background in Sri Lanka , and I know people here come from very privileged backgrounds around the world .
We must understand that link and have the spine and the courage to fight to allow people - who can do things such as grow and market their food and create rural agriculture in the developing world - to export produce .
We should stop protecting our cows and our farmers in Europe inefficiently , and stop destroying our own customer base .
Unless we are able to do that , we are going to have to pick up a huge bill .
Mr President , it is high time that forces were joined to help the developing countries to greater prosperity .
The best way of doing this is generalised free trade , which offers the best guarantees for sustainable economic growth in all parts of the world .
It is certainly the case that the liberalisation of trade is the key to development , but it also needs an important nuance .
I argue for the free market , not the unbridled or unlimited free market .
The free market does not actually exist any more .
Today we talk of a socially corrected market with attention to social standards , the environment , consumer protection , respect for intellectual rights , etc .
These constraints must be a permanent factor in the inclusion of less developed countries in the world trade system .
In the next WTO round , we from Europe must certainly see the developing countries as our partners rather than as our opponents .
I do not share the view of the rapporteur , Mrs Morgantini when she says that there is no evidence of liberalisation stimulating the growth of prosperity .
Globalisation offers benefits to all countries that engage in the world economy .
Similar countries that have pursued a different trade strategy demonstrate marked differences in the area of per capita income .
I am thinking for example of South Korea compared with North Korea , of East Germany compared with West Germany before unification .
I am thinking of the Asian tigers compared with the Southern Asian countries .
Or even more blatantly , about 20 years ago China and Africa were at the same level of development .
Since China has resolutely pursued the path of an open economy and has engaged in the world trade system , the results have been spectacular .
On average , the Chinese today earn three times as much as the Africans .
The difference is enormous not just where income levels , but also knowledge levels are concerned .
The rich may well have grown richer as a result of globalisation , but any question of the poor growing poorer is manifestly untrue .
UN figures prove it .
The proportion of the world 's population living in extreme poverty has fallen in 10 years from 29 % to 23 % .
At the end of the nineties , there were 826 million people undernourished , or 40 million fewer than in the early nineties , despite the population explosion .
The infant mortality rate fell worldwide from 64 per 1 000 in 1980 to 56 per 1 000 in the nineties .
Around 80 % of people in the developing countries have access to good water supplies , and illiteracy has fallen to 20 % .
That is not perfect , but things are moving in the right direction .
There is still much to be done , but there is also hope .
Proper globalisation is the way ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , we certainly support those aspects of the report that censure the system , and for that reason we will be voting for the report , despite the impotence that it expresses .
What sort of a society is it in which nearly a third of humankind does not even have access to that most basic commodity , drinking water ?
Millions of people in poor countries die every year if not of thirst then at least from the many diseases spread by contaminated water .
Is it because there are insurmountable technical obstacles to providing all the inhabitants of our planet with drinking water ?
No .
Everyone knows that it is quite simply about money .
Everyone also knows that twenty-first century society has accumulated more than enough material and financial resources to provide this .
But water itself and its distribution have become a colossal source of profits for the multinational conglomerates .
These conglomerates - Vivendi , the former Société Générale des Eaux , Suez , Bouygues - are free to raise water prices while international institutions vote through resolutions and prepare the ground for them by systematically dismantling public water services in poor countries .
Their profit is dirty money , contaminated by the blood of the millions of people who die of dysentery , cholera , typhus , malaria and bilharzia .
In 10 years , the number of human beings without drinking water has risen from 1.2 billion to 1.7 billion .
This is a crime against humanity and speaks volumes about the deadly harm inflicted by the current organisation of the economy , which plunges a part of humanity into barbarism .
Mr President , the next round of World Trade talks begins in Mexico next week .
I have been nominated to act as a negotiator at these talks for the European Parliament .
I certainly hope that the countries participating in these negotiations - including the European Union and the United States of America - come to an agreement on one very sensitive issue .
There are 42 million people in the world who are sufferers of the AIDS virus - many of whom are based in Africa - yet the technology and the treatment is available to combat diseases such as AIDS .
If developing countries can be given the right to distribute these much-needed medicines to their own people on their own licensing terms , then the costs of these medicines would be substantially reduced .
There is now a growing political will to introduce changes to the international intellectual property rights system so that drugs to combat AIDS can be given to those countries which do not have the money to pay for them .
We all know what our responsibilities are when it comes to the issue of combating AIDS and we must act accordingly .
A successful outcome to these negotiations would mean saving the lives of millions of people in the world .
This round of trade talks must truly be a development round .
Saving people 's lives must always come before any doctrine on intellectual property rights .
Mr President , Mr Lannoye 's report contains very accurate and incisive criticisms of the negative effects of privatising water supply services .
I wish to take this opportunity of supplementing Mr Lannoye 's criticisms with further arguments , to the effect that privatisation also weakens the protection of precious water resources .
In Denmark , the supply of water is based upon a principle of solidarity when it comes to prices and the accessibility of resources .
In Denmark , the supply of water services is decentralised , primarily public and to a lesser extent private , but it is always user / owner controlled .
That is a very important factor for ensuring the continued protection of sources of water .
The public dimension of the Danish water supply services is very active in demanding as high levels of protection as possible and in demanding an end to possible sources of pollution .
The private dimension is , however , very satisfied with the diluted requirements that the EU is now coming up with and that mean a weakening of the limit values for pesticides in our drinking water .
Experience in Great Britain and elsewhere also shows that , when the water supply is turned into a commodity and privatised , there is no more protection of resources .
At the time when the EU was negotiating in connection with the Drinking Water Directive , London 's private water suppliers were thus lobbied on the same basis as the European chemical industry with a view to our simply allowing large quantities of pesticides into the drinking water . It was easier to earn money that way .
As I see it , the only sure way to protect sources is not to use pesticides .
I am therefore very pleased that , in its conclusion , Mr Lannoye 's report has , as its priority , the need to introduce production methods , in both the north and the south , that promote environmentally friendly agriculture , based to a significant degree upon local resources , green technologies and regional cooperatives .
I am delighted to vote in favour of Mr Lannoye 's report .
Mr President , in the last 10 years there have been several international conferences on the theme of access to clean drinking water .
We know that in many areas there has been failure , not least in the commitment to ensure that everyone would have access to clean water by the year 2000 .
In 10 years the number of those suffering from a shortage of clean water has instead increased by half a billion , the number at present being approximately 1.7 billion .
One in four people in the world drinks dirty water .
The situation is compelling decision-makers to take a serious look at whether the measures taken have been at all the right ones .
Universal , equitable and non-discriminatory access to clean water is a basic human right .
A shortage of water is a self-evident cause of the spiral of poverty .
Experience has shown that it is impossible to leave the problem of water shortages to the market to resolve .
The invisible hand of the market is hardly likely to hand a glass of water to someone who is thirsty .
We also have to recognise the fact that privatisation normally means higher prices for water and purification services , which naturally cause the greatest problems for the poorest people .
Because access to water has been established as a basic right it should affect the way we think about it .
Water resources should not be seen as one country 's private property , but as a shared global resource .
It must be said , however , that if water is treated as a free commodity to be shared , it weakens the potential for organising a highly functional water supply .
For that reason , the flexible practices called for in the amendments in order to mix the public with the private are needed , as long as a person 's right to water is considered to be something basic that can never be given up .
Mr Lannoye 's report intelligently highlights the connection between access to water and purification and hygiene .
Around 6 000 people , mainly children , die each day of infectious diseases , often caused by poor hygiene .
It would be a fundamental error to view water , sanitation and hygiene as separate issues .
Now , more than anything , we should increase those domestic and international resources that can be used to improve the water supply and sanitation in city slums and shanty villages as well as in rural areas .
Of key importance is linking sanitation with the water supply , which will not succeed if there is no substantial additional investment on the part of those responsible for the water supply .
We must , moreover , develop people-oriented technology for households as a solution to water and water purification problems .
I wish to express my support for Amendment No 19 , which requests the application of a water-debt trade-off , so that debts can be cancelled and the money used to fund basic water purification infrastructures .
Mr President , I would like to highlight two aspects of the Lannoye report on water .
Given that we will be represented at the WTO conference in Cancún next week , I would first like to mention the connection with the General Agreement on Trade in Services .
I think that the European Union should make its attitude clearer .
If we consider - and that seems very much what you were advocating , Commissioner - that water is a public good , then we should ensure that the public authorities keep control of water distribution in each and every country .
Of course , public-private partnerships can be used for funding .
But you yourself quoted the comparison - a rather daring one , it has to be said - with what other countries regard as vital .
Take anti-missile defence in the United States , for example .
No one could imagine suggesting to the United States that they should subject their anti-missile defence to the authority of a WTO dispute resolution body , with rules such as national treatment , most-favoured nation rules , or the obligation to award a contract to any other WTO country if it responds to an open invitation to tender in this crucial area .
When it comes to water , if we take your comparison further , developing countries , such as Burkina Faso for example , even if they have access to investors , to multinational companies , should very much retain control over the way in which those investors are involved .
I therefore believe that in the context of GATS - and I hope that the Commissioner responsible for development will have a decisive influence on those discussions , and that those discussions will not just relate to trade policy - we should not put pressure on these countries to liberalise their public services , in particular those relating to water , as a quid pro quo for giving them access to our markets , such as the agriculture market .
When it comes to financing , we certainly need a European fund , but I support Mr Lannoye 's comments .
As in the case of the European Structural Funds , we know that creating a market is not the same thing as creating a community .
Sometimes we have to support measures designed to make up for delays in development , which means that public finance is essential .
A European fund is vital .
We should even establish a world water fund , in the same way that UNAIDS exists at world level to treat persons suffering from AIDS .
Private finance alone will not be enough to achieve this , and we cannot be content just to indulge in engineering .
This will also mean increasing public funding .
As regards Mrs Morgantini 's report on the link between trade and development , I would say that even if everyone agrees that trade can contribute to development , it is still not enough just to open up borders - as some speakers including Mr De Clercq have suggested - as if that automatically gave the key to development .
Economic diversification is crucial .
We should draw more inspiration from what we have done ourselves .
Over a period , in a pragmatic and gradual way and by means of sectoral aid , we have to accept that the countries of the South can protect their own economies .
Encouraging them to create markets on the huge scale required is essentially the objective of regional integration .
But we should not adopt a systematic , dogmatic , one-size-fits-all approach to liberalisation , because that would exacerbate the deterioration in the terms of trade mentioned by Mrs Kinnock .
These countries will of course export in greater volumes and Mr Deva is right to say that we should increase their agricultural products ' access to the EU market , and we should reduce our subsidies to limit the effects of market distortion .
They will , however , always be exporting products with ever lower value on the world market .
These countries should be in a position to export more diversified , sophisticated and industrialised products .
We therefore need to revise our trade policy towards developing countries , by giving priority to the aspirations and objectives of trade policy and to those of the Commissioner responsible for development .
Mr President , I am sure you have seen it , that Oxfam cow , to which we are currently giving shelter in our Parliament .
For us Europeans , this cow is of course a symbol of affluence .
But let us be realistic , for people in the developing countries this cow stands for unfair world trade .
There is a good reason for Oxfam campaigning under the slogan ' Make trade fair , stop the dumping ' .
I cannot repeat it often enough , and Mr Deva has also used the example : for a fifth of the poorest people in the world , the amount that this European cow receives in subsidy per day is more than they have to live on each day .
In point of fact , the aim of our social democratic input at the WTO negotiations in Cancún next week is to come closer to genuinely fair world trade .
Mrs Morgantini 's report on aid and trade therefore comes at the right time .
It also clearly chooses the side of the developing countries .
Unambiguously , the rapporteur stresses that , two years ago , clear agreements were made in Doha , but that there are difficulties in following them and observing them .
First and foremost , it is the rich north - we may well look a little longer at the United States - that has been in default .
In June , also in Europe as a party to the treaty , we just in time reached an agreement on the reform of European agriculture .
This weekend we were finally able to reach an agreement , a huge breakthrough , on cheap medicines , following very strong resistance from the United States .
It was at the last minute , but it was undoubtedly a huge breakthrough .
Apart from agriculture and medicines , the core of the Doha negotiations , the trade in services will also be on the agenda in Cancún .
In his report Mr Lannoye takes a closer look at one of these services , that is the supply of water .
His argument is that water is public property .
I would say water production in particular , that is what my group actually supports .
Water production must therefore stay in government hands , but for many developing countries private capital is needed for water distribution .
The Commissioner has explained this .
That does not mean that it must not happen under the control of the government , which is responsible for access and pricing .
But 1.7 billion people have no access to clean drinking water and as many as three billion have no access to sanitary facilities .
There is a compelling need for a good policy in this regard .
Social democrats are in favour of public services remaining in government hands , a public responsibility of government control .
But that does not mean that the private sector does not have an important part to play in parts of water distribution .
This is the essence of the debate and here we agree with what the Commissioners said .
In my group , as my colleague has already said , there are different thoughts about this .
A second product that warrants special attention in the light of trade and development , and which is often overlooked in the discussion of agriculture , is cotton .
Four West African countries have called on the WTO to recognise the strategic importance of cotton for development , combating poverty , and food security in Western and Central Africa .
Ten million people are directly dependent on the production and export of cotton .
Their development is being hindered by trade barriers in the cotton sector , as a result of which prices are being kept artificially low .
Our plea is that , in Doha , we should take measures concerning products such as sugar and cotton .
We are also sure that the Commission can take action in this direction .
Then we will have fair trade .
More trade therefore means more success for the poor countries .
Mr President , knock on any mud hut in any poor country and ask the poor family inside what it needs most of all . There is only one answer : water .
Not democracy .
Not human rights .
Not medicines . Nothing else , just water .
If the European Union has allocated EUR one billion for water aid - and I believe Commissioner Nielson has been instrumental in this - I must congratulate the EU and the Commissioner .
What a fantastic job .
This is what these people need .
Sadly , it is not enough .
We need to do more and I ask the Commissioner to please make sure that this Parliament has a say in formulating water aid policy so that it is not lost in the clouds like the EDF .
Parliament needs to be involved .
I want this to happen .
I hope you will assure us of this because I do not want my colleague here to persuade the PPE-DE Group to vote against the Lannoye report tomorrow .
I understand what you are doing and I have confidence in it .
I would like to say a quick word about trade .
The poor countries need to process their products , not simply to export the raw products so that the value added is not received by them .
That is the key to trade .
I know Commissioner Nielson understands this and I know he is working for it .
I hope he will do more .
. The contribution by Mr Khanbhai corresponds to Mrs Sanders-ten Holte 's remarks about the wish of Parliament to be involved in anything relating to the Water Initiative and the Water Fund .
This is not difficult to understand .
The money we are talking about is part of the EDF .
We are working to set the budget for the EDF .
The Commission and Parliament are in full agreement on this , also for very principled reasons .
We want a special facility or fund in order to have a more flexible instrument , more ability to work across the board .
There is no reason for the worry expressed in the report by Mr Lannoye about the 0.3 % management of the fund .
This is not an attempt to create one solution .
It is more like a facility .
It does not matter if we use the word ' fund ' .
The main idea is to be able to accelerate actions as necessary and to be a catalyst for the various partnerships that it is possible to create and promote .
We are not talking about a conventional method of funding projects , but something that could accelerate things .
We hope that this debate and the welcome support from Parliament will make it possible for Member States to accept what we have proposed .
To be direct , this is about eliminating the risk of losing EUR 1 billion of the EUR 13.5 billion reserved in the 9th European Development Fund which is up for evaluation next year .
That money was made conditional some years ago , under the Cotonou Agreement and the 9th EDF , on the performance in the first part of the period .
This is a totally political judgement .
This is why we came up with the idea of reserving this money for the Water Initiative , in order to make sure that we all agree on this high-priority dossier and reserve the money for it so as to more or less lift this EUR 1 billion out of the general discussion .
That is what we are trying to do .
I hope that support from Parliament on this will muster enthusiasm among Member States .
Regarding the trade aspect of the discussion , I agree with Mr Belder about the very difficult situation in terms of coffee .
It is ironic that we urged developing countries to diversify and pointed out that coffee was a good cash crop .
The result is that now , Vietnam and many other developing countries are quite successfully moving into coffee production , consequently dumping it on the market , and damaging the market to such an extent that we have a crisis that is very difficult to deal with .
There is no easy answer to that .
The reality of the market is here to stay .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
. Mr President , today the world 's gaze is very much on world trade .
However , for millions that is a million miles from their broken , infected and disabled lives , because you can only trade if you can make , grow , sell and distribute .
Those tasks are essential to your economic wellbeing and to your country 's economic growth .
They are tasks which are way beyond you if you are physically or mentally ill or disabled .
If they are beyond you , you are in a downward spiral to poverty and , more often than not , to death .
Health and wealth , ill-health and poverty are inextricably entwined .
Poverty leads to ill-health and ill-health means poverty for nations , families and individuals .
Without health you cannot create wealth and without wealth you cannot prevent and cure disease .
We , the countries of the European Union , have accepted the challenge to help the least- and the less-developed countries to overcome poverty and to become partners with us in world trade and development .
We have acknowledged the fundamental link between good health and the reduction in poverty and we now need to enhance this priority in our development policies .
The Commission has sent us a good communication , which I welcome .
It focuses on the three massive challenges of TB , AIDS and malaria and nothing in my report contradicts that focus .
Indeed , I call for more and better investment in these areas .
However , there are other enormous health challenges we must also address .
Let me start with the final point in our report .
We , the developed world , are short of doctors .
Each and every year we make up our domestic failure by recruiting 63 000 doctors from the developing countries .
In return , we send them just 1 300 .
This is unacceptable .
Then let me re-emphasise the need for a shift in resources to basic health , if our rhetoric is to be translated into effective action .
Just 3.4 % of our current development budgets go to health .
That is simply inadequate .
Only 9 of the first 61 country strategy papers had health as a focal area for cooperation . That will not achieve results .
We need resources , but they must be efficiently targeted .
Drugs , for example , are wasted if not accompanied by adequate storage , distribution , monitoring and patient education .
Nigeria is an example where dramatic improvement was possible in fatal childhood diseases once the programme developed a home-to-home strategy and changed the public perception about immunisation .
Then there are the diseases and disorders beyond the three priorities of TB , AIDS and malaria .
By 2020 , 80 % of the global burden of disease will be non-communicable diseases : cardiovascular , cancer , respiratory , diabetes , depression , epilepsy , etc .
Diarrhoea diseases kill 1.5 million children a year .
We heard in the last debate about water .
Apart from malaria , water-borne diseases that debilitate and destroy include typhoid , dysentery , cholera , hepatitis , trachoma , fluorosis and Japanese encephalitis .
Yet 1.1 billion people have no access to clean water and 2.4 billion are without hygienic sanitation .
Yet the cost need not be prohibitive , and our report points to examples of inexpensive interventions and changes of local practice which can make a significant difference .
I am grateful to colleagues from all parts of the House who suggested additions or amendments - most of which we were able to incorporate in committee - and a few which I have accepted and put my name on at this plenary stage .
I would also like to thank the governments , academics , practitioners and NGOs - not least from the developing countries themselves - for their contributions .
They confirmed many of the proposals I had drafted and suggested new areas for me to explore , such as vaccines , maternal health , biomass fuels and palliative care .
I hope Parliament will endorse our report and that the Council and the Commission will see it as supportive as well as exhortative .
None of us can be satisfied with our efforts to date to defeat poverty by promoting good health .
We are all in development mode and our commitment must be to drive our policy forward and faster .
It is in all our interests to make real and lasting progress .
. Mr President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Bowis for his good work .
While we give support to health directly in many countries , the Commission is increasingly investing in budget support strategies where the linkages to improved health outcomes are ensured .
In this context the follow-up through key input and outcome indicators is crucial and this is a high-priority area of work . This relates to a long discussion with Parliament and the Committee on Development and Cooperation about the percentages allocated to different sectors .
The Commission is prioritising support for improved health and education outcomes .
To reflect this , it is not enough simply to calculate funds for health and education where they appear as focal sectors .
All support to related social sectors , such as investment in water and sanitation , and budget support linked to improved health and education outcomes , has to be taken into account .
Doing this brings us to something that adds up to more than 40 % of the programming for the 9th EDF .
It is a matter of the credibility of the link between budget support and outcomes in these sectors , but this is the best way we can do this .
We are relying on other donors or partner governments to do more of the substantial work .
We are providing a lot of money , but this is also what complementarity is about , what donor coordination is about and what ownership is about .
I am in no way apologetic about these percentages and I will never get tired of arguing like I do here whenever , like tonight , I hear figures - which I feel are wrong - regarding how much we do in these sectors .
The Interreg contribution through budget support is real and it has the advantage that it also makes it possible for us to fund , and for support to be received for , the ongoing recurring costs .
It does not do much to help to build a nurses ' training centre if the teaching there cannot be sustained .
That is one of the advantages of budget support .
This is in no way an excuse , but it is a real , hard-core explanation .
The specific challenges as regards HIV / AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis have been meaningful , leading to our contribution to the global fund .
Our engagements at country level mean that we now know better what to do than we did some years ago .
Attempts at solving the HIV / AIDS problem are made more difficult as it involves having to cope with the ideological battle of reproductive health and sexual rights .
I do not want to start a discussion tonight on these issues , but it is an added problem on top of all the other existing problems .
As regards financing I am pleased that it was possible to get the United States to accept what everyone else agreed to in December last year in the WTO on TRIPs and the use of generic medicines .
The point I want to make here is that it is very nice to see that our decision last year to untangle the procurement of medicine for these diseases adds to the reality and impact of what was agreed in the WTO last weekend .
If we still tied procurement to European producers , the WTO agreement that Third World countries should be able to buy generic medicine would not have carried much real importance .
So it is the combination of this deal in the WTO and our untying of procurement there that really is dynamic .
I do not want to prolong the discussion ahead .
I will end by repeating my appreciation of the input provided by Mr Bowis .
Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Bowis for this really excellent report .
This House welcomes the Commission communication and urges the Commission and the Member States to make their contributions to achieving the Millennium Development Goal of halving by 2015 the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water , especially given that around three million people die every year from water-borne diseases .
If we look at the Commission 's ambitious goals , they deserve Parliament 's full and unequivocal support .
The EU has undertaken to reach the development aid target of 0.39 % of GDP on average for all EU Member States by 2006 .
At the International Conference on Financing for Development in Monterrey in March 2002 , it was agreed that each of the current EU Member States would by 2006 increase the proportion of GDP spent on development to at least 0.33 % .
Yet taking the Federal Republic of Germany as an example , we can see that unfortunately , this is likely to remain a utopian ideal .
Germany vigorously rejected , to the very last , any increase in spending , claiming that this was incompatible with budget discipline .
This shows that ultimately , the Federal Government 's economic policy failures are the cause of inadequate development assistance .
Only yesterday , I saw that the German Minister of Development states on her website that 0.27 % of GDP is currently allocated to development assistance .
This must seem like pure mockery to the people affected , who followed what happened at the World Summit on Social Development in Copenhagen as long ago as 1995 and trusted the pledge that 0.7 % of GDP would be spent on official development assistance .
The only conclusion we can draw is that it is hard luck for anyone who relies on development pledges !
It is a sign of political bankruptcy - indeed , it is a political debtor 's oath - that at the same time , real expenditure has decreased by more than 500 million euros from 1990 to 2001 .
Yet we live in an era when Volkswagen , for example , has to appoint three apprentices to every training place in the developing countries because two out of three die during training , either from Aids or from other - water-borne - diseases .
UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in Monterrey , and I quote with your permission , Mr President , ' If the industrialized countries do not double development assistance , the forces of envy , despair and terror will continue to grow ' .
Let me add to this : these forces will impact on Europe too .
That , not least , must be avoided !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur has presented a very comprehensive report demonstrating , in an impressive and multi-faceted way , that there can be no sustainable development without good health .
Poverty reduction must therefore be linked as a matter of urgency with measures to combat diseases , and great efforts are needed to build an effective healthcare system in the developing countries .
In this context , we must focus first and foremost on the most vulnerable population groups , such as children , who die , as previous speakers have said , in their hundreds of thousands every year from diarrhoeal diseases .
They die of infectious diseases because they are denied the vaccinations which could save them , and they fall victim to malaria - hundreds of thousands of children every year - because their immune systems are not robust enough to survive this disease .
These examples show that health problems in the developing countries , especially among children , certainly do not always result from life-threatening diseases . Often , they fall victim to illnesses capable of being cured or prevented if the necessary drugs or vaccinations are available .
Women , too , are especially at risk .
Giving birth to many children at short intervals destroys women 's reproductive health , causing severe anaemia and increasing their susceptibility to infectious diseases .
Poor food or malnutrition also undermines the health of large sections of the population - for hunger is not just hunger , it also saps the strength necessary to build a good life .
It has quite rightly been pointed out , and I say this again , that sustainable development is under threat .
It is true that a holistic strategy is required .
It is not just primarily a matter of medical care . The scenario we are dealing with today - and this is where the campaign against tuberculosis , malaria , and AIDS comes into play - is that we are dealing with diseases - AIDS in particular - which are not curable but which can be treated , thus giving people the opportunity to live for longer .
Nonetheless , the fact that there is no cure for it means that we must also address the issue of prevention .
This is an extremely important area , and must also be included in a holistic healthcare system .
I am convinced that we can generate more support for these campaigns in many ways if we highlight the severe economic impacts sustained by countries where a large number of people are affected by these diseases .
According to the statistics which I have available , in Burkina Faso , agricultural production has decreased by 16 % because people are sick or have already died of AIDS and therefore can no longer work in agriculture .
In Swaziland , school attendance among girls has decreased by 36 % because they have to care for their parents who are sick with AIDS .
Ultimately , only the grandparents will be left .
This means that massive economic damage will result in these countries unless there is an effective healthcare system to help restore public health to the necessary level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission communication and Mr Bowis 's report are based on the vicious , infernal and fatal circle which robs developing countries of any real right to health for the majority of their population , which only aggravates their underdevelopment still further .
The same applied , incidentally , to my own report on the financing of clinical interventions to combat AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis , which was adopted several months ago .
I therefore give my unreserved support to the rapporteur and to the proposals he and the Committee on Development and Cooperation have put forward .
We need to increase the level of financial contributions , particularly those earmarked for water .
As several other Members have said , three million people die in the world every year for lack of drinking water .
Major vaccination campaigns are needed . Preventive health measures need to be built up .
Medicines need to be made accessible and methods of treatment need to be adapted for developing countries , not to mention palliative care , the provision of analgesics and the fight against trafficking in counterfeit medicines .
In March 2003 , in the wake of the Sixth Framework Programme on Research and Technological Development , I persuaded the European Parliament to adopt a EUR 600 million research programme to combat AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis under Article 169 , which also made a concrete contribution towards achieving the same objectives .
I am seizing the opportunity I have been given this evening to inform fellow Members about the implementation of this programme since its final adoption on 16 June .
Commissioner Busquin has returned from Africa , where he was able to confirm interest on the part of researchers in the countries concerned following the establishment of appropriate management structures .
Measurable progress has already been accomplished over several years , very often with the encouragement of this House , acting in close partnership with the European Commission .
We also , and above all , need to be aware of the dramatic situation in the developing countries , which is an indication of everything that remains to be done and of the enormous effort that is required in terms of imagination , partnership and budget resources .
By way of conclusion , I would like to reiterate my support for the committee 's proposals , my total support for our rapporteur , my personal commitment in these areas , not to mention the commitment of my group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , and I invite the Commission , and above all the Council , to step up Europe 's commitment if we are to avoid a situation in which far from improving , the developing countries ' position deteriorates in future .
Mr President , up to now we have placed particular emphasis on the fight against communicable diseases , especially HIV / AIDS , tuberculosis and malaria .
We have repeatedly asked for the scope of this action to be extended to other diseases particularly associated with poverty and with poor hygiene and environmental conditions .
I therefore very warmly welcome John Bowis 's report , which approaches health in the broadest possible way and takes account of the impact on health of food , environmental and educational policy .
Preventing diseases involves improving the living conditions of people in the South , by means of a coherent and integrated development strategy .
In the long term a preventive strategy is essential .
In the shorter term , we need to ensure that the sick have access to treatment and medicines , which also have to be made available in the first place .
It is true that in the majority of countries in the South health systems are poor , but privatising the sector will not solve the problem . Only the public sector can provide free and universal health care .
For that reason , health should continue to be excluded from GATS , and I am delighted that this report reiterates that fundamental principle .
I of course support the amendment calling for the provisions of the Doha Declaration on medicines to be implemented , especially as the agreement that the TRIPS Council has just reached is supposed to allow it to come into force .
Although we welcome this entry into force , it also has to be recognised that the complexity of this agreement means that we have some doubts about its effectiveness .
For example , countries without any production capacity will be subject to a double system of mandatory licences and restrictions that they could often find costly .
If health really is one of the priorities of the European Union 's development policy , then the Member States should make a firm commitment to grant the mandatory licences developing countries need if they are to protect their public health .
We Members of the European Parliament need to join together to exert continuing pressure if this communication is not to be just a dead letter .
Mr President , I would first like to say thank you to my colleague , Mr John Bowis , for his work .
He has taken all aspects of human health into consideration impartially .
It is opportune that we should be speaking about the health situation in the developing countries and access to clean water in the same sitting .
You cannot just daydream about good health if people are denied their basic right to clean water .
Clean water , functional sanitation and good hygiene are the foundations on which healthcare is built .
Every year three million people die of infectious diseases transmitted through polluted water .
Health and poverty reduction is a subject where almost everything has already been said .
There is no lack of information from us .
I do not intend now , therefore , to churn out more tragic figures and statistics before Parliament .
I would prefer to tell you briefly why I decided some time ago to stand for the European Parliament . When I was asked to stand I had serious doubts about the reasons , which I shall not go into here .
However , while I was thinking over what my decision should be I was on a working trip to El Salvador and Mexico .
I was working for a development cooperation organisation examining the tracks of the hurricane that had raged in the autumn of 1998 and familiarising myself with the situation regarding AIDS patients and conditions in the slums .
I met a mother of small children who had been infected with HIV by her partner and now it had been detected in her newborn child too .
I encountered a lot more examples of wretched human destiny : small people crushed by enormous problems .
Then I began to think : what if the politicians who decide these people 's affairs and fate for them have never met them in the flesh ?
What , furthermore , if they do not understand the issues they are taking decisions about ?
Supposing they do not even see the people through the statistics ?
They are , after all , real people , not zombies .
They have a pain threshold .
I made the decision to go into politics for these people 's sakes .
Many a time I ask myself if my efforts are visible anywhere or sufficiently visible , and I cannot bring myself to answer the question .
I think that if it does not result in any practical decision being made , or a gesture made for better things to come , or a hunger for justice , which has concrete results , I do not have the right to call myself a politician .
Mr President , in 2001 this Parliament asked the European Commission to make primary education and basic health care spearheads of development policy .
Now 35 % of the development budget goes on social expenditure , including education and health care .
For Africa one of the biggest threats is the AIDS epidemic .
Along with tuberculosis and malaria this is a disease requiring extra attention in the Commission 's policy .
In the present announcements this attention is very clearly in evidence in the action programme .
Attention is focused on these three diseases .
The arguments for the approach to these three diseases remain valid and have even become clearer still than previously where AIDS is concerned .
Public opinion however is not yet fully mobilised around a clear realisation of the worldwide crisis that these three diseases represent .
There is still an urgent need for large-scale collective action .
In his report Mr Bowis rightly says that , in addition to these three diseases , the approach to other poverty-related diseases also warrants attention .
African trypanosomiasis , better known by the name sleeping sickness , is a good example of this .
There are two stages to this infectious disease .
In the first stage the victim suffers fever and debilitation .
The disease is difficult to recognise at this point , but relatively easy to treat .
If the disease is not treated , then the parasite moves from the blood to the brain .
It can take anything from a few weeks to years before the disease progresses from phase 1 to phase 2 .
In stage 2 the victim suffers fits and convulsions .
Sleeping sickness is easy to recognise in the second phase , but treatment then is far more difficult .
If the disease is not treated , the patient goes into a coma and inevitably dies .
There is a general lack of such treatment in the developing countries .
An unnecessarily large number of people die because the diagnosis cannot be made in time and medicines are not available or are far too expensive .
The agreement on the cheap AIDS medicines that was concluded last Saturday as part of the WTO negotiations is a big step forward in combating this poverty-related disease .
To give priority to basic health care ahead of regulations in the field of intellectual property was a crucial decision .
Failure would have destroyed confidence in the ability of the WTO to have a development round to tackle the injustices in the world trade system .
All the WTO members now have an obligation to ensure that the agreements work in practice .
European countries must promise , just as Canada has already done , that producers of generic medicines obtain licences from the country in question for export to developing countries .
It is also important in the WTO negotiations that , where the trade in services or GATTS is concerned , the right of every WTO member to regulate public services should be guaranteed and that developing countries must not be compelled to hand government control of basic services such as health care over to the market .
I would like to say expressly that , in this , I feel supported by the attitude of the Commission and Commissioner Lamy .
In this our positions do not differ .
If you were to ask a random passer-by in Strasbourg how his health was , then that will always count as number one .
If we later go to South Africa , I should like to see a similar random passer-by whom we meet there able to say the same , and for us to be able to live safely in the same world village , on the same street .
. Mr President , non-state actors , non-governmental organisations , private companies , trade unions and civil society have a major role to play in the European Union 's development programmes .
They are crucial to us for four reasons .
First , good development practice means that aid is successful when the beneficiaries themselves participate in the programmes that deliver that aid - helping people to help themselves .
Second , non-state actors provide pluralism , alternative views and alternative experiences to those of governments , views which are at best representative of grass-roots communities of marginalised people , who in turn are representative of those in greatest need .
Third , a strong civil society is part of a healthy democracy , providing scrutiny of governments and promoting principles of anti-corruption and good governance .
Democracy and development go hand in hand .
Fourth , from a European perspective , the best of independent actors - renowned non-governmental organisations like Oxfam or the Save the Children Fund from the UK , Médecins Sans Frontières from France and so on - have helped to deliver public support to the whole notion of development , as well as providing a record for ensuring the swiftest , most direct and efficient provision of aid which , in itself , commands that public support .
However , as the proposed resolution lays down , that relationship is not always a comfortable one .
For example , non-governmental organisations are themselves not immune from criticism .
I supported Commissioner Nielson when he made proper criticisms regarding the management and efficiency of the former liaison committee of EU development NGOs in Brussels .
It is true that non-state actors can suffer from the same problems of bad governance for which we sometimes criticise governments of developing countries .
Yet the Commission 's communication and this Parliament 's conviction is based on the principle that we can do better .
I am grateful for the active cooperation of the Commissioner 's services , but the results of my questionnaire - showing that non-state actor consultation took place in only half of 63 beneficiary countries and that the totals by region record only 2 or 3 % of the total funding provided going to non-state actors - represents a challenge for the time ahead .
It is a challenge which can and must be met in the forthcoming mid-term review .
I welcome the fact that the Commission supports my proposal in the resolution for one staff member per delegation in developing countries to be responsible for NSA consultation and participation .
We have taken such steps in relation to financial management and it is right that we give equal weight to quality as well as quantity of aid .
I hope the Commissioner tonight will not simply support the principle of training in this respect , but will also commit himself to beginning to deliver it in practice .
I propose in the resolution that this process be supported through the creation of multi-stakeholder committees by country or region , a proposal which is meant not to increase bureaucracy but to ensure systematic means of participation by NSAs .
I know that the Commissioner has a healthy scepticism of my interest in budget quotas , but the 15 % identified in his own programming guidelines should provide a firm baseline in the budget for non-state actor participation - 85 % for governance seems not an unduly small amount .
I welcome the fact that the Commissioner has now invited MEPs , including myself , to contribute to the reform of the specific NGO co-finance budget line .
I advance the proposal that the delegation should manage its own small-scale , capacity-building funds - a model which is effective for some Member State interventions , including those in the United Kingdom .
In conclusion , I accept that non-state actor involvement is not simply - nor principally - an issue of funding .
It is now five years since the Commission established a small , informal working party under the then Director-General of DG Development to recommend a new relationship with non-governmental organisations .
The evolution of those discussions has , in part , taken in Commissioner Kinnock 's reform programme and the White Paper on Governance from Mr Prodi .
Now it includes the proposal from the European Convention for a legal base on civil dialogue .
In development specifically it has included the legally-binding , contractual participation laid down in the Cotonou Agreement , a principle that we believe should be extended to the EU 's relationship with all regions of developing countries in the world .
However , it is now time to move from discussion about NGOs , civil society and non-state actors in order to effect real change and improvement .
Commissioner Nielson 's communication gives us the opportunity to do just that .
We must , we should and we will .
. There are many different aspects to the discussion on the role of non-state actors .
One is that we deliberately played up expectations , especially in the ACP countries following the Cotonou Agreement , making an interesting breakthrough in giving them a role in the debate over country strategies and also starting a new activity of being able to fund the different non-state actors in these countries more directly .
But these activities of NGOs and so on in our partner countries are not something we run or organise .
It depends on the political situation , the level of democratisation , the character of the society .
In some countries these things are very new .
That is why the feedback of how successful this inclusiveness has been is somewhat mixed .
We are pushing for it , but I cannot accept that the Commission can or should be made responsible for how successfully this can be done in another country .
It is not our country .
There is a limit to our powers .
I am quite optimistic .
We have compared our attempts to the somewhat similar ones to broaden participation in the discussions in the poverty reduction strategy paper process , handled by the World Bank with the same countries in most cases .
When we compare the achievement of involving civil society , we have had much more success .
This should not be seen as a civil society beauty contest between the Commission and the World Bank .
It is of more interest that both urge the partner countries to do the same thing .
The partner countries could then see that different partners in development work would actually like civil society in these countries to be more involved .
Civil society relations with NGOs in a European context are a somewhat different story .
Mr Howitt wrote something in the explanatory statement that I disagree with .
It is simply wrong .
He says that the organisations themselves complain that any consultation they enjoy is entirely ad hoc and that the Commission can be accused of only consulting when it wants to legitimise its own perspective .
I have checked whether the new umbrella organisation of development NGOs agrees with this description of the relationship .
It does not .
So what Mr Howitt has presented here is not what I have heard from the same NGOs .
Of course both the NGOs and Mr Howitt could be wrong .
I do not claim that one of them must be right .
In my view , today we are in a constructive phase of the discussions .
My preference is to put the emphasis on an exchange of substance rather than formalising things between us .
This is well understood .
The hard-core of cooperation - the funding and administrative working relationship - is better than it has been for many years . It is possible to keep it that way .
What is most interesting in terms of the funding aspect is that the NGO budget of EUR 200 million per year is only a small part of the total activity that we are funding through NGOs .
The total amount of money per year going through NGOs is closer to EUR 1.5 billion - food aid , food security , part of the humanitarian aid for NGOs , and a great volume of project implementation work where we use different NGOs in the field .
This should be given more attention .
The EUR 200 million budget is so heavily in demand that we have an impossible situation if all of the discussion is concentrated there , especially in view of the ten new Member States that will join the EU .
We should take care to provide good opportunities for NGOs in those countries to get in on the action .
The EUR 200 million budget for NGOs should be looked at with a view to making sure that civil society in the new Member States does not feel marginalised because of stiff competition for that specific budget .
I look forward to continuing the discussion , not only with Parliament and Mr Howitt , but also with the NGO community .
Mr President , the role of NSAs - non-state actors - in helping development has been acknowledged and I agree with Commissioner Nielson in what he said .
If you look at the United Nations , there are 72 000 registered NGOs drawing EUR 7 billion every year .
Certainly , the NGOs have got their act together . They know what to do , where to go and source the founds .
On the other hand , private companies - and they are non-state actors too - do not enjoy the same status , privilege or funding .
I am very much in favour of tilting the balance to established private corporations with a good track record in development and in developing countries , so that they may also receive aid that would be very well utilised .
We also have two categories that the EU has never considered .
I know they are slightly off-track and perhaps Parliament has discussed this .
One of them is service clubs , such as Rotary Clubs , which do a fantastic job at a very low cost .
Others are missionaries , particularly in Africa .
Very selective use of mission work in developing countries can bring substantial benefit to the very poorest in these countries for very low sums of money .
I have personal experience of both Rotary Clubs and missionaries working in East Africa for very little money .
They provide substantial support for local communities .
But today I am going to focus on accountability .
It is known that a large percentage of money received by non-state actors , particularly NGOs , is spent on administration , including high salaries , first- or club-class fares , and bills for expensive hotels .
There are so many seminars which now , with information technology , are totally unnecessary .
Transparency International is supposed to monitor the role of such bodies , but it has not done the job it is supposed to have done .
I am pointing out these things for this Parliament and for Commissioner Nielson to put at the back of their minds because much has already been said and will be said .
But I want to highlight one thing and I hope Commissioner Nielson will take note of this .
Whenever the EU gives any aid to any poor country , please let us inform the population what we are doing : how much money we are giving for each sector and to which actors or players or stakeholders this money is being given .
Because the poor will be the best invigilators , the best inspectors , the best reporters to our EU delegations if they find that this EU money is being misused . If money has been given to the government through budgets and not spent in an appropriate manner the people will know and will report .
If money is given to NGOs and it is not utilised people will know .
But if they do not know what the EU gives , for what sectors , there is no inspection , there is no vigilance and there is no feedback .
I want to say one last thing .
There is aid fatigue and it is important that whatever the EU gives , which is very generous , it is spent well .
I wish Commissioner Nielson much luck in what he is doing .
He has my full support .
Mr President , Mr Howitt 's report opens up some interesting avenues .
Public involvement in cooperation with developing countries is at the heart of our concerns .
This communication should underpin real cooperation with non-state actors .
Who are these non-state actors though ?
Who are these privileged partners ?
Are they partners imposed on us ?
We believe that participation should involve a wide range of actors , including partners from the South , and it should prevent the poorest countries from being marginalised .
This means that a proper mechanism needs to be established to optimise participants ' representation .
This communication should not allow the Commission and the governments of developing countries to legitimise their actions by treating non-state actors as pawns .
The populations of the countries of the South themselves should be able to democratically appoint their representatives and organise themselves collectively through associations , trade unions and grassroots organisations .
It is this process that we need to support by providing the structural aid needed to guarantee that non-state actors have the independence that is vital for dialogue and for the involvement of all strata in society .
It is incumbent on European companies to stop banning trade union organisation and rights of association for workers and local people .
On the contrary , they should encourage such activities .
At present civil society is only recognised in the text of the Cotonou Agreement . It needs to come off the printed page and be put into practice !
When we revise the ALA Regulation , it is essential to include this aspect in our cooperation with the countries of Latin America and Asia , which would also make it possible to make funds available to non-state actors in those countries .
Involving non-state actors in their governments ' development strategy is essential to guaranteeing pluralism , freedom of expression and democracy , which underpin the European Union 's missions throughout the world .
We are therefore pleased to welcome this report by Mr Howitt .
It opens up important avenues that we must not fail to explore .
.
Mr President , I should like to respond to Mr Nielson 's statement that my explanatory memorandum gave false information about what development NGOs had said in relation to his own consultation arrangements .
I do not regard Mr Nielson as someone who is thin-skinned , but I believe that statement did not do him justice .
It may be true that Mr Howitt may be wrong , as may the NGOs , but is it not equally true that so might the Commission ?
For the record , comments were properly made to me pointing out that there is insufficient NGO involvement in agenda preparation and presentation in the Commission 's twice-yearly meetings with Brussels-based development NGOs .
The NGOs I consulted are part of the public record .
Indeed , I produced an appendix to my report that listed them and this was passed to the Commissioner 's service .
Perhaps , rather than rejecting the criticism , the Commissioner should reflect on why - if it is true - it might be that NGOs are saying something slightly different to him than they are saying to this Parliament .
Good governance is surely an issue for all of us .
. Mr President , I made the effort of discussing this with Concord .
We have an ongoing discussion about the preparation of our regular meetings with the development NGOs .
This works well and happens regularly .
Both sides in those discussions produced input - this is not dictated by one side .
If they are grown up enough to discuss and criticise something they are unhappy with , they should do so directly .
In any case , to say one thing to me and then some thing different to Mr Howitt shows there is a problem - not necessarily for me or for Mr Howitt .
We need and are entitled to expect clarity in discussing things like this .
I do not want to relate to something which is not up front and clear .
We are entitled to expect better than that .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday , at 12 noon .
. Mr President , despite the improvements cited , the 2001 report is still by no means a perfect one .
We are learning year by year . We started with a very difficult background .
I have stated a number of times - some thought it was a bad joke - that the main reason why we are so bad as regards informing the public about what we do in development cooperation is that we do not know what we are doing .
The truth is that statistically speaking , we are very far behind in our reporting and the whole mechanics of the system .
We did not have an annual report that presented , across the board , a picture of what the Commission was doing in this area .
This was a very big problem a few years ago .
So , getting started was very important .
I am pleased to inform you that the 2002 report is just about to be published .
In fact we sent it today to Parliament and the Council .
Even though preparations for it had to be launched at the end of last year , it takes into account many of the recommendations made by your rapporteur , such as more analysis on the effectiveness of aid follow-up to Monterrey and Johannesburg , more statistical information permitting a comparison among the regions , and an executive summary .
So , as you will see from the new report , we really are trying to improve it .
I should like to stress that production of this kind of report is a complex process .
First of all , it addresses many different audiences .
On the one hand , it is an important management tool for our own institutions .
On the other , it is a public information instrument .
Following this dual purpose , there are conflicting demands .
We have to fulfil our obligations on a number of regulations , resolutions and so on concerning reporting .
For that reason we had to include a lot of detail .
At the same time , it should be easy to read , without too much technical jargon .
All in all we are happy that we have done it although we are not yet totally happy with the quality of it .
The great help we get from Parliament and the feedback from this good report by Mr Martínez Martínez is , from our point of view , one way of continuing to improve the standard .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
. ( FR ) Where European Union law exists , the Member States , who are supposed to enforce it , ride roughshod over it .
This is acknowledged by this report , at the same time as it blandly speculates what legal bases might make it possible for adherence to it to be compelled .
The members of this union of states , obliged to join together , but competing with one another in order to defend their own bourgeoisies , apply Community law only in so far as their big businesses and major industries find it convenient for them to do so .
Although the rapporteur makes reference to the steps taken by the European Court of Justice in support of Community law , the same Court is incapable of preventing the law of the jungle from being the only law that prevails in this competitive society .
The most it will be able to do , then , is to make the smallest European powers comply with a few rules , whilst grovelling before the larger ones as it has always done .
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , before beginning our work , let us remember with emotion that it is the 40th anniversary of the death of Robert Schuman , who was President of the European Parliamentary Assembly between 1958 and 1960 and one of the outstanding figures in the founding of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , not only in this plenary but far beyond these walls , it was repeatedly said that we faced , in the shape of enlargement , an historic step .
This historic step demands of us , above all else , understanding , an understanding that must be profound rather than merely superficial , a real comprehension rather than just a random encounter .
We need languages as a vector if this understanding is to be guaranteed .
In this place , we will soon be representing twenty-five states and over three thousand years of cultural history .
Many cultures and many languages are far younger and hence less deep-rooted , so there is , in all of them , concern about their own identity .
I believe that these concerns do not need to persist , and would like to give you the example of the South Tyrol , from which I come .
We have benefited from the European Union .
The Austrian minority in South Tyrol - speaking German and Ladin - has been greatly strengthened by the EU , by a policy of openness on the part of Italy and by developments in the European Union .
It is my belief that this minority has become a bridge between Italy and Austria , between the German-speakers and Italian-speakers .
That is why I would like to dispel the misgivings of the minorities , the small linguistic communities within the EU and of those who will be joining it .
This report seeks to value and maintain languages and cultures and to strengthen all of them - not just the official languages , but also the regional and less-used ones .
Europe is a mosaic , and a very beautiful one , and we want this mosaic to be conserved rather than becoming a cocktail .
In the Europe of Fifteen , there are at present over sixty minorities .
Another sixty will be added from the ten candidate countries .
This wealth of languages makes for diversity and enriches us , and it will be possible for many of these minorities to function as bridges between States .
The Commission , with its action plan and its inclusive approach , has recognised that at the right time .
I would like not only to single out Commissioner Reding for specific mention , but also to express due gratitude to her for this initiative .
The Action Plan on Linguistic Diversity is the right way forward .
I am grateful to the Members of this House and to those who , in past parliamentary terms , have made substantial contributions towards this end , above all those in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport who have helped to improve this report .
Parliament played a leading role in this .
From 1981 to 2001 , it has taken the initiative with the Arfé Report , the Kuijpers Report , the Reding Report , the Killilea Report , and , most recently , the Morgan resolution ; now , with this resolution from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , it wants to go one step further .
This is a decisive moment before enlargement , when we are able not only to express our positions on the work that the Convention has completed , but also to offer proposals .
The Year of Languages 2001 was important , but it was not enough .
The learning of languages must not be limited to one year , but must become and remain a continuous process .
Mr President , allow me to begin by thanking the rapporteur very warmly for his commitment , as it is a commitment to languages and therefore to human beings and to our citizens .
It seeks to create a multilingual and multicultural Europe where we advocate diversity , because as far as we are concerned that is Europe 's real wealth .
Mr Ebner , both you and the Commissioner want the same thing .
We now have to decide how to achieve it .
I would like to go on to look at the two legislative proposals contained in the report .
The first concerns an Agency on Linguistic Diversity .
Although I do feel that such an agency would be useful , we must stop and think before launching such an undertaking .
A feasibility study would be a vital stage in the considerations ; it would provide us with a detailed assessment of the existing instruments , including those relating to regional and minority languages .
My services have carried out an evaluation of all of the activities relating to regional and minority languages , and a report should be published at the beginning of next year , which will serve as a first step on this path .
I am sure you are aware , ladies and gentlemen , that a feasibility study on the creation of a Cultural Cooperation Observatory - the Ruffolo report - is already under way .
I feel that it would be useful to learn the lessons of that experience before embarking upon a new exercise .
I would like to highlight the importance we place on the Council of Europe 's activities in the field of languages .
I agree with you : we must coordinate the efforts of the Commission and the Council of Europe .
Before going any further in terms of creating an agency , there should be an exchange of ideas regarding the methods for greater coordination .
The second point relates to the adoption of a multi-annual programme .
I must admit , Mr President , that this poses a problem , as the Commission cannot accept this recommendation .
It is not a question of substance , as you know very well that we are of the same opinion in that respect .
I have already had several opportunities to talk to you about this issue .
I have supported the idea that in the current circumstances the best way of promoting regional and minority languages is through an integrated approach .
I am totally convinced of this , as a separate programme would , in my view , mean further isolation of regional and minority languages .
Now is the time for just the opposite , that is , giving them greater recognition .
We must ensure support for these languages by making use of the possibilities provided by the existing programmes .
Moreover , the European Year - you will no doubt agree - was an experience that integrated regional and minority languages .
The implementation report demonstrates that regional and minority languages now occupy a prime position .
After careful consideration , the Commission decided to present an action plan , which the rapporteur has already mentioned and which I have brought with me today .
You should have received a copy .
If not , I have some copies here that you can have .
Would the President like one ?
President Roca , your copy awaits !
This action plan is based on the conclusions of the Helsinki Conference on regional and minority languages , organised under the aegis of President Ahtisaari in October 2002 .
Mr Chairman of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , Media and Sport , if you like , I will outline this action plan , adopted on 24 July , in greater detail and talk to you about its implementation .
The plan envisages the integrated approach I spoke about , as we must focus on the opportunities for financing within the framework of existing programmes and ensure that there is more awareness of these opportunities and that they are better utilised .
As a result , thanks to the budget passed by Parliament , on 31 July the Commission published a call for proposals and the projects should be submitted by the end of this month .
Allow me also to say that we should take advantage of the discussions on the new generations of programme because if we truly want to implement a concerted action for languages , the new programmes should incorporate a significant multilingual element .
Before ending , I would very briefly like to mention some of the points in the report .
As far as the definition is concerned , I believe we are in agreement : we should use that of the Council of Europe , as set out in the European Charter of Regional or Minority Languages .
With regard to the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages and the Mercator network , I know that many of you here are very interested in these instruments and hope that they can continue to operate .
I can tell you that the proposal for a decision establishing an action programme to promote bodies active at European level in the field of culture is currently being negotiated .
A total of EUR 5.4 million is being set aside to fund the Bureau and the Mercator network for the 2004-2008 period .
You can therefore forget any concerns regarding this issue .
Finally , Mr President , the annex to the motion for a resolution sets out 20 different requests .
I must stress that most of these requests go far beyond what could be implemented within the framework of the two legislative initiatives proposed by Parliament itself .
I do not want to go into detail , but would remind you that many concrete initiatives to promote regional and minority languages are contained in this action plan and that substantial funding is already available .
The action plan aims to bring everything together and to present to the citizens in all their diversity the possibilities the European Union can offer them , the opportunities recommended in the action plan for languages , in other words the opportunities , Mr Ebner , that have exactly the same aim as your report : to turn this grand European linguistic mosaic into a great table for Europe 's cultural diversity .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteur for all his work and , above all , for his great willingness to seek solutions to possible problems .
Spain is a country with great wealth when it comes to languages , and there are many regions or Autonomous Communities in which Castilian is co-official - as the official language of the Spanish State - with another language , such as Catalan or Basque , amongst others .
Above all , moreover , I must say that we feel very proud of this .
We in the People 's Party always try to ensure that one of these co-official languages does not thrive to the detriment of another , for the good of our citizens and in order to have a totally bilingual population .
We in Spain already channel enough money towards the promotion of languages and , for this reason , we do not agree with channelling more Community budget for this purpose , bearing in mind all the existing needs at European level .
We believe that certain points in this report - and we agree with its general basis - do not entirely respect the principle of subsidiarity and even violate the principle of proportionality and Community legislation .
We have full confidence , however , that , this being the case , the European Commission will play its role as guardian of the Treaties and put right anything which is not correct in the report .
Mr President , Europe is a collection of peoples - as we heard during the presentation of the Convention two days ago .
In Europe there is a group of languages which forms a significant part of its heritage .
We see this in this Chamber : 11 working languages and nine new languages which will be incorporated on the enlargement of the European Union .
In Europe there are unitary states , nation states and also multinational states - states made up of several nations with their own languages .
In my case , in the Spanish state , there are several nations .
I belong to the Catalan nation , the language spoken by more than 7 million people - in other words , more speakers than two of the current official languages of the European Union , and more speakers than six of the languages of the 10 candidate states .
The Commissioner herself , Mrs Reding , was rapporteur for a report on the linguistic diversity in Europe in 1990 .
At that time the European Commission was asked to take account of the particular circumstances of the Catalan language within the European Union .
In this regard , we can say that the steps recommended by Parliament - by means of the Reding report - at that time have not been taken : that official texts in Catalan should have validity and that the Commission should also regulate a form of incorporation of Catalan into the linguistic system of the European Union , since it is a language spoken more widely than many of the languages which are working languages and official languages here .
We are not asking , under any circumstances , that Catalan should be a working language - the European Union 's linguistic system is quite complex enough - we are simply asking for recognition of its validity as an official language and that it may participate in the wealth of this cultural mosaic .
In this way we will be able to satisfy that plurality which Robert Schuman - as the President mentioned at the beginning of the sitting - spoke of during his lifetime .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Ebner , for his report on the promotion of regional and minority languages , which goes hand in hand with the values supported by our group , in particular those relating to rural issues .
It is vital to safeguard and promote these languages .
A heritage of our past , they cement peoples and territories and add the specific characteristics and cachet to numerous regions throughout Europe , like here , Alsace or Catalonia - Northern Catalonia - from which I come .
Mr Vallvé , we are the symbol of geographical diversity for the same so-called minority language .
I do wonder , however , about the means of fulfilling this objective and , in particular , the need for a European Agency for Linguistic Diversity and Language Learning .
How , exactly , is it going to operate on the ground to promote this learning ?
Would it not be better to apply the subsidiarity principle and work at national level , much closer to local level ?
That would make it possible to respect cultural traditions and the administrative and constitutional organisation of each state by encouraging them to promote , first and foremost , the learning of regional and minority languages from nursery school and , then , the organisation of cultural events such as twinning and school exchanges that would encompass the identity and history of the people .
We must not rob the Member States of their power of action in the field of training and culture .
I see Amendment No 5 as a step in the right direction , as it encourages ongoing support for minority and regional languages in a context of political neutrality and independently of any mercenary , financial considerations .
We must also provide a legal basis for these actions so that we can get out of the mess caused by the ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Communities and allow European funds to be used .
Allow me , as a member of the Disability Intergroup , to say how pleased I am to see the reference to sign language , which , according to the Council of Europe , is used by more than 3 million of our fellow citizens .
There could perhaps have been greater emphasis on these languages as their users face the same problems on a daily basis as the people using the languages covered by this report .
It is essential that all the members of the Union ratify the Council of Europe 's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages .
After 2001 , the European Year of Languages , I hope that the excellent links we have with the Council of Europe can continue to grow , especially with the secretariat of the Charter .
That would seem to me to be a pragmatic and effective way of encouraging and developing the use of our regional languages .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Ebner 's report deserves credit for having emphasised the value of regional languages as components of our cultural heritage and wealth .
I regret , however , that the report did not seek to define its subject and has left this to the Commission , which is invited , in paragraph 2 , to lay down criteria on the basis of scientific elements .
As legislators , it is precisely our role to determine these criteria .
Thus we would undoubtedly have had to distinguish between regional languages and minority languages .
Minority languages may be national or official languages in a Member State , one example being the German-speaking population in the Alto Adige region or South Tyrol , as mentioned by the rapporteur .
Although these people speak German , it is more questionable whether German can be considered a regional language in Alsace as the Alsatian dialect , which is undoubtedly Germanic , is substantially different .
As far as regional languages are concerned , what exactly are they ?
Are they , for example , the langue d 'oc in the south of France , or its distinct components , Provençal or Gascon ?
Above all , we must not forget that many of our national languages are themselves threatened .
Indeed , the Parliament itself provides its own delegations travelling abroad only with interpreting services into English , as was recently the case with the delegation to Japan , and that leads me to believe that we are going down a dangerous path .
My own language , French , is unfortunately losing ground every day as a language of international communication , but the very existence of others is threatened .
I am thinking of Gaelic in Ireland and the languages of the Baltic states , which have only just escaped Russification .
We must certainly develop regional languages , and that is my conclusion , Mr President , but we must ensure that we do not undermine or weaken our national languages .
We must ensure that there is no artificial reconstruction of abstract languages that are removed from the regional realities .
We must ensure that we do not establish a restrictive and authoritarian system .
The regional languages will contribute to our cultural wealth only if they meet these three conditions .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at the moment , some 40 million people speak a regional or minority language in addition to one of the Union 's official languages .
With the enlargement in 2004 , some 6 million people will be added to this .
In the Netherlands too , we have the phenomenon of a minority language , Friesian , which enjoys official recognition as such .
As has been said before , linguistic diversity is a heritage of which we Europeans are proud , and so we should be .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union rightly recognises the cultural and linguistic diversity .
In future , this will also form an inherent part of the European Constitution .
The European Parliament has always made a case for protecting linguistic diversity and regional and minority languages .
Various resolutions have been adopted in this respect .
A budget line was created for this purpose as early as 1980 .
In 2001 , the European year of languages was particularly intended to draw attention to the importance of languages , to language diversity , and to stimulating language teaching .
This involved not only the major languages , but also lesser-used regional and minority languages .
It was a sound initiative .
Nevertheless , there is still a great deal left to be done in this area .
I am therefore pleased that a plan of action is now being drafted in order to hammer this point home once more .
I myself have spoken in favour of greater attention being given to sign language .
We know that about 1 in 1 000 people - some 15 000 people in the Netherlands alone - are born deaf or become deaf before they reach the age of three .
To them , sign language is an essential means of communication , so I am pleased that this component has been included in the present report .
It would be good if sign language could be considered a minority language .
Deaf people are often excluded from many areas of society on account of their disability .
Their language deserves as much attention and support as do spoken minority languages .
I sincerely hope that the Commission will manage to present a legislative proposal on language diversity by the end of this year .
Peace in Europe is not only about effective economic cooperation .
It is , above all , about demonstrating an interest in , respect for , and understanding of , people from a different culture .
Language is an important key in this .
Finally , I should like to congratulate Mr Ebner on the result of his work and thank him for the particularly pleasant working relationship .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have often heard that Europe 's wealth lies in its cultural diversity , and the expression is often , and readily , used in many political speeches .
It is not , however , meant only to be used , but should also emphasise and reinforce European consciousness .
As we have already heard said many times today , one essential part of this richness is linguistic diversity , which we have taken on as our cultural heritage and must pass on as a matter of cultural responsibility .
Put into practical terms , this means that we need institutions to take on this work , financial resources to make it possible , and voluntary organisations to give support in the performance of these tasks .
Being myself from Austria , a country in which six recognised ethnic groups and their minority languages are represented - three of them , including Roma , in my very small federal state of Burgenland alone - I know how difficult it is to meet all the demands involved in using languages properly and in maintaining them .
Whilst it is the individual states that have responsibility for minority languages and for their support , the European Union cannot evade the obligation to take action to back them up in this ; we are talking here about 40 million EU citizens and 60 regional and minority languages .
The European Year of Languages was , as we have heard , a great success ; it also sent the right signals and pointed us in the right direction .
Now is the time for what we have learned to be put into practice , and I would agree with Mrs Martens that sign language must absolutely be included , as the deaf must be able to participate in social and political life .
Multiannual programmes for linguistic diversity are desirable and should be pushed through .
International exchanges of experience and courses of study , cross-border projects and so on , should be brought together under one roof , and I believe it to be absolutely necessary that EBLUL be given a legal basis enabling it to make full use of the financial resources provided for it .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Constitution says that European values include that of preserving and developing linguistic diversity .
Today is therefore a particularly well chosen time to present the report on regional languages and cultural diversity .
I want to thank my fellow MEP , Mr Ebner for all the hard work he has done .
As many in this House have pointed out , we now need practical efforts in order to make further progress with this work .
I believe that , as Mr Ebner said , developments will increase the need for measures on our part .
It is important for us to share our various experiences of linguistic diversity and language learning .
I therefore believe it important for a relevant institute to be set up .
I nonetheless believe that there is no great difference between how matters look at present and what is discussed in the report , where there is explicit talk about what are called language baths .
This is an extremely good method , which has been used to good effect in South Tyrol , Catalonia and Finland .
I see no mention of it in the Commission 's action plan , but I am glad the plan states that the universities must review their language policies so that English is not so dominant .
I want , however , to emphasise that we must investigate , and go more deeply into , the issue of an institute for linguistic diversity and language learning .
I am convinced that such an institute is needed .
I also wish to thank the Commissioner for mentioning the conference in Finland .
We learned a lot at this conference , lessons I hope may also be taken on board by Parliament .
Mr President , we must congratulate our colleague , Mr Ebner , on this further resolution from Parliament to promote so-called regional or minority languages .
During the European Year of Languages , the Council even went so far as to state that all languages are equal in dignity .
That is all very well , but as the joke goes , some are more equal than others .
Those that are more equal than others are the official languages of the Union .
The others , although equal in dignity , are not equal in law .
My national language , Catalan , is spoken by more than 10 million citizens of the European Union .
These 10 million people cannot use their own language in their relations with the Union .
We are therefore discriminated against in relation to our fellow European citizens .
Why ?
It is because we Catalans have not had our own State since Barcelona was taken by the Franco-Spanish armies on 11 September 1714 .
We therefore know what has to be done .
The democratic exercise of the right to self-determination will one day soon resolve our European linguistic problem .
I give you my word .
Mr President , let me , too , start by congratulating Mr Ebner on his report , in which , taking the positive experience of the European Year of Languages as his starting point , he highlights the growing awareness in Europe of the way in which languages bridge the gaps between cultures and cultures the gulfs that divide people , and points out that we must accordingly - if I may exaggerate to make a point - stop dreaming of the ' American model ' of one language and no culture , instead really discovering in the diversity of our languages and cultures a keynote , something indeed of fundamental value for our future .
Knowing our neighbours ' language and culture better means understanding them better and respecting them , and so I see language as performing an essential task in the sense that knowledge of other people 's languages promotes peace .
If we look more closely into the trouble spots in and around Europe , we discover that a lack of respect for those who are different - which involves languages - has very often brought about the trouble in the first place and led to the situation in these places worsening .
I therefore see language as being about more than knowing and respecting others .
I see language as the best peacekeeping force that we in Europe can deploy .
The report makes clear , though , that , in an ever-expanding Europe , there is increasing awareness of regional cultures and also of regional languages .
Belonging as I do to the German-speaking community in Belgium , I can see that respecting this is not a luxury for those regions that enjoy autonomy , but something I regard as a European fundamental right .
It is for that reason that governments have - as we have just heard said - the primary task of guaranteeing the cultures of smaller regions and their right to have their voices heard .
We should then , at the European level , give consideration to what additional instruments we employ .
We appreciate Mr Ebner 's work in representing us in this House .
We know that German is spoken in Italy and Belgium ?
However , that does not prevent us from speaking the language of our neighbours .
We do so with belief in our own culture and also with love for the culture of others .
We hope that this will be the norm in the Europe of tomorrow ; speaking one 's own language , speaking the language of one 's neighbour ; getting to know one another better and on that basis building the foundations of a Europe of all languages and , above all , a Europe of mutual respect .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union would not be as culturally and politically rich as it is today if we did not have more than 40 million citizens who speak regional or minority languages .
That is why it is a very positive move that in the new draft Constitution the Union 's linguistic diversity is being recognised .
Under Article 3 the Union will respect the wealth and diversity of its cultures and languages .
I do hope that at last we are moving on from speech to action in the area of language policy also .
Throughout the current parliamentary term we have encountered almost insurmountable problems whenever we have tried to steer funds from the Union 's budget in the direction of minority languages .
The reason has been the absence of any legal basis .
Fortunately , we have been able to avail ourselves of multiannual programmes such as Socrates and Culture 2000 , not forgetting the European Year of Languages 2001 .
The rapporteur , Mr Ebner , has done an excellent job .
I agree with him that the EU should have an Agency on Linguistic Diversity and Language Learning .
There should also be sufficient resources allocated to it for it to function effectively in an enlarged Union .
With enlargement the number of regional or minority language communities is estimated to double from the present number of approximately 60 .
We must also give our support to the proposal for a multiannual programme on linguistic diversity and language learning .
No agency or action programme , however , will solve the problems that EU citizens who speak regional or minority languages encounter in many Member States .
The right to an education in one 's own native language in particular should be guaranteed in all Member States .
For this there has to be investment in the training of teachers of regional and minority languages .
There will be limited scope in future budget headings in respect of internal policies for financing activities to encourage the use of regional and minority languages .
I hope that more resources under the Structural Funds can be directed towards such activities .
We should also inform speakers of regional or minority languages of such possible resources .
Mr President , I regret that , despite having offered a written translation , I have not been authorised to speak in Euskera - the language of an ancestral people , the Basques , which has survived the passing of time with a small population and which , in the opinion of eminent foreign researchers , is the language of the first residents of Europe .
By speaking in my language , I would have liked to have stressed the reality of this European Union which we are building amongst all of us on the basis of respect for our own cultural diversity .
I believe we are all concerned , not just the green ecologists , when the biodiversity of nature is threatened by man 's actions .
However , we often forget human biodiversity , one of the main manifestations of which are the different languages and cultures which are sometimes not respected or protected , but rather there is simply an attempt to eliminate them , for the sake of the commercial convenience of uniformity and globalising tendencies .
Since I believe that the individual , the person , is above commercial and economic interests , I would advocate constant support for national , regional and minority languages , independently of changes in political power , as well as decisive support for multilingualism so that we can build our Union without it becoming a confused tower of Babel .
I would finally like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Ebner , on his wonderful report .
Mr Ortuondo , would you be so kind as to tell the Presidency to whom you put your request to speak some sentences in Euskera and provide a translation ?
The Presidency has no knowledge of this request .
Evidence of this is that Mr Wyn , who made this request in relation to the Welsh language , has been able - quite legitimately - to say a few words in Welsh .
Could you explain how this has happened ?
Mr President , thank you very much for your words .
I tried , through my group , to offer a translation of my words and to speak in Euskera , and the reply was that only one person per Parliamentary group could speak .
Mr Wyn is from my group .
He has been allowed to speak and I have not .
That is what I understand from the reply I have been given .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my warmest congratulations go to Mr Ebner for his report , which raises a central issue of democracy : the relationship between rights of freedom and the use of one 's own language .
I would say , and this is , indeed , most significant , that the rights of freedom of the rapporteur have , in a sense , been violated in this House : when Mr Ebner mentioned his region , he called it - as is his right - Südtirol , and in the Italian translation it was adapted to the bureaucratic name fixed by the Italian centralist State and translated incorrectly , as ' Alto Adige ' .
Europe , as he rightly said , quoting the great Europeanist , Dr Silvius Magnago , is a wonderful mosaic of nations and should , therefore , see its unique ethno-linguistic character as a precious gift to be defended and valued .
I will continue and conclude in my mother tongue , which is Piedmontese : ' Voeui bin rimarqué si ma son che in Piemunt , che l 'è la mia regiùn , ancöi as parlan ? . ancura - a parte el piemunteis , che l 'è na lingua straordinaria con una bela literatüra e na gramatica che risale adiritüra al Setzent - due aute lingue minuritarie : lusitan e il valzer che s 'parla anche in Valdusta .
Tant 'el piemunteis que le aute lingue minuritarie l 'han sübi e sübissen ancura adess , en tel 2003 , n 'upressiùn gravusa da la parte de le Stat centralista italian , e l 'è certament l 'un dei mutivu per ingagèr nost cumbatiment per uteign sübit il federalismo , in Italia , e duman la piena libertà e l 'autonomia del nost bel Piemonte e de la Padania libera .
[ I would like to add that in Piedmont , which is the region I come from , not only is Piedmontese still spoken , which is an extraordinary language with beautiful literature and grammar that dates back as far as the eighteenth century , there are two other minority languages : Ladin and Walser , that are also spoken in Val d 'Aosta .
Both Piedmontese and the other two minority languages have suffered and continue to suffer now , in 2003 , from serious oppression by the centralist Italian state , and this is certainly one of the reasons for fighting to obtain federalism in Italy without delay , and demand full freedom and independence for our lovely region of Piedmont and for a free Padania . ]
Mr President , Commissioner , I have just learned that you would probably have been able to speak Letzeburgesh here this morning .
In contrast to Welsh and Basque , you would probably not have had to submit your speech beforehand .
We would have had it translated for us .
I would like to extend warm thanks to Mr Ebner for his initiative in producing this report .
Along with Mr Grosch , who has also already spoken , he represents linguistic minorities in the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
I think the South Tyrol and Eastern Belgium are , along with other places , successful examples of how minorities make for enrichment rather than for instability and also build bridges .
In Eastern Belgium and the South Tyrol , multilingualism can be heard , and , above all , seen .
This visible multilingualism is something we have not yet achieved in this Parliament building , where what we can read is all in one single language .
We find nonetheless , in our fifteen Member States and ten candidate countries , which are stable democracies , a repressive reflex towards minorities and their languages , mainly for reasons of history .
I want to make it perfectly plain that there are no separatist or extremist languages , but , if anything , only separatist or extremist people , with whom we have to deal by means of policy or the criminal law .
That is why linguistic minorities as such cannot be generally suspected of imperilling the unity of the nation by using their language .
For this reason , I find it quite incomprehensible that not all Member States have ratified the Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and the Council of Europe 's framework convention on the subject .
I would call on those states that have not yet done this to do so .
It will not endanger their national unity or territorial integrity .
Those who have problems with this leave themselves open to the suspicion that they are very insecure and believe it self-evident that their own language and culture can only be safeguarded by restricting others rather than through their own attractiveness .
I would urge a bit more boldness on those who still hesitate .
Mr President , yesterday the President of the European Convention ended his speech by evoking the future European slogan : united in diversity .
This inevitably leads to the conclusion , therefore , that in the debate on this report and on future Commission policies in the area of linguistic diversity , we are dealing with an issue which is not just highly topical , but which is at the very heart of the European project .
So congratulations on this good report .
Allow me to comment , however , on a single area of concern : as a Catalan speaker , I am aware of the existence in Europe of languages spoken by millions of people which are not thought of as being minority languages or regional languages and which - despite having official status within their autonomous region - are not state languages and are therefore not languages with official status in the European Union .
To deal with the problem of the institutionalisation , the status and the function of these European languages is perhaps the fundamental key to deciding whether the policy of a future European agency for linguistic diversity or the policy on the European institutions is really going to be faithful to the slogan of the future constitutional Union : united in diversity .
Mr President , I am speaking today on behalf of my colleague Mrs Echerer , who has worked hard to secure the acceptance and recognition of sign language .
Today we have heard many minorities speaking up for themselves .
It is unfortunate that we do not have today interpretation into sign language , as we did with the Lynn Report .
I am grateful to the rapporteur and also to the Committee for finding room for sign language in this report and in this programme , which opens the door to its being recognised .
Several Members have expressed the view in this debate that sign language should be promoted as a health resource .
I think this would profoundly violate the rights of the deaf minority .
Sign language is not a crutch or a wheelchair .
Not only is it a language used by 15 000 people , but we should also bear in mind that it is the only language in which these 15 000 people can carry on a conversation .
For recognising them as a linguistic minority and acknowledging that their language also contributes to the diversity and richness of European languages , I am grateful to all who have had a hand in this report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0251 / 2003 ) by Mr Perry , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on Television without Frontiers ( 2003 / 2033 ( INI ) ) .
. Mr President , I will start by saying that the Television without Frontiers Directive is one of the successes of the European Union and has undoubtedly helped European television .
However , we also have to recognise that the television industry in Europe at the present time is not without difficulties .
I am thinking of issues like restricted advertising revenues , and a significant number of companies are currently facing financial difficulties .
The industry today is greatly different from 1997 , when the Directive was last revised , and barely recognisable from the TV industry of 1989 , when the Directive was adopted .
In 1989 there were just 47 television channels in the whole of Europe .
Today that figure is 2000 .
TV is an important industry , with turnover estimated at EUR 62 billion per annum .
The role of the EU must be to help encourage the industry and in no sense to restrict it .
TV is now facing important technological changes : there is more satellite TV , digital TV , convergence with the Internet and new advertising techniques , such as split-screen advertising .
The directive , however , is beginning to creak , and revision cannot be put off indefinitely .
Indeed , a thorough review is becoming urgent .
I appreciate the Commission 's careful approach and congratulate the Commissioner on her careful and extensive consultation .
However , we need to take care : too long a delay in revising the directive will impede progress in the industry .
We should not move away from the fundamental principles of the present directive which relies largely on self-regulation and is not too prescriptive .
We should no more seek to control what people watch than we would seek to control what books they might wish to buy in a bookshop .
Therefore , I am clear that overzealous use of quotas and too detailed definitions would be wrong .
Above all , we should only seek to regulate and influence at a European level that which is of transeuropean concern .
However , there are European issues we need to address .
For instance , events of major importance need to remain free to air , and there is a case for a short European list of such events .
There was a real risk that last year 's World Cup would not be freely available in all our countries .
I am as keen as any colleague to encourage European content in television , although primarily that could be helped by the ' MEDIA Plus ' Programme .
I also urge the Commission to look at ways to ensure that channels like Euronews and Arte flourish and develop .
They help create a European television identity and help our citizens to appreciate and understand the European dimension in their lives .
Euronews in particular is a very effective means of allowing European and world citizens to get a European perspective on current affairs , rather than an exclusively national or American view .
I would also urge the Commission to find means to protect the diversity of ownership of television and to guard against undue concentration of ownership .
Plurality of media ownership is important for democracy .
In this report I touch on two particular issues which may be seen as minor but are important .
First , the needs of viewers with sensory impairments : these fellow citizens wish , and have the right , to enjoy television .
I hope the Commission will conduct the study called for as soon as possible to enable us to get best practice for subtitling , sign language and audio description in television broadcasts .
Finally , I want to raise the issue of those European citizens - often retirees but not only - who move to a place in the sun .
Spain , Greece , Portugal , Italy and France are indeed wonderful and hospitable countries , but for those people from the north of Europe it is nice to watch television programmes from their own country and even to watch their own country play in a football match .
Many people do this by skirting around the law by watching via satellite broadcasters from their own country .
They often ignore the terms of their contracts or even use pirate technology .
Perhaps that is not a big problem , but , as sensible legislators , we ought to be able to frame sensible laws that allow citizens to lead their lives within the law and not in a grey market .
Therefore , I thank the Commissioner for her commitment to Europe 's television .
I urge her to heed this report and to come forward as soon as possible with practical proposals to revise the directive .
Mr President , the Commission congratulates Mr Perry on his work , evident not only in this report but also in the efforts made over the past months to contribute to a reform of the directive that is in the interests of our citizens .
On 6 January , the Commission adopted the fourth report on the application of the Directive and a work programme for its revision incorporating a public consultation .
What did we note in this report on the application of the Directive ?
Firstly , we noted that the Directive is operating relatively well .
Nevertheless , recent technological developments call for more detailed reflection .
The aim of the public consultation was to enable the Commission to assess the need to update or adjust the Directive and the report and today 's debate will help us in this respect .
As part of its work programme , the Commission organised two series of public hearings , in April and June , and interested parties were invited to participate in public debates by responding to specific questions and forwarding their responses to us .
We received 160 written contributions , which are all available on the Commission 's website with the exception of a few whose authors asked for them to be kept confidential .
Based on the analysis of the results of this consultation , the Commission plans to submit to Parliament and the Council at the end of 2003 or beginning of 2004 a communication on the future of audiovisual policy , which will be accompanied by proposals if appropriate .
One of the challenges of the revision is to take account of technological innovations .
I am thinking in this respect of the Council 's 1998 Recommendation on the Protection of Minors and Human Dignity and Audiovisual and Information Services , which is the first legal instrument to cover the content of audiovisual services on the Internet .
After the break , the Commission intends to publish a second report on the implementation of the Recommendation based on a questionnaire that was sent to the Member States .
The aim of this report is to ascertain the progress made , to make it possible to make a direct comparison and to include the new Member States .
Mr Perry raises several questions in his report , to which I would like to respond , without prejudice , of course , to the consultations under way .
The first relates to the scope of the Directive , referred to in paragraphs 7 to 12 .
Mr Perry calls for the definition of audiovisual content to be extended to take account of media convergence .
However , as long as television broadcasting services continue to enjoy unequal importance and impact in our societies , it would be difficult to reach consensus on the concept of content without frontiers .
This was also borne out by the consultation .
In addition , while information society services are at an early stage in their development I feel that it would be inappropriate at the current stage of negotiations to subject them to the more detailed approach of the Directive .
The very first thing that must be done therefore is to ascertain whether the Directive provides the appropriate regulatory framework for the coming years or whether it needs to be adjusted , and this will be verified in the communication .
As regards the working group of national regulators , mentioned in paragraph 19 , the Commission held a meeting with the regulators in March and the next meeting is due to be held on 14 October .
Some Member States do not , however , see the need for an additional committee and have already expressed concern that this committee may duplicate work already being done .
I am not in favour of the systematic participation of public and private broadcasters ; I prefer a system of ad hoc invitations like the one we are using at the moment .
With regard to self-regulation and co-regulation - paragraph 20 of the report - I agree with the rapporteur that greater emphasis should be placed on co-regulation .
As a result , in the working documents we have specifically raised this question and I think that we will be able to make some progress in this area .
I would now like to move on to paragraph 28 concerning channels that have a pan-European dimension .
I do not think that it is up to the Commission to take the initiative in this field .
Indeed , given the disappointing results of a study on the possibilities of using digital platforms for thematic channels , it would be difficult for the Commission to finance any new studies on this subject .
Having said that , we are going to contribute indirectly to the creation of pan-European channels by establishing a favourable regulatory framework and by supporting the creation and broadcast of European audiovisual works .
In relation to the question of television for disabled people - paragraph 34 - we must not forget that the Directive deals essentially with the aspects linked to content and the issue of disabled persons is therefore not formally covered in the report on the application of the Directive as it does not fall within its scope .
It is up to the Member States to apply the principle of subsidiarity in this area .
Nevertheless , access to television services for disabled people is very important .
My services have received many contributions regarding these pertinent issues and all of these can be found on the Commission 's website .
The website also contains the contributions from associations representing disabled people .
In order to make some progress in this area , we plan to organise a round table on 21 October in association with the Royal National Institute for Deaf People and the Royal National Institute for the Blind in the United Kingdom and to invite the Member States to attend and to report on the situation at national level .
We are therefore going to continue in this way , and I must also point out that the Information Society DG has set up a working group that has been christened ' Inclusive Communications ' .
This aspect is thus being taken into account .
Finally , as regards media concentration , discussed in paragraphs 36 to 42 , I support the idea in the Perry report that pluralism is an important element in safeguarding democracy .
This idea is fully reflected in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I would also like to stress that one of the topics covered by the May 2003 Green Paper on Services of General Interest relates precisely to the protection of pluralism .
All interested parties are invited to submit their comments by 15 September .
The Commission will determine its future policy on the basis of the conclusions of this consultation process .
Finally , I will not be able to comment on all of the changes to the Directive today because we have not yet received all of the written contributions .
We receive new contributions every day and I would like to allow my colleagues to complete their analysis before informing you of them by way of the communication on audiovisual policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has done me the honour of asking me to present its opinion .
We cooperated with the rapporteur , Mr Perry , and I am in the happy position of saying that we have taken a common approach .
The Commission needs to pay particular attention to Mr Perry 's individual proposals if we are to take another step forward on the interconnected problems linked to the whole of the audiovisual sector .
This year 's report has a factor of additional interest compared with previous reports , because it proposes in its annex a programme of work which makes provision for dialogue to develop with the individual national agencies , such as radio and television organisations , independent regulatory authorities etc .
The objective is to reform the directive so that it can monitor rapid technological progress , but it also has other individual objectives .
All these objectives mean that a difficult job awaits the Commission and it must convince us of how it is going to work in order for all the necessary adjustments to come about .
Another conclusion on which we more or less agree is the dual role of the audiovisual media .
They are an economic commodity , which is why they are linked to the issue of competition , to the knowledge society being promoted by the Lisbon policy .
Full coordination is therefore needed here .
At the same time , they are a cultural commodity and their promotion needs to take account , on the one hand , of the public interest , such as protecting minors and safeguarding cultural diversity ; on the other hand , however , they must take horizontal account of the European interest , which is to safeguard the European identity against non-European standards , especially American standards .
We need to realise here that the danger from the commercial deficit on the audiovisual media market in comparison with the corresponding American products is directly linked to the future of Europe .
The dialogue has started .
It may be public .
I would say , however , that it needs greater publicity and greater visibility .
In view of all this , the reform of the Television without Frontiers directive must be one of the most serious concerns of all three institutions of the European Union because , over and above clarifying disputed concepts , such as independent producers etc . , we need to guarantee the availability of digital options to a wide public and promote the cohesion of the policy of the audiovisual industry .
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Perry on the quality of the work he has carried out on what is a vital and extremely sensitive subject .
It is true that he usually deals with difficult issues .
We are all aware of the substantial cultural and economic challenges the Television without Frontiers Directive presents for each of the Member States of the Union and the candidate countries .
That is why we support the Commission , which had the quite right and sensible idea of seeking the opinion of each Member State before taking any decisions on the revision .
Specific improvements to the Directive are no doubt necessary to take account of technological developments , but we must ensure that these adjustments are not premature .
In fact , if we look objectively at the situation of the audiovisual market , we can see that the national markets are adapting bit by bit to the new technologies .
Thus , the recent technological developments have not really disrupted the audiovisual landscape , which continues to be dominated to a large extent by traditional television .
Future changes to the Directive must under no circumstances disrupt its content .
A revision calling into question the cultural objectives on which the Member States had reached agreement , under the pretext of extending the scope of the Directive to include all broadcasting formats , would in reality change completely the initial aims of the Directive , that is , the defence and promotion of cultural diversity .
The main provisions of this Directive must not be called into question .
The key principles must continue to form the foundation of the Community 's audiovisual policy : the promotion , movement and broadcast of European works within Europe ; the production and broadcast of works by independent producers ; the existence of broadcast quotas for television services ; the guarantee of protection of minors ; and measures to combat excessive advertising .
The Television without Frontiers Directive has proved its worth as a legal instrument and is now being applied satisfactorily .
Its revision can only be justified if it makes genuine improvements to certain elements such as the worrying issue of media concentration , which obviously undermines pluralism .
The Directive must continue to be a useful tool in promoting cultural diversity and must not become a legal instrument providing solely for the promotion of commercial channels where we would see , for example , continuous advertising with disregard for the works broadcast .
Over and above the economic and financial issues , which are clearly vital , is the simple question of our cultures , our identities and the values in which we believe .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Perry has earned our gratitude by presenting a report demonstrating a very forward-looking perspective , and in which he has not left out the areas of conflict that undeniably exist in a dual system in which public and commercial service providers square up to each other and fight over a market comprising 155 million households in the present European Union of fifteen Member States , a figure that will further increase .
There is no doubt that the directive will have to be revised if its objectives for the future are to be achieved .
My Group takes the view that the Commission is too hesitant in this respect .
What is in fact at stake is the safeguarding of cultural diversity , a wide range of opinions and pluralism .
Whilst democratic opinion today is , in essence , shaped by television , this is no longer only the traditional television with analogue transmission .
More and more , we have digitalisation to cope with .
I was recently at the International Broadcasting Exhibition in Berlin , where I could see very well how consumer habits in this area are changing , and that nowadays the technical means of transmission can no longer be decisive when it comes to deciding which is the right way to draft laws for a media service .
It must also be clear , however , that we need to establish a system of graduated regulation , and this is where there will be new demands placed on future legislation .
Not every media service is of major importance in publicity terms , so the determinative criterion for the future must be the extent to which a media service is useful for publicity purposes and in what sense it is not .
If I might put it rather loosely , it is on that basis that legislation can be drafted with varying degrees of rigour .
Much will also be demanded of the rules that will have to be laid down , not only , to be sure , under the television directive , but also in parallel with it , in order to counteract the accumulation of economic power , which becomes media power and , eventually , also political power .
We are dealing here with a development that makes it plain that bounds must be set at European level to contain media concentration , which does indeed endanger pluralism .
As we can see from the example of Italy , national legal resources are not , in any case , sufficient .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before I make my comments , I should like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Perry , for his sterling report .
It is an important directive , and thanks to the Commission 's regular reports , we are gaining a clear insight into its functioning , which enables us to prepare well-considered proposals for a possible revision in future .
I do have some remarks .
First of all , given the current increase in media convergence , both in the present Member States and in the acceding countries , we must continue to hammer away at pluriformity , both in the public broadcasting corporations and in the private stations .
This is crucial to my group , and I assume my fellow Liberal will also stress this in a moment .
Secondly , sound criteria are needed to protect minors from aggressive TV commercials .
In fact , with regard to television programmes too , it is important for children to be able to make informed choices and for their parents to be able to help them in this .
My group is a great believer in self-regulation , which gives me an opportunity to stand up for the Dutch system , ' Kijkwijze ' , which enables parents and children to make informed choices by means of pictograms .
Finally , I should like to say how pleased I am by the wide support given to my proposal for a pan-European children 's network .
It is a good way of distributing European productions for children on a larger scale , since it combines broadcasting licence-holders from the Member States and candidate countries .
Excellent children 's films have been made in Europe .
If we now see that in my country , the national production of quality films has enjoyed an enormous boost , which is what I read the morning of the day we returned from the film festival in Venice , that the proportion of Dutch films among those seen by cinema audiences has increased by some 6 % , and especially audiences composed of young people , due to an innovative approach whose key aim is to show producers that they are making films for a certain audience - an audience-specific approach , in other words - then I can only be optimistic about the preservation of our cultural diversity in the media , and there is certainly a place for television without frontiers , and , needless to say , for Europe .
Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen .
This issue is a difficult one and is undergoing constant change .
I must thank Mr Perry for his work , and yet I am unsure whether or not this Directive needs to be revised .
This has been stated clearly both by those working in the industry and by the Commission .
This current issue comes up against the problem of definition and apprehension raised by the transfer of images , the development and acceleration of which we have not yet managed to control .
What worries me is the absence of a definition of a ' work ' .
The Television without Frontiers Directive provides a negative definition .
We know what it is not .
It is not information , it is not advertising , it is not this , it is not that .
It is produced by X or made by Y. I , myself , would prefer - and I believe that some of those working in the industry would also prefer - to know what it is .
That would perhaps make it easier to settle the ongoing debate in France and other European countries on reality television .
The problem is defining the scope of audiovisual works .
Some works are very easy to define , such as documentaries and films , but not all are .
I do not know how to define reality television and this is a serious concern .
The second point raised by this debate is the movement of works .
The movement of works and artists is a recurring problem in the field of culture , as I highlighted in the report on the performing arts .
In the context of Television without Frontiers , it is magnified as a result of concentration and the non-national nature of the sector .
How can we promote non-national works in each of our countries ?
We will have to give our opinion on this fundamental problem .
Mr Perry , you paid a great deal of attention in your report to the question of media concentration , which can prevent the movement of non-national works .
I am very pleased that you stress this point as , in my view , it is vitally important and something we must look at very seriously indeed .
Mr President , the fundamental problem in this audiovisual debate is that we do not dare to define the quality we want to protect .
When we talk about European works , for example , we include completely ridiculous talk shows , under the pretext that they are European productions .
Until we have the courage to define what a work is - and that is where Mrs Fraisse is right - in other words , what it is that we want to protect , our television services will be unable to protect European production and European works in Europe for want of the appropriate instruments .
Secondly , as regards concentration , the problem is very simple .
If we do not define what we cannot democratically accept in Europe , there will be more and more concentration and non-European forces will dominate the market .
For both these reasons , I believe that the European Union must have the courage to define what a work is and to define what should be the limit , democratically , between political power and the power of the media .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I and Mr Volcic have tabled some amendments to the excellent , and I repeat , excellent , report by Mr Perry , regarding an issue which you have all touched upon , media concentration and , therefore , pluralism .
I listened with great interest to what Commissioner Reding had to say in defence of pluralism as an essential value .
We cannot , however , close our eyes to the fact that , throughout the western world today , market forces , if left to themselves , almost always lead to serious , dangerous phenomena of concentration and that only a political measure can lay down the rules for a liberal society , the essential basis of which is pluralism .
We are , therefore , facing a major political battle on this issue , taking place in the US , where there is a deadlock between Congress and the authority , and in Europe with the grave problems in England that have thrust themselves upon our attention and the problems in Italy that many of you are aware of .
I do not want you to think , however , that the amendments tabled by Mr Volcic , and myself urging Parliament and the Commission to adopt a measure , a directive , in line with what was , moreover , approved by Parliament in November , were dictated solely by Italian issues .
There is truly a much greater , much wider issue here that affects the whole of Europe : it is an issue of civilisation .
If we want to be a Community based on liberal principals , then this is one of the first issues we need to regulate , in a spirit of freedom and respect for all opinions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am particularly grateful to Mr Perry for his report because , in emphatically demanding the revision of the television directive , he has done so with the objective of maintaining and promoting cultural diversity in Europe in an era of technological convergence .
The fact is that content is no longer dependent only on the medium of television , but , in the same way , on many other technological media , and if we want to maintain diversity , we have to find ways whereby we can achieve common rules in this area , which do justice to the various demands , albeit in a slightly different procedure .
There are two issues I would like to address , and the first is media pluralism .
This Parliament has very emphatically spoken out , most recently on 10 November 2002 , in favour of greater support for , and underpinning of , media diversity in Europe and against unhindered media concentration .
I would press upon the Commission the urgent need to do what this vote by Parliament demands of it and put before us the pieces of work that we have asked for .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats cannot , however , endorse Amendment No 10 , which was tabled today , as it refers exclusively to one instrument , the directive , and because we will achieve a result in this area only if we balance , in an appropriate and proper way , the competences of the Member States and those of the European Union .
Considerations of media pluralism therefore demand the solution that we called for in our resolution in November .
The second point I want to address is the protection of young people .
New technologies require that children and young people be protected in the same way as is provided for in the television directive .
Let us therefore work together towards a new system and new ways of self-regulation with minimum standards accepted by all .
I wish the Commission much success as it travels down this road .
Mr President , Commissioner , we have now heard many answers concerning how the television directive is applied , but also questions , and I think we must and should make some changes .
We must unreservedly guarantee basic principles such as the requirement that the cultural diversity of the media be protected in order to maintain freedom of expression , diversity of opinion and pluralism , creativity and the right to free access to information .
Public broadcasters must perform their educational function , by which I mean that the quota for the transmission of European programmes and works by independent producers could be increased .
This is an aspiration with which I wish to associate myself .
There must , however , be clear , workable and manageable definitions of what is meant by European works and independent producers .
I see the requirement that levels of media concentration be monitored as being the most important .
We have examples of media power and political power being concentrated in one pair of hands .
I believe this cannot be conducive to democracy , and so this is a vitally important area of concern .
We will no doubt have to work towards a directive founded on our demands in the 20 November resolution , and , if all these things come together , I hope that we will be able to do all that media diversity in the European Union requires of us .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen . This directive confirms once and for all that European democracy and transparency is closely connected to the freedom and pluralism of the media .
Therefore , media concentration jeopardises freedom of conscience and is a grave injury to human dignity .
In its Green Paper of 21 May 2003 , the Commission calls for specific measures to be looked at once again to actively protect pluralism ; in its Recommendation of 28 January 2003 , the Council expressed the same concern ; in its Resolution of 20 November and the two reports by Mr Sylla and Mr Perry , Parliament said likewise .
We must , therefore , give a specific response through a Commission initiative to this effect .


We are in a constituent phase .
The draft Constitution includes the Charter of Fundamental Rights , Article 11 ( 2 ) of which explicitly enshrines the right to freedom and pluralism of the media .
What sense is there , however , in adopting a Constitution when that is , itself , negated by the present situation ?
Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur , our colleague Mr Perry , and say that I am very pleased that the revision of this directive aims to promote values of public interest , that is , cultural diversity and the right of reply .
Above all , moreover , it wishes to promote the development of the European audiovisual industry .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the European audiovisual industry must above all be an industry of quality .
As a mother of two small children , I naturally look for children 's programmes and cartoons - with a view to finding programmes which do not injure their sensibilities and which are not prejudicial to minors - and I often find that these programmes or cartoons intended for small children are much more violent than anything even I would like to see .
I often remember how , as a child , I heard adults talking about how they believed that cartoons such as Bambi or Pinocchio were not suitable for us , but now that kind of thing is by far the most ethical programme we can find .
If we want a society free of violence , which is what we all aspire to , we must invest in it .
Investing in it means investing in children and young people , who are the future of the European Union .
I believe that showing them violence on a daily basis is not the best way to do so .
I would therefore insist that the European audiovisual industry must be of high quality , strictly controlled and , above all , must be suited to its intended audience .
Mr President , Mr Perry has reminded us of where the directive has succeeded and he has also indicated , very politely , where we have gone too slowly .
We have gone too slowly in tackling the problem of media concentration , the limits to public access and the progress we have to make towards a sensitive , but forceful , restatement of this directive and its contents framework .
I would say to the Commissioner that we are now in the 52nd month of this Parliament and more conferences and discussions simply intended to spin out time until the end of the Parliament are not good enough .
I thank Mr Perry for accepting my own amendments on access in paragraph 44 .
Television must empower as well as entertain .
Digital broadcasting can reach those with sensory deprivation just as well as it can reach the mass audience .
In this year , above all , we should make progress to that end .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
. ( EL ) Mr President , the Constitutional Treaty reformulates in one of its articles the cultural dimension of Europe and this constitutional foundation expresses a clear political position .
Namely that European culture is a fundamental component of the European economic and social model which is needed if the political venture of the European Union is to be completed .
It is the duty of us , as Members of the European Parliament , to convert this constitutional formulation to an active , effective policy .
I consider that , with the report on cultural industries , we are making such a step .
We have expanded our policy horizontally with certain important admissions which have to do with the conditions of production and consumption of cultural products and services by European citizens .
We demonstrated during the preparation of this report and in the dialogue held in the Committee on Culture with all the honourable Members , and I must thank them for that , the central importance of creation and of creators as a basic source of the added value of cultural products .
We took account of the important economic dimension of culture nowadays , its role in the economic development of regions and towns and its contribution to GDP and to the employment sector .
We noted the revolutionary changes brought about by new technologies in many of the sectors of the cultural industries , such as in music , in publications and in the audiovisual sector .
We discussed in detail the importance of the competitiveness of European products , compared with those from other countries of the world , the inequalities of the international trade and the close link between cultural heritage and tourism .
European citizens consume millions of copies of disks and books and buy millions of tickets to the cinema and concerts every year .
All this constitutes their cultural diet , thereby shaping their profile and their cultural identity .
The citizens also watch television programmes .
They receive information and influence on the Internet from a massive quantity of material which we refer to as content .
In these ways they select , cultivate and promote one form or another of art and culture , different aesthetics and quality , in close dependency on education and their personal development .
It is a complex cultural process which characterises the daily life of citizens and we should not ignore the broad political importance and weight which it has .
In addition , enlargement gives Europe an even greater cultural dimension , together with diversity .
The internal market is growing .
Creators ' works must overcome a number of obstacles , such as problems in connection with distribution and promotion and extensive piracy , in order to find a way of reaching the European public .
What we are looking for is European added value and that also applies to the thousands of small and medium-sized enterprises working in the various sectors .
In order to address all this , we have made a series of proposals to the Commission .
They are numerous , but I shall comment on just three .
First , the need for a definition of cultural industries and the sectors they include .
We need here to analyse the cultural , commercial and economic dimension in order to include the sectors in the definition of cultural or creative industries , as they are called in certain countries .
I think this will give us a better statistical picture , which we do not have at present .
Our second call on the Commission is to map the cultural industries at European level .
We are calling for it to concentrate on cultural , economic , legal , technological and educational aspects , to include employment , intellectual property , the competitiveness network , new products and exports .
Finally , we consider that it is very important to have a Green Paper in order to promote the coordination of the Member States and the regions in the sector of the cultural industries , so that obstacles can be analysed , solutions suggested and a way found for the public and private sectors to cooperate , to promote competitiveness and to improve European citizens ' access to culture .
I would like to believe that this report is just the beginning and that the Commission will respond not only to this specific report but also to the signs of the times , by taking the necessary initiatives with which , it should be added , the Council has also been preoccupied recently .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank Mrs Zorba for her excellent report .
It has come at just the right time to highlight the importance of the phenomenon of European cultural industries not only from an economic point of view - to which reference has been made - but also in terms of the potential they offer for cultural diversity in Europe .
It is unfortunate , but we are not always aware of the economic significance of European cultural industries .
I am referring to audiovisual , music and publishing services .
A study carried out in 2001 on the employment potential of this sector estimated that 4.8 million people were employed by creative industries in the broadest sense , which accounts for 3.1 % of employees in the European Union .
The European audiovisual sector alone directly employs more than 1 million people .
Therefore , in addition to their contribution to diversity , cultural industries contribute significantly to the economy .
They of course differ from other industries in that they have an obvious social and cultural role .
They have to do with creation .
They involve producing and selling not products , like other industries , but cultural goods .
These goods are the expression of an identity ; they are reference points .
Therefore , as far as cultural industries are concerned , normal industrial policy cannot play the same role , not being adapted to these industries .
We need to look beyond it .
Cultural diversity presupposes a solid and varied industrial fabric that guarantees pluralism in the cultural supply within a global market .
This phenomenon alone shows the importance that needs to be attached to this sector of activities that relates to our identities .
I would like to mention some key actions to demonstrate to you that Europe is paying attention to this sector , not only within the framework of cultural programmes , but far beyond them .
You are all aware of the MEDIA programme and the work we do for film , but did you know , for example , that in the Culture 2000 programme , the support provided for publishing houses to encourage literary translations has benefited 1 300 translations in the past years ?
Did you know that a large proportion of the Structural Funds is used to develop the cultural industry ?
For example , in the Swedish town of Hultsfred , the ERDF cofinanced projects aimed at developing the music industry .
Since then , the town has become the rock capital of Sweden !
As you can see , European aid can result in genuine , concerted and concentrated development of cultural industries .
Indeed , in your report , you call for a communication on the Structural Funds and culture , a communication that will highlight these types of actions .
I would like to point out that since 2002 we have also been developing experimental measures designed to support the music and book industries .
For instance , we have the project to increase exports of European music outside our continent .
You can therefore see , ladies and gentlemen , that these cultural industries are being supported only by EU programmes and actions .
I must add that we will soon have a unique opportunity to strengthen this action when we discuss the extension of the MEDIA and CULTURE programmes and the new generation of programmes .
To this end , with Parliament 's help , we will have to envisage very systematic action so that the creativity of this sector can encourage economic and cultural diversity and , thus , our European roots .
. Mr President , it has been a great pleasure to work closely with Mrs Zorba on this important ' own initiative ' report .
I am pleased that the final report , as adopted in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , incorporated the more important elements of my Committee 's contribution .
I refer in particular to the emphasis on the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises .
I have a long involvement with cultural industries in Ireland , in particular local industries which promote the Irish language , traditional music and culture of my own region in the West of Ireland .
SMEs in the field of culture are clearly more vulnerable compared with similar sized companies in other spheres .
These SMEs frequently produce , what are in effect , public goods .
In other words , their products offer benefits to society as a whole above and beyond any commercial value .
Such SMEs frequently face difficulties in assessing finance , particularly in the start-up phase .
If you combine the uniqueness of the cultural sector with the fact that such industries are often located in peripheral and rural regions , it is clear that the question of providing adequate finance must be addressed .
The Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy would like Member States to look at what policy instruments could be used to promote cultural industries .
Parliament has previously stressed the need to reduce the legislative and administrative burden on SMEs , simplifying the collection of data for tax collection and reducing unnecessary red tape , especially for the self-employed and small businesses .
One point of Mrs Zorba 's report that I particularly welcome is the call for a revision of the ' De Minimis ' rules on State Aid .
Such a review would take into account the unique situation pertaining to SMEs in the cultural sector , particularly those in peripheral regions .
In conclusion , I would like to make one particular plea in relation to the policy on the information society .
Priority must be given to the development of broadband Internet access to rural and peripheral regions .
This , would help create a more level playing field for the many cultural related SMEs based in these regions
Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Zorba on having taken this very interesting initiative to dedicate a report to cultural industries .
In fact , today we are seeing the emergence of cultural industries with an ever-increasing economic dimension , which also play a vital role in Europe 's cultural diversity and identity .
One of the problems raised by this report is the total absence of a precise definition of cultural industries and of any European industrial strategy in this area .
The Commission must look at these issues and put forward proposals to us , perhaps by way of the Green Paper .
In future , we will have to increase aid for cultural industries in projects for the economic development of regions and towns , through the Structural Funds , and also by encouraging private and public partnerships .
Similarly , the European Union will have to establish support measures for SMEs and independent enterprises , which play an important role in the area of artistic creation and production .
Finally , I would like to emphasise here the importance of the printed word , and in particular of the regional daily press .
That is what best guarantees linguistic and cultural diversity and is the most overlooked of the Union 's cultural policies .
It is vital that when the Commission is drawing up its Green Paper it should at long last put forward proposals to actively support this sector , which is also essential for pluralism .
In the same vein , the Commission will have to propose specific measures to combat media concentration .
In conclusion , I feel that it is now time to mobilise our efforts to ensure that the proposed UNESCO convention on cultural diversity can soon see the light of day .
More than ever , we must promote a European cultural spirit in order to encourage creation and bolster cultural diversity , without which Europe would not exist nor have any influence abroad .
Mr President , the direct cultural policy of the European Union is restricted , as the Member States have wished , to the modest funding of programmes which , nevertheless , are amongst those most often requested by the citizens .
This deficiency is due , in my opinion , to fundamental causes .
Firstly , the Council 's fear of denationalising these policies , which some consider as signs of national identity .
The other reason is the governments ' , and also the Commission 's , fear of using Community resources for subsidies which are not directed towards farmers or large public works .
People avoid talking about culture or art in economic terms when , on the contrary , it should be argued that the cultural industries create employment and generate wealth for Europe .
If we include the audiovisual field and cultural tourism in the culture sector , it is by far the most important sector for the European economy .
I address this , without much hope that they read the Minutes , it is true , to the Finance Ministers and also our colleagues in the Committee on Budgets .
As requested by Mrs Zorba , the Commission must quantify these aspects and consider them when drawing up its policies , not only the directly cultural ones but also the economic , social and territorial ones .
Furthermore , Commissioner , you should demand that your colleagues take this approach to territorial policies .
On the other hand , it is also becoming necessary to restrict the commercialisation of culture .
You will perhaps remember that a few years ago one of the best museums in the world , the property of one of our Member States , was renting out its rooms when the museum was closed - rooms exhibiting humanity 's greatest works - for weddings and other social events .
This was a depressing and alarming example .
Within the European Union , the economic exploitation of cultural resources must be compatible with their historical and artistic dignity .
Mr President , these aspects and many others are dealt with in this report , and I warmly congratulate its author on its timeliness and quality .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to express my appreciation for Mrs Zorba 's sound initiative .
We worked well together and managed , via a poll , to gain more insight into the finer points of the cultural industries .
It is clear that there is much room for improvement , certainly at European level .
The cultural industries are , after all , of great economic significance , and offer much scope for employment .
On this basis , I should like to call for culture to figure more prominently in the Structural Funds ; SMEs in particular might benefit from this .
Culture is also , however , an expression of our national identity .
In a united and , soon , enlarged Europe , it is important for us to be aware of this cultural diversity .
Museums in all manner of areas are trying to accommodate this , but unfortunately , they are hindered in most European countries by the sometimes exorbitant premiums they have to pay for the exhibits on display .
This gives museums in countries where this is not the case a major advantage in the organisation of outstanding exhibitions .
This is , in my view , a clear form of distortion of competition , and it must be stopped ; it prompts me to urge the Commission to map out the differences in indemnity regulations in the present and future Member States , and subsequently to table a proposal for more streamlined regulations .
It is unacceptable for a united Europe to have an elitist group of citizens who are well-informed on what Europe has to offer in terms of culture , while others have to remain deprived of all the fine things that the cultural industries in other European countries have produced and are producing .
Thank you .
I should therefore like attention to be given to these indemnity regulations .
Mr President , I should like to thank our rapporteur for the serious work she has done ; however , I cannot agree with her on the approach which she has opted to take .
In a society in which everything can be bought and sold , culture is in immediate danger of commercialisation , which changes its nature .
Cultural creation is no longer the art created either collectively by society or by gifted people .
It is becoming a product which is produced and sold , so that it can be converted to business profit , as well as a means of ideological guidance of the peoples , by promoting a specific way of life .
Under these conditions , approaching culture in terms of the industry , the market and added value , as if we were talking about cars or oranges , is very dangerous .
Of course , the report expresses a number of concerns about cultural diversity .
However , it is not these that determine its content , it is concerns that the European art markets have lost an important share of the global market , that the European Union has not yet developed its potential as regards the trade in cultural commodities .
Company mergers are considered dangerous not because they result in monopoly control , but because they jeopardise market transparency .
Even piracy is condemned not as theft of intellectual work , but because it deprives these industries of vast revenues , impacting on future investment .
The proposals are in keeping with the concerns expressed .
The report calls for the intervention of the Commission and the Member States not in order to strengthen artistic creation and protect it from commercialisation , but in order to strengthen companies and promote the competitiveness of the European industries .
This sort of intervention will further institutionalise culture and put it under even greater control by the monopolies .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to draw your attention to the amendments proposed by our political group , in a bid to mitigate somewhat the consequences of the report .
Thank you , Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou .
On behalf of the sittings service , I apologise for the hubbub over which you had to speak .
This morning 's debate on the cultural package is closed .
Culture being about listening to one another , I assure you that at times we are not always very polite .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , several journalists have told me that ' Plenum Aktuell ' , the German-language summary of our debates , has recently proved to be particularly deficient .
The German text contains neither Monday 's debate on Basel II nor the debate on the outcome of the Convention , which many of us regard as historic .
Until 11 this morning , there were no reports at all , something that seems to have something to do with the reorganisation of the press service .
I think this bodes ill for the quality of the reports on our debates , and I would be glad , Mr President , if you would set the relevant inquiries in motion .
. ( FR ) Although of economic importance , culture is above all about citizenship .
The diversity and quality of culture and the capacity to participate in cultural creation are elements of a democratic society that cannot be ignored .
In this respect , public intervention is crucial .
Financial support must be provided for cultural creation and production in order to ensure diversity and vitality and to avoid concentration in the hands of a few , often American , multinationals .
Today , though , systems of public aid are threatened by the thinking that makes the market pre-eminent over everything else .
In the EU , these systems may be considered to be ' State aid ' prohibited as being contrary to European competition law , which is sacrosanct .
We must regret , in this respect , the result of the Convention , which leaves the existing texts as they are instead of promoting aid for culture to the ranks of aid that is automatically authorised .
A formidable sword of Damocles thus hangs above our cultural policies .
At international level , we must safeguard the cultural exception , particularly in light of the GATS , by ensuring that the unanimity rule is maintained in relation to trade agreements in the field of culture .
Mr President , I would like to point out that in the next report we are going to vote on - the Ebner report - the Spanish version of paragraph 14 of Recommendation 2 of the Annex does not have the same meaning as the original version .
I would therefore like to ask that , when it comes to the vote , we vote on the text of the original version of that paragraph .
Mrs Zabell , as in all cases , the services will guarantee that the version ultimately published will conform to what has been voted for in plenary .
The Spanish version will be corrected .
We shall now proceed to the vote on :
Report ( A5-0271 / 2003 ) by Mr Michl Ebner , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , with recommendations to the Commission on regional and lesser-used languages - the minority languages in the European Union in the context of enlargement and cultural diversity ( 2003 / 2057 ( INI ) )
Mr Vallvé is requesting the floor for an oral amendment .
Mr President , Mr Ebner , I would like , at this juncture , to bring in an oral amendment .
With your permission , I would like to replace ' in the official language ' in the last sentence with ' in the official language or languages ' .
[ I think that is perfectly clear ] .
If there are no objections we shall proceed in this way .
( Parliament approved the resolution )
I will take advantage of the Presidency and offer my [ sincere ] congratulations molt sincerament en la meva pròpia llengua [ in my own language ] .
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , I had informed the services that I should like to table an oral amendment after Article 39 .
I should now like to ask you whether this is still possible .
That is very kind of you .
We have at the moment a situation in which , among others , the Dutchman , Arjan Erkel is still being held , with no indication as to his whereabouts .
This is why I should like to table the following oral amendment , which is in line with the rapporteur 's views .
I will read it to you in English .
It is to be inserted after Article 39 , and reads as follows : .
I would say to the honourable Member that as President I have no problem repeating votes if there is really the least reasonable doubt .
I can guarantee that there is no doubt , I have declared the result entirely convinced of this and I am not going to rectify a vote whose result has already been declared .
The rapporteur is going to present a technical modification of paragraph 120 rather than an oral amendment .
.
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to table an oral amendment to the effect that the last sentence of paragraph 120 should be changed , because the situation has meanwhile changed .
It should read as follows : starting with complete freedom of movement . Freedom of expression and religion on the part of the Venerable Thich Quang Do - I hope I have pronounced this correctly - released in June 2003 but still subject to police control , and the reinstatement of the legal status of the banned United Buddhist Church .
I would insist that I believe that this is more of a technical correction .
Does anybody object to the presentation of the rapporteur 's oral amendment ?
If not , we shall proceed to the vote .
I am sorry , but I have no intention of carrying out that check .
I would insist that the result was perfectly clear .
You have not taken account of the fact that one group has not voted in the same way in both cases .
I am simply applying Rule 19 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure and I will take the consequences .
Mr President , you cited a Rule that I did not know existed when you made your ruling on the points of order by Mr Wieland and Mr Van Orden .

Rule 138 ( 3 ) mentions that points of order concerning the validity of a vote may be raised after the President has declared it closed .
Thus Mr Wieland had the right to do what he did .
Rule 138 ( 4 ) provides that ' after the result of a vote by show of hands has been announced , a Member may request that this result be checked using the electronic voting system ' .
You did not do that Mr President .
I know the final decision on all this is yours , but it was a legitimate call by a host of Members of this House .
You said at the very beginning of this voting session that your eyes were playing you up .
I would humbly ask that you take a check on Amendment No 16 .
( Applause from the right )
I am going to apply Rule 138 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , which gives that final responsibility to the President , and I therefore consider the result I declared previously to be valid .
. ( NL ) Mr President , as rapporteur , I would not like to see any ambiguity left about one section in the decision-making process .
I should therefore like to urge you to consider complying with the EPP 's request and permitting , at this stage , an oral vote on point 16 .
I appreciate that you would then have to go back on a decision , but I should nevertheless like to urge you to treat this report in such a way as to leave no misunderstanding or uncertainty on this matter at all .
I would therefore make an urgent appeal to you now to honour the request .
I am sorry but I am not changing my opinion .
We shall proceed to the vote on the whole of the motion for a resolution thus modified .
( Parliament approved the resolution )
Report ( A5-0281 / 2003 ) by Mr Fodé Sylla , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Rights and Freedoms , Justice and Home Affairs , on the situation concerning fundamental rights in the European Union ( 2002 ) ( 2002 / 2013 ( INI ) )
Mr President , I would like to present an oral amendment to the first sub-paragraph of paragraph 135 , which says the following : ' calls on the institutions to provide access to opinions of the Legal Services , respecting the principles established by the Court of Justice ' .
I believe that this amendment would resolve the small problem which had arisen .
Mr Turco is requesting the floor .
Is it on the same issue ?
The mere fact that the staff of the Legal Service and Parliamentary Bureau only let us know at 10.40 this morning which texts we have to submit , how we should vote and which amendments they can accept , gives a picture of the situation in which we find ourselves in Parliament .
I would like to thank Mr Mollar for his efforts , but , as far as I am concerned - being one of the authors of the amendment adopted unanimously by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , an amendment which , moreover , quoted the opinion of the European Ombudsman - I think that we must put an end to this farce .
I will vote against this compromise .
We take note but , institutionally , the correct procedure was to hear the chairman of the committee and you as author of the amendment .
We are therefore going to vote firstly on the proposed compromise by the chairman of the committee .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would nevertheless like to remind those Members who have asked for no less than five or six passages of the report to be deleted that we are not in a supermarket with a trolley .
This is about the Charter of Fundamental Rights , and we are not here to decide what should be retained or completely removed .
It also has to do with the Charter that has to appear in Part II of the text of the Constitution .
So when Members propose removing the right to education , the right of asylum , the right to citizenship , the reference to racism , when Members call into question equality between men and women or on the basis of sexual orientation , I say to them that the next time we should not call this text the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union but the Charter of Random Rights of the European Union .
Mr Sylla , I believe that the amendments have been presented correctly , in time and in accordance with the Rules of Procedure , and what you are making is a political objection rather than a regulatory objection .
Your observation is not therefore relevant .
I would ask the honourable Members not to take it into account .
I believe it is a clarification with regard to the wording and as such it will be taken into account .
In any event it has to be approved .
Mr President , I would very much like to make a brief statement about the next amendment . My concern is with torture .
It is quite extraordinary that there is no amendment whereby this House can condemn torture in the strongest terms .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Ladies and gentlemen , you are perfectly aware that this is not a debate .
It is not appropriate to speak here about the fundamental issue .
We shall proceed to the vote on the whole of the motion for a resolution thus amended .
( Parliament approved the resolution )
Report ( A5-0273 / 2003 ) by Mr Paul A.A.J.G. Lannoye , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the communication from the Commission on water management in developing countries : policy and priorities for EU development cooperation ( COM ( 2002 ) 132 - C5-0335 / 2002 - 2002 / 2179 ( COS ) )
President .
Firstly there is an oral amendment by Mr Knolle to Amendment No 15 .
Mr President , I ask that the following change be made to the amendment on which we are currently voting .
The last line reads : ' ? the work of private operators ' .
I ask that the word ' private ' be deleted , so that it will then read : ' the work of operators ' .
Does the House agree to this oral amendment being tabled ?
Are there any objections ?
We shall proceed to the vote on Amendment No 15 , including the oral amendment .
The rapporteur is requesting the floor .
Mr President , I had asked to table an oral amendment .
I will ask the Socialist Group to remove a small section of their amendment , which states ' can be sometimes in practice ' .
I would propose to them that they remove this part of the sentence .
If they are in agreement , I will support their amendment ; if not , I will vote against it .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists does not agree to that omission .
The amendment will therefore be put to the vote in its original form .
We shall now proceed to the vote on the whole of the proposal for a resolution , including amendments .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0277 / 2003 ) by Mrs Luisa Morgantini , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on trade and development ? assisting developing countries to benefit from trade ( COM ( 2002 ) 513 ? 2002 / 2282 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0217 / 2003 ) by Mr John Bowis , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication on Health and Poverty Reduction in Developing Countries ( COM ( 2002 ) 129 ? C5-0334 / 2002 ? 2002 / 2178 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0249 / 2003 ) by Mr Richard Howitt , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on participation of non-state actors in EC development policy ( COM ( 2002 ) 598 ? ( 2002 / 2283 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0251 / 2003 ) by Mr Roy Perry , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on Television without Frontiers ( 2003 / 2033 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0276 / 2003 ) by Mrs Myrsini Zorba , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on Cultural Industries ( 2002 / 2127 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
. ( PT ) The European Union 's objective is to ensure that Europe remains prosperous and peaceful .
It is also , however , an important partner in cooperation , in particular with developing countries .
I congratulate the Commission on its Annual Report for 2001 on EC development policy and the implementation of external assistance .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , however , I can only underline the fact that questions of gender , development and combating poverty are interrelated .
The Commission should , therefore , incorporate into its development policy specific goals relating to education , health , gender equality and combating poverty .
The financing of female participation in business should be promoted . Moreover , the reduction of child mortality and maternal mortality , as well as measures to fight violence against women , genital mutilation , rape of girls and trafficking in human beings , should always be included in development policy .
The Commission should ensure a gender-balanced participation in projects , with a special regard for areas where discrimination against women is most severe .
I support the Commission in its reform of the management of external aid , which will allow us to strengthen the evaluation and improve the implementation of development policy .
. ( FR ) The Martinez Martinez report calls on Parliament to approve the Commission 's 2001 annual report on its development policy and the implementation of external assistance .
We voted against the report to highlight both our opposition to the Commission 's policy and its justification .
Even the report from the very official UNDP notes that the situation in most poor countries deteriorated in the previous year and that , for some of them , it is disastrous .
Under these conditions , the very title of the report , which refers to development policy , is an insult to these hundreds of thousands of human beings whose situation , rather than improving , is only getting worse .
The fact that the report dares to welcome the Commission 's emphasis on poverty reduction is a further insult .
The amount of aid provided is pitiful ; it comes nowhere near the amounts the pillage of these countries yields to oil , building and maritime traffic trusts and the countless European enterprises that are growing rich on the meagre wages paid in these countries .
The report calls for specific measures to protect indigenous populations .
Quite apart from the language , which is redolent of colonial times , what the poor countries , and particularly Africa , must be protected from above all , is these predators , the large cartels ?
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Mr President , I am glad that this report has been adopted .
The report by Michl Ebner from the South Tyrol is successor to a long line of great reports adopted by this House on this subject since the 1980s , beginning with the Arfé Report , produced by a great Social Democrat from the Valle d 'Aosta .
I rejoice in it .
It was the eastward enlargement that made it necessary to send out a clear signal concerning these matters , for a very large number of minorities and ethnic groups will be finding their way to us : Hungarians in Slovakia , Germans and Poles in the Czech Republic , Poles in Lithuania , Lithuanians in Poland , and so on .
Taken together , members of the minorities will , numerically speaking , be the second largest Member State in the enlarged EU , after Germany but before France .
That shows the immensity of this issue in quantitative terms , and even in qualitative terms it is of great significance , as these minorities can become either the mortar in the foundations of the EU or an explosive charge .
We want them to be the mortar that holds us together .
. ( FR ) I am vehemently in favour of keeping , indeed developing , cultural diversity in Europe , particularly at this time when it is being enlarged to comprise twenty-five Member States .
Since languages are the main component of this diversity , then I am in favour of linguistic enlargement , in spite of any material or technical difficulties that may arise from it .
Incidentally , I fear that there is a double game being played by those who are arguing for an increase in the number of languages , with the actual aim of better establishing the monopoly of English .
Therefore , we need to work on the language question , in particular by again giving objective consideration to Esperanto .
The monopoly of English is neither good for Europe nor for Great Britain , whose language will become a mere ' nuts and bolts language '
. ( NL ) Respecting and safeguarding the linguistic and cultural diversity in Europe is an honourable objective .
Any erosion of this diversity would constitute an impoverishment of our cultural heritage .
Consequently , measures to avoid this , such as the proposed establishment of a European Agency on Linguistic Diversity and Language Learning , deserve every support .
However , the draft resolution is explicitly based on the Council of Europe 's Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities .
The Flemish Government has always refused to sign this agreement - with good reason - since French-speaking Belgians who have moved to Flanders want to misuse it in order to have French recognised as an official language in Flanders .
This is in conflict with language legislation that has been established with great difficulty and the principle of territoriality in Belgium .
It mainly concerns people who refuse to fit in with the Dutch-speaking character of the region , and who , in fact , turn failure to teach another language - in this case Dutch - into a political point of debate .
Since the report does not propose any measures to prevent groups of relatively recent newcomers to the region from using the Treaty to their advantage in order to cancel out a linguistic balance that has been achieved with great difficulty , the representatives of the Vlaams Blok will be voting against it .
. ( ES ) It is my pleasure to explain why I voted for the Ebner report , given the far-reaching significance of promoting , respecting and also , where necessary , protecting the languages which enrich the European Union 's cultural and linguistic heritage and which ought to bring to life the motto of the draft Constitution for Europe , ' United in diversity ' .
Moreover , those languages are the central nucleus of the linguistic and cultural rights recognised by that draft Constitution and also by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
With that in mind , I want to draw attention in particular to the need to add the official languages of the Member States to the list of official languages of the Union . An example from within the Spanish state is Catalan , a language spoken in an area containing ten million inhabitants , and recognised by Parliament , in the Reding report , as deserving special treatment given its importance and standing at the heart of the European Union .
It is a sad fact that successive Spanish Governments have failed to champion the official languages recognised by the relevant Statutes of Autonomy , earmarking for development the principles and rights of the Spanish Constitution itself .
For that reason , it is very important that it should be the European Union that recognises and protects these languages , over and above the positions of governments .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( NL ) The recognition of language diversity within the EU is no folklore .
There are currently 40 million EU citizens who speak a language other than the official national language , and next year they will total 46 million .
For the children and grandchildren of migrants , the language of the environment will become their first spoken language .
This does not apply to stateless peoples or to people who live in pockets of society on the other side of the state border that separates them from those who speak the same language .
Within Europe , there has been a long-term battle for education , administration and work in the citizens ' own national language .
People without this opportunity end up in the position of second-class citizens .
The first-class citizens are those who speak the prevailing language at home or who have completely adapted to it .
Within the EU , a stark contrast is starting to emerge between peoples who now have their own Member State and peoples who are treated as minorities within states that predominantly speak a different language .
The language of this latter group is still not being recognised within the EU , unless it happens to be the same of that of the neighbouring country .
For example , the ten million Catalan-speakers will continue to wonder why their language counts for less than the much smaller languages of the Danes , Finns , Baltic peoples and Slovenians .
We will soon face major conflicts unless a solution is found in good time .
.
( PT ) I voted against this report , not because I consider less widely-spoken European regional languages to be undeserving of respect , protection and dissemination , but because I feel that the rapporteur 's approach to this question gives impetus to separatist tendencies within the Member States . This will bring about an intensification of political and territorial disputes inherited from nineteenth- and twentieth-century conflicts and the territorial agreements which always followed them .
The tone of the debate on this report provides conclusive proof of what I have just said .
Its prevailing characteristics have been an inability to understand much of what was said , and the clear and conspicuous use of minority and regional languages as an offensive weapon in a brazen quest for vengeance on the part of many national minorities . Some of these minorities are , notoriously , involved in worrying secessionist or independence movements , some of which have no qualms about resorting to extremist violence and brutality .
I do not believe that the European Union should be allowed to meddle in the structure and internal affairs of its Member States , much less intervene , even indirectly , in their political and institutional balance of power .
I recognise the need to preserve Europe 's cultural and linguistic diversity , but I feel that pushing for the establishment of yet another European agency to that end is a signal that ?
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( FR ) We can subscribe to some of the joint resolution 's exhortations and agree to collaboration between countries faced with disasters , in particular to help countries such as Portugal .
The text as a whole , however , only hides the Member States ' responsibility in their incapability of dealing with the repercussions of the heatwave and the forest fires .
Obviously the heatwave itself was not the responsibility of the Member States ; nor , generally speaking , were the fires .
Why though , were there not enough staff in old people 's homes and in hospitals to deal with the consequences of the heat wave on elderly people ?
Why were there not enough firemen , and not enough equipment , to fight the forest fires ?
It is because all Member States , even the richest ones , have for years been cutting back the budgets for essential public services .
They are reducing funds allocated to them ; they are not taking on staff in sufficient numbers .
Even at normal times , the emergency services at hospitals and the fire-fighting services are at their limits and can meet their obligations only by subjecting their personnel to intolerable working conditions .
In such conditions , what value can be attached to promises - in any case extremely vague ones - that it will not happen again ?
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure ) .
. ( FR ) Leaving behind the media stir , there are two issues to which this summer 's heatwave in Europe should open the eyes of decision-makers .
We are responsible for the disruption of the climate and for the dangerous world that we are going to bequeath to our children .
For some things , it is already too late .
For others , courageous decisions have to be taken very quickly , even if they are not popular .
The thousands of deaths , often of elderly and sometimes unknown people , reminds us that it is not enough to ' prolong life ' but that we need to give the means to live , whatever the situation , the handicap , health and age .
Our society is far from this and worse , it is getting further away from it . ( Just look at the French Government 's decisions to lower taxes ) .
. ( DE ) In July and August , extremes of heat , drought and forest fires inflicted great suffering on European citizens .
The forest fires , in particular , caused severe damage ; human lives were lost , and the destruction of flora and fauna is harming the ecosystem .
The rebuilding of the homes , factories and infrastructure that have been destroyed in the affected areas will take years , and people will not be able to accomplish it on their own .
Dealing with the damage will require the creation of a whole network of relief agencies , and the people affected are in urgent need of solidarity , from the European Community in particular .
I therefore welcome the allocation of aid totalling EUR 31.6 million for the people severely affected as being the EU 's first significant response , but we should assume even now that financial support will need to be improved - to what extent , it goes without saying , will be able to be determined only after the full extent of the damage has been precisely ascertained .
It is , at the same time , indispensable that we ensure that it is possible to get the long-term help needed to rebuild the social and economic fabric started promptly and without bureaucracy .

Also , for the sake of protecting the forests in future , steps must be taken to improve meteorological forecasts , thus making it possible to minimise the risks associated with adverse weather conditions .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( FR ) We have not voted in favour of this joint resolution on the heatwave for the simple and good reason that it does not grasp the social , health and environmental measure of the disaster .
The heatwave is not fate and its gruesome repercussions were not unavoidable .
This climatic accident is primarily the result of the greenhouse effect caused by global warming generated by human activity .
Other choices are , however , possible , notably to oblige the industrial powers to respect the Kyoto protocol .
The free-marketeers ' choices in terms of energy and transport policies are harmful and criminal .
When will there be a resolution for renewable energies so as to leave behind fossil fuels and nuclear energy ?
When will there be a resolution to prioritise rail and piggyback transport , and moreover , one for other choices relating to national and regional development ?
Finally , if we continue to reduce public deficit and dismantle public services to abide by the dogma of the Stability and Growth Pact , we will close down social services and hospitals .
If we continue to cast elderly people into precarious situations and poverty by revising retirement schemes and systems of allowances , then we will make them even more vulnerable and we will destroy the social security systems .
This policy has killed more than 14 000 people in Europe .
We need to make different choices for our society .
. ( PT ) The final text of the resolution goes a long way towards meeting the expectations of the Portuguese people and provides , at last , a response that is in line with the scale of the disaster that struck Portugal in the form of a devastating series of forest fires at the end of July and August .
I voted for all the proposed amendments to the motion for a compromise resolution and am delighted that they were all approved , significantly improving the high standard of work achieved previously by the representatives of the groups .
Portugal 's justifiable request for an increase in the size of its grant from the Solidarity Fund has received a strong vote of confidence here today . A complementary move is now afoot to reorganise some Structural Funds and Community programmes with a view to dealing with the effects of the disaster ; that move has also been given a boost .
At the same time , moreover , the second reading of the draft Forest Focus regulation , which will soon reach this Chamber , has gained considerable impetus . This is because renewed sanction has been given to the demands already made by the European Parliament for the forest fire prevention programme , as it functioned until the end of 2002 , to be properly reviewed .
. ( PT ) The main priorities of the programme for rebuilding infrastructure and regenerating the affected areas should be replanting and reforestation , to be financed by the Structural Funds , the European Agriculture Guidance and Guarantee Fund ( EAGGF ) and the Cohesion Fund .
Fire prevention in southern European countries should be encouraged through binding measures to which the governments of the Member States must strictly adhere . It should not be left at the mercy of purely economic policies such as those in evidence during the disaster we have just witnessed .
There can be absolutely no doubt that Member States ' national , regional and local land-use plans should make provisions for forestry reserves , scheduling initiatives for protecting indigenous species , preventive schemes and natural reforestation schemes , in the interests of safeguarding the character and quality of life of communities in a given area .
I have voted against . And why ?
Because we are barking up the wrong tree with these resolutions .
I would put the question here whether we are not at risk of slipping into totalitarian thinking with the selective condemnation of the Cuban situation , while other countries that are allegedly friendly to us have maintained similar practices , more systematically , and for much longer .
This means that even the European Union is turning into a totalitarian regime that is selective in who it holds accountable and prosecutes .
To what extent has Cuba as a country and the Cuban population over the past 40 years had a reasonable chance of developing its own policy ?
It is hypocritical to point the finger only at Cuba .
Instead , what is needed here is understanding and cooperation based on mutual respect .
My thoughts , therefore , also go to Guantanamo , to what is going on there , to all the lies and manipulations that are being disseminated .
Lies are being told , people are even paying other people to lie , and I think that this should stop .
I object to this behaviour .
Mr President , I have voted against the resolution on Cuba , not because I disagree with what is said in it about the situation in Cuba , but because I disagree with what is not said .
I feel that it is intellectually and politically unjustifiable to assess Cuba 's position without considering the unremitting aggression instigated by the United States and endured by the island for the last 40 years . That aggression has been made manifest in all kinds of acts , including terrorist acts , which have been condemned by the international community .
This policy of aggression has intensified recently , giving rise to justifiable concerns on the part of the Cuban authorities , especially now that pre-emptive war has risen to the status of a White House doctrine and the invasion of Iraq has taken place .
The threat of virtual war , endured by Cuba for so many years , has thus grown into the threat of real war .
We might criticise some of the reactions to this threat ? we have done so ? but that does not mean we should not try to understand them .
The Cubans are convinced of two things , and I agree with them : the first is that the European Union treats Cuba differently from any other country in the same economic circumstances as Cuba , and even from any other country with a similar regime to Cuba .
The Cubans are also convinced , as I am , that this discriminatory policy is not a matter of coincidence . Rather , it is encouraged by the United States .
I believe it is essential to rethink our policy towards Cuba , with the immediate aim of regaining credibility and trust among all the Cubans with whom we have dealings .
That does not mean we should hide our worries , our criticisms and our hopes of seeing the Cuban people progress . It does , however , mean that we should express those thoughts with the same respect , independence and coherence we show other countries , from Israel to Morocco , Russia to Latvia , Argentina to Guatemala , and even from China to the United States .
Only if the European Union restores trust and credibility , shows understanding and solidarity , will it have the necessary influence to help things get better in and with Cuba .
Resolutions like this one do nothing to help us in that task of restoring credibility and trust , either in Cuba itself or in the rest of the developing world , for which Cuba is still an important point of reference .
The debate on Cuba demonstrated that the objective of the ? U is identical to that of the USA : to use various means , to use economic aid and diplomatic relations as a lever in order to bring about a change in the system ' peaceably ' , methodically , to impose the market economy and to overturn socialism .
It became clear that what the selectively over-sensitive Euro-unifying hypocrites cannot forgive socialist Cuba is not the so-called authoritarianism of the socialist regime or any weaknesses in it , but the fact that Cuba , despite the open war and the forty-year criminal embargo by the imperialists , is maintaining and continuing to improve the standard of living and education of its people , which is the highest in the whole of Latin America , that socialist Cuba and Fidel Castro are a beam of light , a source of fighting inspiration to the peoples in the area and mankind as a whole .
That is why , while they turn a blind eye and acquiesce to the daily executions and the thousands of political prisoners , including Cubans , in the USA , Israel and elsewhere , while they support dismal dictatorships and genocide , they shed crocodile tears about the fate of the paid agents of the imperialists in Cuba .
They cannot forgive the determination of the Cuban people , as expressed on a daily basis with their fighting unity , to defend their socialist homeland to the last .
We stand at their side unhesitatingly and express our admiration and our gratitude to them .
. ( FR ) We obviously denounce the heavy sentencing and the attacks on freedoms in Cuba , without forgetting , however , the immense responsibility of the US , with its economic embargo , its political pressures , and its military threat , the objective of which is not to ensure more independence for the Cuban people , but to strangle this small country which has dared to escape from its direct hold .
The majority of Members may well have voted for this resolution against the arrests in Cuba , but how many of them remain silent when the great power that they represent supports , finances and arms authoritarian regimes or dictators , in particular those in former colonies , that is to say in its spheres of economic influence now ?
Being selective , the virtuous indignation against these attacks on freedoms in Cuba does not merit the slightest credit .
They should start by clearing up their own back yards !
We , though , denounce our own state , France , which , whilst claiming to be a country of human rights , keeps troops in several African countries and defends , with weapons if necessary , as in the Ivory Coast at present , authoritarian regimes that have infinitely less legitimacy towards their own people than the Cuban regime towards its people .
We had no part to play in this masquerade .
. ( PT ) The political and social situation in Cuba is hard to understand without a sufficiently broad sociocultural or historical perspective .
Today 's Cuban ' socialism ' cannot be exported beyond the island 's shores .
The Cuban threat , moreover , may have been very real in the 1960s , when at one point Soviet missiles were trained on Cuba 's powerful neighbour , but it is now no more than a fiction , a pretext justifying a political confrontation . That confrontation is at its most bitter between Cubans living in Cuba , who defend Castro 's regime , and Cuban exiles in the United States , who exert considerable sway over the Bush Administration .
An EU presence in Cuba is indispensable for monitoring how the Cuban political regime really operates , and to what extent it is hampered by a commercial blockade which has tragic effects on the people while , in some ways , supporting and sustaining the dictatorship .
Even now , after the Cuban dictator took advantage of 26 July to blast European policy , it cannot be said that every door has been closed or every possibility exhausted .
The stance adopted in Parliament by Commissioner Nielson on behalf of the Commission is , therefore , justified .
Since I am in agreement with the resolution 's main points but feel it does not go far enough , I abstained from voting on it .
.
( PT ) This resolution is one of a range of initiatives responding to the recent escalation in the campaign of interference and aggression conducted against Cuba by the USA over the last 40 years . The actions of the new US representative in Havana , James Cason , stand out within this process .
They openly violate Cuban sovereignty through their support and funding of ' members of the opposition ' . Their aim is to destabilise Cuban institutions and even propitiate conditions which could act as a pretext for a military attack on Cuba .
The resolution does not say a single word about the terrorist acts and kidnappings which have been carried out as James Cason has continued with his exploits in Cuba . These represent a qualitative change in the process of intervention .
The resolution does not condemn the US blockade of Cuba because it is illegitimate , illegal under international law and has serious consequences for the economy and quality of life of the people of Cuba . Rather , it condemns the blockade because it ' is not a constructive approach to promoting change or reform of the Cuban regime ' .
The measures adopted by the EU represent a supine acceptance of the Bush Administration 's policy .
' Cooperation ' should not be used as a means of interference .
On the contrary , the EU should adopt and develop a mutually advantageous cooperation policy , one which respects Cuban sovereignty and independence .
. ( NL ) In 1955 , I saw for myself the abject poverty and inequality in South America .
This turned me into a supporter of Fidel Castro even before he took over state power at the end of 1958 .
I still think that the alternative society that has been created since then in Cuba , which has managed to assert itself surprisingly well in the face of American attempts to starve and destroy this alternative , is valuable .
It is neither money nor economic power play the lead in that country , but solidarity and the equality of all people .
This solidarity and equality cannot , however , justify the long-term prison sentences and death penalties that are meted out to silence those who , in the eyes of the regime 's supporters , do not display solidarity or who threaten equality .
Even if the present Cuba were some kind of paradise , which it is not , paradise cannot be defended in that way .
Such violations of human rights do not convince anyone , but only lead to bitterness among those who they wish to eliminate .
They are the wrong answer to the undermining campaign organised from within the USA .
Serious violations of human rights cannot be condoned , not even if they are perpetrated by people who originally had similar political objectives .
I have already voted for condemnation during an earlier debate on urgent subjects .
It is a pity that Cuba should unnecessarily isolate itself from its friends in Europe .
. ( FR ) I abstained in the vote on the resolution on Cuba .
Whilst fully sharing the criticism directed at the current regime as regards its serious violations of human rights , I cannot join in singling out Cuba when things remain the same in dozens of other countries with comparable regimes .
It is high time that the Council , the Commission and the Parliament provide a human rights ' policy that is rigorous and uniform , which does not take into consideration the size and geographical location of a country , nor the state of its relations with the European Union or the US .
. ( PT ) I voted in favour of the joint resolution on Cuba .
I did so because the Cuban people still lacks the most basic civil , political and human rights , just when we thought we had seen the last of the ramifications of the fall of the Berlin Wall .
The European Parliament had to take a firm political stand against Fidel Castro 's regime .
I wanted to contribute to that goal , because the Cuban people live under a dictatorship which has chosen to turn in on itself rather than open up , to imprison rather than set free .
If there is one people still asking to be set free in 2003 , then , it is the Cuban people .
The dictator 's latest pronouncements , in which he displayed the irresponsible attitude we have come to expect from him by spurning all European Union assistance , are thus all the more deplorable .
More importantly , I would like to conclude by recalling that the European Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize to Oswaldo Payá Sardiñas in 2002 .
In doing so , it sent a political message to the Cuban regime : we in Europe were also watching to see how matters developed .
In 2003 , the regime responded to that message by taking more political prisoners , by continuing to violate human rights and trample the rule of law under foot .
This resolution requests that Mr Payá Sardiñas come to Europe and explain in person what is happening in Cuba .
The regime will not let him .
It is our duty not to abandon him .
. ( PT ) I am delighted with the compromise resolution , which was approved unamended .
I found it particularly satisfying , moreover , to see what we are calling the ' Sakharov Initiative ' finally ratified , and thus approved by an overwhelming majority in Parliament , in paragraph 2 . Under this initiative , it is proposed that we once again invite Oswaldo Payá , winner of the Sakharov Prize 2002 , to Europe , and welcome him at the highest level .
This is a joint initiative by the European Parliament , the Commission , the Council and the Member States .
I am proud to have been responsible , together with other honourable Members , for launching this initiative in May . Little by little , it attracted growing support in Parliament , with 205 individual signatures by July , until its eventual adoption and ratification in plenary .
I hope that the Council and the Commission will now follow it up properly .
Along with many of my fellow Members , I really believe that the great symbolic significance of the support eventually mobilised by this ' Sakharov Initiative ' , combined with its ratification , may result in a marked , decisive improvement in the situation in Cuba . It may be just the catalyst for change that has been lacking .
Mr President , for the first time I regret seeing you in your seat , as I would have liked what I have to say now to have been addressed to your predecessor . I have , out of conviction , voted in favour of the van den Bos Report , but I will emphatically not endorse Amendment No 16 .
I am also grateful to the rapporteur for showing magnanimity in helping the President out of a tight spot and finally giving ground , but there was no moving this particular horse .
The President 's right to have the last word in certain matters is founded upon him , or the Vice-President in question , enjoying the confidence of this House .
I must say at this point , and to my great regret , that the Vice-President who previously occupied the chair no longer enjoys my confidence , as he abused the trust placed in him in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I have voted in favour of the van den Bos report , but there are two things I would like to explain .
First of all , I would like to clarify that in the Gujarat massacre of March last year , many of the victims were also of Indian origin .
Furthermore , it is wrong to refer to the threat of increasing Hindu fundamentalism .
This gives a distorted view of the situation in India .
After all , that country is the only country in southern Asia that has opted in favour of a secular and pluralist state model .
A choice of this kind clearly demonstrates tolerance for the different population groups .
There are exceptions in every society , but this is no reason to generalise and brand the Indian society as a whole as fundamentalist .
India is an open , tolerant and pluralist society in which religious freedom forms part of the constitution .
It is on the basis of this argumentation that I have voted in favour of the van den Bos report .
Today , Mr President , we have voted on two reports on human rights .
Even though it is in fact the issue of human rights that leads me to sit in this House , I voted against both of them .
The reason for this is the fact that the issue has , unfortunately , been misused for ideological reasons .
My criticism is primarily aimed at the way in which , with the van den Bos report , we have taken an unambiguous stand for religious freedom throughout the world , whilst at the same time treating the statement by Cardinal Ratzinger and the Catholic Church on same-sex partnerships as some sort of violation of human rights .
This just shows the ideological misuse of the issue of human rights .
European society is founded not only upon the inviolable dignity of the person , but also upon the inviolable dignity of marriage and the family , the defence of which is one of our tasks as politicians .
Future reports on human rights should protect marriage and the family , rather than calling them into question .
. ( NL ) The annual report on global human rights in 2002 and the European Union 's human rights policy by Mr van den Bos ( D ' 66 ) broaches so many topics that it is difficult to see the wood for the trees .
The rapporteur is getting under the EU Member States ' feet with the suggestion that human rights policy should be dealt with at Community level .
The report should have confined itself much more to enforcing human rights clauses in association and cooperation agreements , and to assessing their effectiveness .
In this respect , the European institutions - the Council , the Commission and Parliament - should definitely search their own hearts .
The report is right to denounce increasing extremism and fundamentalism , but fails to separate these expressions of perverted religion from religion itself .
Anyone who does draw this distinction need not make a forced effort to keep religion out of political debate .
Moreover , it then becomes immediately clear that the ideologies of socialism and liberalism are also subjective philosophies .
Non-belief - not adhering to any faith - is also based on a choice of faith .
Democratic politics is therefore never impartial .
Finally , it is important to note that international human rights standards , however valuable they are , are not the ultimate standard against which human action will be judged .
After all , the basis of this law lies in the human person , as if man were autonomous and made the law for himself .
This subjectivity puts the universal claims of such law into perspective .
According to my political belief , objective and universal law are only based on the Ten Commandments given to mankind by God , the Creator of all life .
It is fortunate that a huge number of legal standards that apply in our European societies to this day are based on this .
It would be sensible simply to recognise this .
Only then can something positive be expected from an inter-religious or inter-cultural dialogue .
.
( PT ) Although there are aspects of this report with which I agree , I feel I must draw attention to what I would describe as the appropriation of a report - on the situation of human rights in the world , of all things - as a tool of political coercion . In it , countries listed as ' friends ' are defended , while those listed as US or EU targets are criticised , thereby applying double standards .
I cannot understand why , for instance , the report makes no mention of Israel 's invasion of Palestine , or the invasion of Iraq by the USA and its allies . I therefore support the proposals for amendments tabled by my group , which condemn the following :
human rights violations carried out by Israel in pursuit of its policy of attacking and oppressing the Palestinian people through murder , imprisonment , destruction of housing and the building of an unacceptable and illegal wall designed to enforce the occupation and colonisation of Palestinian territory ;
the concept of pre-emptive war , as well as any resort to war as a means of ending international conflicts ;
the invasion of Iraq , instigated by the USA and involving EU Member States , in flagrant breach of international law and the United Nations Charter .
. ( NL ) Protection of human rights outside the EU ceases to be credible if , in a number of cases , the human rights situation in the EU itself is in poor shape , if a European sense of superiority underlies everything or if others are judged by double standards .
Europe should look at America to see how things are not done .
For years , American human rights policy was geared to punishing countries that strayed off course and to rewarding governments in countries where America had military and economic interests .
In the former case , minor human rights violations used to be put under the microscope while in the latter , major violations were hushed up , denied or glossed over as much as possible .
In the developing world , human rights were therefore put on an equal footing with the ability to follow the ' American way of life ' , particularly the existence of free competition , to which the involvement of all in democratic government , equality and solidarity were made entirely subordinate .
Oppressive dictatorships were backed for fear of mass rebellion .
Although the European states have not gone to such extremes in most cases , its current relations with the dictatorships in China and Iran are very clearly based on its own self-interest .
For the governments in Russia , Turkey and Israel , it will become easier to oppress Chechens , Kurds and Palestinians when the EU wants to be on good terms with them .
This report is a valuable contribution to change , but will anything actually happen ?
. ( FR ) The report by Mr Fodé Sylla on the fundamental rights situation in the Union , full of extreme proposals , gives an idea of what threatens to happen if the Union were to gain greater competence in this area , which is what the Convention has proposed .
It is enough to list the proposals relating to immigration : expanding the right to asylum , broader legal immigration channels ; relaxing naturalisation procedures , expanding the concept of European citizenship to non-EU legal immigrants , granting them the right to vote in local and European elections , and it goes on .
These proposals are accompanied by harsh and peremptory judgments on this or that named European country , which is enjoined to redeem itself by making amends .
In addition , France was asked to ratify the Charter on Regional and Minority Languages that the previous socialist government signed .
I hope that they will never do it .
We can see that if the Charter on Fundamental Rights were to become obligatory then the Union would have , thanks to this Charter and to Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union , the right to impose real enforcement of rights , oriented , or rather disoriented - towards destroying our societies .
. ( FR ) What the European authorities pompously call fundamental rights is , at best , but the vaguest of notions , the content of which boils down to precious little for workers and the most vulnerable inhabitants of Europe .
Apart from a few rare exceptions , the report does not show any steps forward , but instead steps backwards in this area due , more often than not , to the required policies applied by the States that want to make us believe that they are guaranteeing real rights for the people of Europe .
Those who are denied the most basic of individual , economic , social or political rights by this society are firstly the minorities and those that it is most hard on are women , children , disabled people , the elderly , homosexuals , asylum seekers , immigrants , members of national minorities etc .
For millions of workers , the prospects are unemployment , inadequate wages , arbitrary employers , exploitation , and death in the workplace .
For them , where are the fundamental rights on which the European Union is holding forth ?
Our vote in favour of the report was motivated by the accuracy of the critical description of the actual state of human rights in Europe , but this does not mean that we share the illusions of its author regarding the capacity of the European Institutions to fundamentally change things .
. ( IT ) The serious lack of competition rules regulating conflicts of interest and the concentration of monopolies to protect the rule of law and citizens ' freedoms is due to over 50 years of cronyism and over 30 years of complete monopoly by RAI-TV , which has gradually been replaced by a duopoly over the last 15 years .
Even in this last period , this has been the choice of the left alliance , at least as much as the right .
In fact , the world of audiovisual information and its immense power to influence the situation in Italy are dominated by groups of influential journalists , generally centre-left but also far left , who constitute a genuine political force that has dominated RAI-TV to date and is present at the highest level in Mediaset .
. ( PT ) The European Parliament 's annual report on the situation as regards fundamental rights in the EU is an important tool for understanding how fundamental rights are being respected and protected in Europe as a whole and within each of the Member States .
We need a rigorous and effective assessment of the quality of that protection , enabling a clear overview of the current situation as regards fundamental rights . Then we will be able to take decisions in this field .
I am sorry to say that this year 's report does not fulfil these requirements .
The first draft of the report might have met with a broad consensus , but this final version is totally unacceptable .
The rapporteur has opted to draw up a sort of shopping list in which he criticises a selection of EU Member States at the same time as suggesting unrealistic and irrelevant proposals .
The following proposals are completely unacceptable :
granting the right of asylum to victims of persecution by non-government agents ;
granting access to education to all children present in a given country , even if they are there illegally ;
passing European legislation on homosexual marriage ;
allowing third-country nationals to vote in local elections and elections to the European Parliament .
. ( FR ) The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats was obliged not to vote in favour of this text despite the importance that our group attaches to the respect and protection of fundamental rights .
All of the Charter , yet nothing but the Charter .
Once again this principle , approved by the Parliament , has not been respected .
From the shopping list to the militancy , as well as personal opinions being put forward , this report is a catalogue of ideological yet irrational wishes .
Many of the points raised concern neither fundamental rights in general nor those at the heart of the European Union .
The European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats does not agree with the alleged progress in certain areas ( notably regarding the right to asylum ) nor the tendency to extrapolate the letter of the Charter on certain issues relating to discrimination .
Furthermore , quoting countries only serves to weigh down the text and to awaken pointless nationalist reactions .
Has the Charter , as it is written , been respected during the course of the year in the territory of the EU ?
That is the subject of the report that Parliament should produce , and ensure that it is given a broad political basis .
. ( IT ) Only the Radical Party has , since the beginning of the 1960s , placed the fight against abuse of truth and information , at every legal and political level of large-scale non-violent campaigns and successful referendum initiatives .
Silvio Berlusconi and his enterprises are certainly responsible for choosing , since the 1990s , to turn his media empire of humble origins into an instrument not unlike RAI TV to boost his declining political career .
His attempt only succeeded in part and his greatest media representatives ' moderate ' and support large demonstrations , both electoral and non-electoral , of his political enemies .
This is typical of the Italian situation , of this ' Italian case ' .
Silvio Berlusconi is someone who , if anything , continues rather than opposing or reforming , as he promised to do in his electoral campaign .
As a result , the Radical Members abstained in the vote that ' deplores ... a situation is continuing in which media power is concentrated in the hands of the Prime Minister ' of the Italian Republic .
I am afraid that we may well now be facing savage power struggles which could go ' to the death ' , struggles within systems which are not only political but economic and , quite literally , criminal too .
. I welcome the Sylla Report on fundamental rights and in particular its conclusions about the treatment of asylum-seekers and their children .
The report is correct to be critical of the UK 's record on this and my knowledge of the Dungavel detention centre in my constituency of Scotland illustrates the UK Government 's failures .
The UK Government is failing to protect the rights of asylum-seekers ' children by holding them for prolonged periods in the Dungavel centre and the devolved Scottish Government , which is responsible for the provision of education in Scotland , has failed to ensure that they are given access to mainstream education while resident in our country .
The Scottish people have been appalled to learn about the long-term detention and lack of educational facilities for families like Yurdigal Ay and her children who were deported to Germany earlier this summer having spent a year at Dungavel .
The UK Government 's record on asylum-seekers and their children at Dungavel is a disgrace and I trust that the Sylla report will be heeded by UK ministers and that steps are taken to ensure that the fundamental rights of refugees at Dungavel and throughout the UK are not infringed .
. ( EL ) The European PASOK group decided to vote against the entire motion , considering that the positions on the ban on women entering Mount Athos , conscientious objectors and the right of Muslims to mosques and cemeteries are unjust , unacceptable and , at the very least , demonstrate ignorance for the following reasons :
1 .
Mount Athos enjoys special status , which was secured in Joint Declaration No 4 on Mount Athos in Greece 's Accession Act to the EEC .
2 .
The Annex to the Final Deed of the Treaty of Amsterdam contains a declaration recalling the Joint Declaration on Mount Athos attached to the Final Deed of the Accession Act of Greece to the European Communities .
3 .
Greek legislation on proselytism was found to be in compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights by the European Court of Human Rights .
As far as Muslim mosques are concerned , it is a known fact that there are currently 350 mosques and 250 Muslim cemeteries , while the procedure to found an Islamic centre and mosques in Paiania in Attica is advancing .
4 .
Article 18 of law 2936 / 2001 makes provision for a reduction in unarmed or civilian service for recognised conscientious objectors , who will complete reduced armed service .
. ( EL ) 11 September provided an opportunity to speed up measures to apply the most anti-grass roots choices of the monopolies .
It was followed by a sweeping charge against human rights and personal freedoms in the ? U. Workers ' rights and the right to a free state education and health service were cut back even further .
The standard of living of the working classes has fallen .
A typical example is that over fourteen thousand people died from the heatwave in the France of ? respect for human rights .
The reactionary legal arsenal is being reinforced with new provisions .
Political parties , such as the Communist Party , are being prevented from operating freely and unimpeded , especially in the countries under enlargement .
Violation of the freedom of expression is being accompanied by violation of the right of assembly with the ban on and the prevention of the participation of citizens and the bloody suppression of strikes and demonstrations .
In the name of the fight against terrorism , electronic records on citizens under the Schengen system prevail , personal data are being channelled to the USA , mass ' repatriation ' of immigrants is multiplying .
Europe has appointed itself as the sheriff of the USA , especially after the signing of the agreement on cooperation in criminal matters and extraditions to the USA , where there is capital punishment and Guantanamo .
This report however , will not go unanswered .
The workers are opposed to this policy and are fighting to overturn it and for real respect for human rights .
. ( NL ) It is easy to reach agreement across the political spectrum when it comes to denouncing terrorism and trafficking in human beings .
It is somewhat less easy when criticism is aimed at obsolete and over-full prisons , power concentrations in the media , the infringement of privacy and discrimination against homosexuals , immigrants or people with a disability .
Major differences of opinion , however , remain about the ambition to ban political groupings on account of ' extremism ' or ' separatism ' .
In the future Member State of Latvia , people who had failed to resign their membership of the then governing Communist Party eight months prior to independence were denied any political rights .
In the Basque country in Spain , a newspaper and a popular political party are banned , and the results of elections are heavily doctored because the excluded political grouping cannot in any way put forward candidates .
In Turkey , a potential future Member State , it is a matter of course that organisations and publications are banned , opponents end up in prison and regions are destroyed in order to be able to control them more efficiently .
We notice attempts are being made everywhere to adapt the electoral systems in such a way that there is only room left for the two largest political groupings , to the more or less total exclusion of all others from the work of parliaments .
It is unwise to leave to their own devices large groups of people who do not have any prospects , are outside parliamentarian democracy , and who become susceptible to violent alternatives .
. The British Labour Members have voted in favour of the Sylla report , which serves a valuable purpose .
All Member States must be strong and confident enough to accept criticism .
This does not automatically mean that every criticism should be accepted as valid .
We reject the rapporteur 's assertion that the detention powers in the Anti-terrorism , Crime and Security Act 2001 are being used improperly .
Where we are dealing with potential threats to national security exceptional measures are sometimes necessary .
Tough safeguards ensure that these detention powers are not abused .
The decision to detain individuals is made on the basis of detailed and compelling evidence .
Only 15 Foreign Nationals have so far been detained under this Act .
Detainees are free to leave the UK at any time to return to their country of origin , and have a right of appeal against the decision .
The UK Government agrees that the detention of the children of asylum seekers should be avoided and is seeking workable solutions to prevent this situation .
As regards the right to a fair trial , the vast majority of decided ECHR cases concern events occurring prior to the enactment of the Human Rights Act .
Individuals are now able to enforce their ECHR rights directly in UK courts .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
. ( FR ) Among the numerous annual reports adopted by the Parliament , there are many that are of genuine interest .
This is not , however , the case with this infamous report on fundamental rights in the Union , which , far from serving the European cause , emphasises the worst in community federalism .
The reasoning behind such a report is in itself rather strange since , for the Parliament , it consists in denouncing alleged attacks on fundamental rights , attacks supposedly committed by the Member States of the European Union .
In fact , it would hardly be an exaggeration to say that anyone consulting this indigestible document would inevitably have the impression that the European Union , made up of what are as good as banana republics , has become an area of lawlessness . Overcrowding in prisons , attacks on the freedom of conscience , discrimination against minorities , ( economic ) control of the media , an increase in the number of racist acts , restrictive migratory policies , etc . : no Member State is spared and , in fact , it is the whole of the European Union that appears to be an area where freedoms are killed off .

Clearly , all this is but fantasy .
It remains , nonetheless , that , controlled by powerful lobbies agitating for human rights ; the Parliament would make a fool of itself by adopting this report .
. ( PT ) The tone of my speech in yesterday 's plenary did not leave much room for doubt that I would vote against this report today .
Indeed , apart from anything else , the ideological slant of the Sylla report makes it unbalanced and partial in terms of fundamental rights .
Notwithstanding , there was one important argument which I could not put forward yesterday due to the scant speaking time available to me .
It relates to the fact that the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which the rapporteur claimed was the central principle of his report , is aimed at the institutions and agencies of the Union , with due regard for the principle of subsidiarity , and also at the Member States . The charter only applies to the latter however , when they are implementing Union law , as Article 51 makes clear .
We would therefore have liked - though this was not the approach favoured by the rapporteur - to see this report aimed directly and primarily at the institutions and agencies of the Union . In other words , we wanted an appraisal of those actions of the Council , the Commission and Parliament itself which had an impact on fundamental rights in the EU , and which decided or implemented policies affecting those rights .
As we have seen , that was not what transpired .
. ( PT ) The rapporteur steered a straight course towards this one-sided and partisan assessment of the situation as regards human rights , choosing to ignore the common interest and the institutional assessment which should guide work in this area .
He has fostered an alliance of isolated , minority claims , on the pretext , as convenient as it is vague , of combating ' discrimination ' .
The multifarious libels with which he besmirches the Member States lack any kind of foundation in truth , and are at one with the over-inflated verbiage spouted by organisations of doubtful credibility , engaged in the messianic task of replacing the current social model with a different one .
We are looking at a castle which has been razed in the interests of the widespread obsession with elevating political correctness to the status of a science .
This annual report has been hijacked in order to trumpet causes which unite no social consensus , which contradict and assail eternal principles and values with deep roots in Western civilisation . That means that its presentation and the debate on it have become an exercise in propaganda , a mere glossing and recapitulation ad nauseam of a sort of template of irresponsible ideas , devoid of the dignity and reflection demanded by the seriousness of this subject .
This is a deplorable annual ritual which the European Parliament will have to abandon some day if it wants to retain a minimum level of integrity and responsibility .
I could do nothing other than vote against this report .
. ( FR ) This explanation of vote relates to Article 15 , referring to the question of decriminalising active euthanasia .
Given that the annual report on fundamental rights in the EU plays a part in monitoring adherence to the Charter , the Group of the Party of European Socialists will vote against this article .
It follows that there is no objective reason why the question of decriminalising active euthanasia should appear in this report .
Mr President , I voted against Amendment No 5 to the Lannoye report because of assurances given by the Commission that it was not factually correct and that it had not asked developing countries for binding commitments in relation to privatising their water industry .
Developing countries should be free - as we are - to choose whether or not they have privatised or public utilities to provide their water services .
I hope the Commission is making sure that remains the case and is not asking for such binding commitments .
. ( FR ) The issue of water services will not be raised at the WTO meeting in Cancun .
This is unfortunate .
The Lannoye report dissects the Commission proposal , which , in particular , aims to create a European Water Fund for ACP countries .
These countries , we must remember , are key commercial partners .
They are equally affected by a cruel lack of access to drinking water and purification services .
Now , access to water is a right , as is the ability of the inhabitants of the rural areas of our Member States to have access to basic public services such as post offices , education and clinics .
This is why access to water should remain a public service and not be managed on a strictly commercial basis .
The 1980s saw the failure of IMF and World Bank subsidies policies .
Only the countries that privatised their water and electricity distribution networks benefited from aid from international institutions .
The Commission is preparing to make the same management mistake with the European Water Fund .
I support the Lannoye report in its critical diagnosis of the Commission 's programme .
.
( FR ) I voted in favour of the Lannoye report on water management in developing countries because it rightly emphasises the urgency of the problem : today , out of six billion people , 1.7 million do not have access to drinking water , and 30 000 die every day as a result .
The Johannesburg Conference fixed the objective of halving the number of people without access to drinking water by 2015 , and it is imperative that Europe cooperates to realise this aim .
This is why we are particularly in favour of the establishment of a European Water Fund for the ACP countries in general and the African countries in particular .
Decisions on which projects are to be helped by this fund should be taken , not from above , but by the national authorities , jointly with the peoples concerned .
Priority should be given to a management model based on a public-private partnership , in which the public sector fixes the general framework for action of the private sector , as well as its objectives .
The Lannoye Report , however , remains suspicious of the action of private enterprises .
I believe the opposite , that privatising water management , even on the smallest scale , would allow more rational management if it is well utilised .
. ( FR ) In abstaining , we have finally refused to vote in favour of this report because of the adoption , at the time of the vote , of an amendment , Amendment No 15 from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , which is favourable towards the private interests of large water operators .
. ( FR ) The summer heatwave and the thousands of deaths it caused confirmed one thing in Europe and the developing countries , something of which the 30 000 people who die each day of illness linked to a lack of drinking water remind us : water is the most crucial problem threatening humanity .
Climate change will make this situation worse .
It is therefore urgently necessary that mass action plans are drawn up , targeted and financed .
Mr Lannoye and the Committee on Development and Cooperation have given us some minimal proposals , which we must quickly implement .
. ( PT ) Access to water is essential for life , health , food , well-being and development .
Water should not therefore be considered simply as a good , but as a public asset .
It is particularly shocking that 1.7 million people have no access to drinking water , causing 30 000 deaths per day through related diseases .
While the shortage of drinking water in developing countries has worsened , however , the privatisation of water utilities continues apace , particularly as a result of the conditions for receiving loans imposed by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund , and structural adjustment programmes which weaken public services and induce under-investment in this sector .
The liberalisation or privatisation of water utilities has helped deprive poor communities of access to water and has driven prices up . A serious assessment of the socio-economic and environmental effects of liberalisation is therefore needed , as are guarantees that Articles VI and XXI of the General Agreement on Trade in Services will be revised , in order to protect the right of each developing country to decide freely on its method of water supply .
The establishment of a European Water Fund is a good initiative in principle , as long as it supports the water policy of the beneficiary countries by ensuring public ownership and management so that , as a result , everyone will have access to water , without discrimination .
. ( FR ) The draft resolution presented by Mr Lannoye is a very complete response to the scandal of the drinking water shortages experienced by hundreds of millions of people in developing countries .
It questions the responsibility of large international organisations that dismantled public services , leading to this situation .
It has , however , found a majority in this House by getting rid of some of the content of the resolution through amendments that refuse to point the finger and , therefore , beyond good feeling , has used its influence to push for a real improvement in the standard of living of those affected .
The adoption of Amendment No 15 which ' stresses that the key issue is not whether water provision is organised by a public or private entity but rather the specific obligations provided by the policy framework ; considers that it is up to the public authorities in developing countries to define the legal framework for regulating the work of private operators ' , changes the essence of the report .
It is the commercialisation of this common good that is at the root of these inequalities of access , of the shortage and excessive cost in developed countries as in developing countries .
The adoption of this meant that I was obliged to abstain in the final vote .
. ( PT ) More than 2.5 billion people in developing countries have no drinking water , and 3 million die every year from water-borne diseases such as typhoid fever , dysentery , cholera , hepatitis , malaria , trachoma , fluorosis , and Japanese encephalitis .
We must ensure that the water objectives of Monterrey and Johannesburg ( a 50 % reduction in the number of people without access to drinking water and sanitation by 2015 ) are implemented as soon as possible . It is just as crucial , however , to encourage the EU water initiative launched at Johannesburg , costing EUR 700 million .
Finally , I welcome the proposal for the establishment of a European Water Fund to help the ACP states .
. ( EL ) In principle we agree with the rapporteur 's finding that drinking water should be a social resource , accessible to all , and not a commodity subject to speculation .
We disagree , however , with proposals that recognise a positive role in water management for the private sector , be it in the form of mixed management by the public and private sectors or with the state defining a legal and institutional framework within which private agencies operate in the water sector .
Our disagreement is based on the fact that , irrespective of intentions , legal and institutional frameworks and restrictive mechanisms , the private sector is being activated on the basis of the profit criterion , automatically converting a social resource into a commodity with all that implies , especially for poor nations .
We would stress that , as with the food problem , the problem of drinking water is primarily political and secondarily technocratic .
That is why radical social changes are needed in order to deal with it effectively .
The failings of the various programmes applied within the framework of the current system , which in certain cases have exacerbated rather than mitigated the problem , confirm our reading and anticipate the impasses and the exacerbation of the problem which will be caused by the application of the terms and conditions being set by the International Monetary Fund for funding similar activities in developing countries .
.
( FR ) Although access to water was recently declared a human right , the number of people in the world without drinking water today stands at 1.7 million , a figure whose increase has been uninterrupted in recent years .
We need to recognise the causes of the lack of drinking water and fight them : whether it be high productivity and intensive farming , economies directed towards growing crops for export , which often compromise the development of the local economy or the liberalisation of public services in the water sector , a condition often imposed by the World Bank or the IMF on countries in the South to benefit from loans .
The costs of water services have also become inaccessible for the poorest people .
To remedy these discrepancies , we want new patterns of production and consumption to be implemented , in the North as in the South , based on long-term water management .
We want to advance environmental farming and new irrigation systems .
In light of the tragedy that people have gone through and the totally insufficient responses given to date , the establishment of a European Water Fund for the ACP countries is a good initiative .
Access to drinking water and purification services needs to be determined by national authorities with the involvement , through associations and civil society movements , of those people affected .
. ( PT ) To quote the rapporteur , who is a member of my own political group , if we want fairer trade , contributing to sustainable development and to the fight against poverty , concrete measures must be introduced at the forthcoming WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancun to take account of developing countries ' requirements as regards world trade .
The insufficient production capacity of developing countries and their continuing dependence on primary and low-value-added products must be combated , in order to ensure the diversification of production and technology transfers .
The problem of suffocating debts must be addressed , the aim being to cancel such debts . Dumping in agricultural trade must be abolished , the principle of agricultural self-sufficiency promoted , development assistance increased up to the agreed 0.7 % of GNP , and the right of access to medicines protected .
Just as important , however , is the need to safeguard public services , in particular by banning the liberalisation of such services .
It must be borne in mind that the liberalisation of world trade has led to a deepening of the divide between rich and poor countries , and a reduction in participation by the latter in world trade .
The injustices of world trade are the fruit of the development and global expansion of the capitalist system itself .
. ( FR ) The Morgantini report rejects the logic of the Commission Communication ' assisting developing countries in benefiting from international trade ' .
Indeed , the Commission advocates the liberalisation of services , aid to the private sector and an increase in trade meant to help the development of less well-advanced countries .
We know now that these ' recipes ' of a capitalist economic system daily increase the shocking gap between the revenue of rich countries and that of poor countries !
On the eve of the Cancun Summit , whose objective is to increase world trade , we support the proposals aiming to cancel out debt , to establish fair trade regulations , to remove from a commercial sphere a response to the needs of the people , to limit the incentives for rich countries to export farming production .
We have , therefore , voted in favour of this report , even though we believe that the WTO , the rich countries ' instrument to dominate others , should not be democratised but removed .
. ( PT ) Given the indicators of developing countries ' social and environmental unsustainability , the impartial Economist acknowledged a year ago that it would be impossible for living conditions in the southern hemisphere to improve unless the northern hemisphere relinquished a small part of its wealth .
If we want to be credible partners in the eyes of developing countries , therefore , and if we want to bridge the shocking gulf between living conditions in the two hemispheres , both the EU and the United States must , above and beyond attaining the Monterrey and Johannesburg objectives , take advantage of the next round of WTO negotiations , due to take place in Cancun , to move towards the abolition of trade barriers and the gradual removal of agricultural and energy subsidies .
. ( PT ) Although the rapporteur was able to propose several interesting and valuable strategies in response to the challenge of ' assisting developing countries to benefit from trade ' , I felt obliged to abstain from voting .
The observation that the key to development lies in liberalising trade should , rather than earning enthusiastic applause or violent condemnation ( both of which lead only to ideological squabbles with short-term effects ) , be nothing more than a point of departure and a frame of reference .
Given this inescapable truth , therefore , the best approach is to link certain obligations into trading relationships maintained with developing countries .
In other words , it is better to impose conditions on aid offered by the EU and / or its Member States to those economic agents who , by acquiring raw materials or by selling goods and services , establish trading relationships with developing countries . These conditions would involve providing instant attendant benefits , which might consist , in practical terms , of obligatory technology transfers , building local capacity , providing medicines , building basic infrastructure , providing services to help reduce the costs of managing debts , and the like .
History tells us that attempting to change the ' economic ' climate by imposing legislative restrictions has little effect .
. ( PT ) The figures on the situation as regards health in developing countries are tragically eloquent .
This emergency situation requires rapid , robust , supportive and effective European action .
This should ensure , firstly , that the most highly-developed countries increase their contributions in order to comply fully with the commitments made at the Monterrey Summit ( the Millennium Summit ) and the Johannesburg Summit ( the Sustainable Development Summit ) .
Secondly , it should raise standards of effectiveness and transparency of aid through a strategy which respects precise goals and timetables ; is monitored and evaluated ; ensures that the programmes and goods made available are comprehensively and continuously distributed ; promotes the use of local human resources , thus avoiding heavy reliance on foreign technical assistance and developing local capacity .
Thirdly , it should send clear messages to the markets , both by means of European legislation and through strategies implemented within the World Trade Organisation , to the effect that , in the long term , ever-increasing quantities of medicines must urgently be made available at affordable prices in developing countries .
Fourthly , it is time to extend the debt relief initiative to more countries .
. ( PT ) This report makes clear the relationship between poverty and disease , disease and poverty .
The health statistics for developing countries are horrifying : 28 000 children under five die every day , 2 million people die of tuberculosis each year , a million die of malaria , and so on . The spread of AIDS has also reached tragic proportions : 25 million Africans live with the disease , a quarter of that number have died , and 10 % of people between the ages of 15 and 50 suffer from AIDS .
I support the proposal for greater health investment in developing countries and effective monitoring of the results . The effectiveness of that investment should be maximised through a simultaneous strategy of good resource distribution .
I would also highlight the pressing need for a more productive debate on the question of access to medicines for communities in developing countries , since the scale of the disaster demands more creative , bold and determined responses .
I therefore agreed with most of this report . I abstained from the overall final vote , however , as I deplored the rapporteur 's failure to resist the temptation to include in the final resolution a paragraph written in that coded , ideological language which , like that of other reports produced by this Parliament , aims simply to enlist EU development policy in the international pro-abortion movement .
. ( PT ) I voted for this report , which advocates , in general terms , a ' reinforced culture of consultation and dialogue ' with Non-State Actors ( NSAs ) as a means of increasing the effectiveness of European Union development policy .
Interaction between the different actors - local , institutional and others , such as civil society - is indeed increasingly important , at national and international levels . It is one way of obtaining the answer which is still urgently needed if we are to help the world 's least-favoured regions .
Having made this general observation , I must nevertheless point out , in relation to the rapporteur 's comments on the ever-greater cuts in Community assistance to various NGOs , that the participation of non-state actors is not in itself a guarantee that development policies will be effective .
We must encourage greater participation and involvement on the part of actors who neither support ideological or programmatic campaigns nor promote their own agendas , but rather are truly generous , disinterested and altruistic in their aims , and whose actions consequently bear the most real and tangible fruit on the ground .
It behoves us , then , to put a premium on the ' quality ' rather than on the quantity of participation .
.
( PT ) I share the rapporteur 's conviction that the goals set out at the Lisbon Summit will not be attained without granting due importance to the role played by audiovisual communications media . Care must also be taken to consider the state of today 's technology , since it allows television content to be disseminated using different technological platforms , and therefore requires the relevant legislation to be adapted and updated .
The decision to adopt a flexible approach to regulation and set minimum regulatory standards for the sector is equally pertinent and correct , in my opinion .
I share the rapporteur 's concerns about the concentration of ownership and control of television broadcasting , since I see these developments as a challenge to pluralism and cultural diversity .
I take particular exception , however , to the establishment of a Pan-European Children 's Network .
I feel that the task of ' welcoming ' our youngest viewers into the audiovisual world should be left to national channels .
I do not believe that a ' European consciousness ' can be created by suppressing national languages and identities and indoctrinating babes-in-arms with artificial ' European ' values . The European Union should resist the temptation to ' mould ' the loyalties and characters of the citizens of the Member States .
Despite this , I feel that this report as a whole is positive .
I voted in favour .
. ( FR ) We have not voted in favour of this report , because we do not want to support capital investors , whether in the cultural sector or in other sectors .
Besides , they are often the same : a good many capitalists , who are profiting from investing in private television , in the cinema or in publishing , profit the most from public works , the monopoly of water distribution , even from manufacturing weapons .
What we want , on the contrary , is to protect those , thanks to whom this ' cultural industry ' works .
As a result we give our complete support to those employed in the entertainment industry without steady employment who have been fighting for many months to defend their living conditions .
The French Government , which makes such a big case of the ' cultural exception ' , is not making an exception for workers in the entertainment sector : on the direct recommendations of the major employers , it has just launched an attack on their social protection , as it prepares to launch further attacks on the social security of all employees .
.
( PT ) This report contains positive elements which deserve to be supported , such as the proposal to reinforce Community initiatives in support of culture , the concern to promote cultural diversity , reading , publishing and protection of copyright , and support for those SMEs active in the field of culture . It also , however , has negative aspects .
Most importantly , it should be said that the report subordinates culture to the market in general , and to the rules of the European Union internal market in particular . It privileges the commercial dimension of culture , and competition in the context of so-called ' globalisation ' .
It thus participates in the logic of commercialisation of culture .
This report is characterised by various ambiguities , and does not clearly indicate or suggest any actual proposals or measures , such as defending or promoting public national systems to fund and support the production and dissemination of culture , aimed at protecting our cultural heritage and cultural production from subordination to the laws of the market , to the logic of commercial gain and to the promotion of mass- and consumer-orientated cultural models .
. ( FR ) Great prudence should always be shown each time that the EU intends to vest itself with a new area of competence .
This is precisely the case with this report , which aims to strengthen cooperation between European cultural industries .
In principle , this objective does not raise any major objections .
It is worth , however , expressing strong reservations on certain points contained in this document .
In a document in which everything or almost everything could be considered ' cultural ' , there is no clear definition of the idea of cultural works , something that opens the door to much abuse .
It is also necessary to emphasise the danger of exploiting culture for European propaganda purposes and , in fine , the possible challenge to national cultural identity ( which means exactly the definition of culture as an ' essential and unifying element ( ? ) of the citizens of Europe ' ? ) .
Finally , what about the risk of misappropriation of public funds for projects with no real cultural or popular interest - money from European taxpayers cannot be used to subsidise elitist productions , destined for a ' privileged ' minority .
For all of these reasons , I will not vote in favour of this report .
. ( PT ) I agree with the rapporteur 's observations that ' Europe 's cultural industries reflect its national diversity and thus represent an added value to European identity ' and that ' culture is an essential element of European integration ' , contributing to mutual understanding between Member States and their people , which is essential and desirable .
I agree with the contention that SMEs are privileged media for disseminating culture , deserving the support of both Member States and European institutions .
Given the very great number of cultural agents , I doubt whether the existence of an overall EU strategy , or of any policy deriving from such a strategy and all-embracing enough to implement it , would be beneficial or feasible in this field .
In the same way , I feel it is acceptable to protect and promote some aspects of a country 's cultural production at national level , to avoid the risk of concentration , criticised in other areas of economic and social life , from spreading to the sphere of culture .
This may confront us , under the pretext of challenging US hegemony in this area , with the prospect of cultural industries in countries possessing greater means and larger markets wielding an undesirable degree of control . That would jeopardise the very diversity we want to maintain and encourage .
While I understand the rapporteur 's intentions and support many of the proposals she suggests , I was unable to vote in favour of this report , and therefore abstained .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.55 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The next item is the Commission 's statement on the application of the EU-Israel Association Agreement .
. Mr President , the European Union policy towards Israel lies in partnership and cooperation .
It aims to contribute to a resolution of the ongoing conflict , along with other international partners , and in close collaboration with the parties involved .
The Commission is aware of the difficult circumstances in which the business communities are currently working in the Middle East region .
At the same time , the European Commission , as guardian of the Treaty , is responsible for guaranteeing the full and correct application of Community law , including international agreements concluded by the Community and therefore the implementation of the EU-Israel Association Agreement .
I can confirm then that in applying the EU-Israel Association Agreement , the EU relies on international law for the territorial definition of the State of Israel , thus excluding the territories under Israeli administration since 1967 in the West Bank , Gaza Strip , East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights .
Therefore , products originating in these areas are not entitled to benefit from preferential treatment under the EU-Israel Association Agreement .
Following confirmation from Israel that its customs authorities certified goods coming from the settlements as being of Israeli origin , the Commission published a notice to the importers in the Official Journal of the European Union in November 2001 , in order to inform them of the situation .
According to the provisions of the bilateral agreement , it is the responsibility of the customs administrations of the EU Member States to check the origin of goods with the Israeli authorities through the post-verification procedure .
It is also their responsibility to take the necessary precautions where a customs debt is due .
It is in this context that the recovery of duties is now undertaken by the customs administrations of the Member States .
These measures , initiated by the Commission , aim to protect the financial and legal interests of the Community .
At the same time , I can only reiterate that the Commission has always declared its willingness to cooperate and examine any technical proposal from the Israeli authorities to find a solution for this issue which would respect the terms of the Association Agreement .
In other words , one can conclude that the Commission has taken the necessary measures to ensure correct application of Community law .
As a result , Member States are imposing duties on products from the settlements .
We keep this regularly under review with Member States ' customs authorities and we are also continuing to talk to Israel about technical issues related to customs certificates .
Mr President , it is a very sensitive time to be discussing an issue like this .
Firstly , let me put on record my total abhorrence of the terrorist incidents that have happened all too often in the Middle East .
Not only do I condemn the actions of suicide bombers , I also condemn the actions of the security services of the Israeli state when they act outside international law , making the resolution of that problem even more intractable .
However , some people may feel that this issue should not have been raised because it could complicate the peace process .
Those of us who have taken the initiative on this particular issue believe that , unfortunately , such an approach has resulted in insufficient action on the part of the Commission and Member States .
The Commissioner himself has already outlined the important issues at stake .
No one summed up the implications better than Commissioner Patten himself in a debate in this House in May 2001 .
It is important to put it on record again , and I quote him : ' The European Union 's position on settlements is clear : all settlement activities in Gaza , the West Bank , including East Jerusalem , and on the Golan Heights are illegal , under international law , and constitute a major obstacle to peace .
The Commission communication ( of 1998 ) made it clear that preferential access to Community markets for exports originating in Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and in East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights ' contravenes agreed rules of origin since these territories do not form part of the State of Israel under public international law ' . '
That says it in a nutshell .
I listened very carefully to what the Commissioner said .
The impression we get is very different from what he said in this House today .
One does not get the impression that this issue has been pursued vigorously enough by the Commission as a whole nor , indeed , by Member States .
It must be said with regard to Israel that at the moment at best it is not being as cooperative as it could be in providing full details on the origin of all products and their component parts to customs authorities .
At worst , it could be said that Israel is defying its trade agreement with the EU .
Given the clarity of the comments initially made by Commissioner Patten , to some extent echoed today , we need to have more assurances that Member States are taking sufficient action .
Therefore , while I welcome what the Commissioner has said , I remain unconvinced that this issue has been enforced at a Member-State level in the way that it should be .
Mr President , the cavalier attitude the Israeli authorities display towards their obligations to comply with international law with regard to their trade relations with European Union is an indicative example of its attitude to international law in general .
The fact that the European Union is so weak in exerting its pressure on Israel to comply with international law is reflected in the fact that new agreements have been made with Israel in recent times .
I would like to touch on those .
I have enormous respect for the efforts of Mr Solana , on behalf of the European Union , to reduce tension and to encourage a process of peace negotiations , but the European Union is undermining his efforts , in my view , by failing to demonstrate its determination to Israel that agreements made to Israel 's commercial and trade advantage must be fully complied with or will be terminated .
I have no doubt that the current EU-Israel Association Agreement should be suspended .
The actions of the Israeli Government that deny the Palestinians their human rights are in breach of that Association Agreement .
Despite repeated calls by myself and others to have a full review of Israel 's compliance with human rights provisions , nothing tangible has been done , to my knowledge .
Several months ago the Community agreed with Israel to expand its preferential import quotas on a number of agricultural products that are largely or mainly produced in its illegal settlements , and these are for export to Community markets .
The Community took this measure without requiring that Israel stop violating its agreement by issuing proofs of origin for settlement products .
This is not the way to defend or preserve the Community 's legal right to require the correct implementation of the agreement by Israel .
The Commission is now saying that it will not be possible to include Israel in the pan-European cumulation agreement , while Israel continues to misapply the origin rules protocol in its existing agreement .
The Community 's political will to maintain this position is not convincing to Israel and certainly not convincing to me and many others in this House , while it fails to ensure the correct implementation of the existing agreement .
It is my view that the current crisis in the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians is such that the European Union has to exert the greatest possible pressure on the Israeli Government .
In the economic sphere two things need to happen : steps to suspend the Association Agreement need to be initiated on the basis of breaches of human rights obligations contained in the Association Agreement ; and legal steps should be initiated to recover duties due because Israel has misrepresented the origin of its exports .
Both these steps require the political will of a united Commission .
I am not convinced that the Commission is united on this matter and the consent of the Member States is needed .
I call upon the Irish Government to make this a priority for its presidency of the European Union .
I should like to emphasise that in making these comments I acknowledge that the responsibility to make peace is shared with the Palestinian leadership .
It must ensure that all possible steps are taken to end the vicious suicide bombings that have caused so much Israeli anguish and hardship and have hardened attitudes behind an irresponsible Israeli Government .
Likewise the United States must exercise its enormous influence on Israel to cease its assassinations and abuses of human rights in the occupied territories .
I should like to address two points made by the Commissioner .
He said that Member States are applying duties on settlement goods .
My understanding is that only happens in a small number of cases where Israel has actually declared these goods to be settlement goods , and it does so only to relieve the pressure of the Commission and this House on them in relation to this matter .
Regarding the post-delivery verification system , once Israel declares where the goods come from , there is no way that a Member State can legally challenge that verification .
I would like the Commissioner to address those two issues .
Mr President , the Liberal Group suspects that the government of Israel is applying the origin rules of the Association Agreement in a way that derives from its settlement policies .
No other explanation can justify the proofs of origin being issued to both manufactured and agricultural products - produced in settlements - which we consider illegal and therefore not covered by the agreement .
These include chives , non-woven textiles , wine , snack foods and so on .
Although they are given customs access by the EU , they are actually produced in West Bank settlements such as Barkan , the Golan Heights settlement of Katzrin and the Gaza Strip settlement of Gush Katif .
This is not a new issue .
We know that the Member States are unable to reliably distinguish which consignments are eligible and which are not .
We know that the Commission has compiled a list of settlement products and exporters , and is trying to expand the list .
We know the list is incomplete and that Member States have not found it possible to identify , when shipments are presented for clearance , what products they contain .
The situation cannot continue for two reasons .
Firstly , Liberals attach great importance to rules ; here we are seeing a consistent , persistent breaking of the rules .
We recognise there are difficulties .
The Commission and the Member States bear separate and full responsibility for this , since they both have obligations to act to solve the problem .
It may be that those in the Commission who want to discharge their guardianship responsibility have insufficient political support within the Commission .
The Member States that want to help have insufficient support in the Council .
That is why this Parliament and the Member State parliaments need to act .
Above all , it is the duty of the government of Israel not to play tricks with a signed agreement .
Israel should understand that this is not the time to do that .
Unless they respect the clauses of the Association Agreement , the Israelis will have difficulty in convincing the rest of the world that they are acting in good faith in issues such as the peace process as a whole .
Mr President , my colleagues have already made many of the points that I wanted to raise in an extremely clear and precise way , and so I will not repeat them .
I would , therefore , just like to ask myself - and you - some questions .
I wonder , firstly , whether the European Union 's efforts to pursue political dialogue and the participation of the quartet will be strengthened or weakened by the genuine reluctance on the part of the Commission to ensure that the protocol on origin rules and the territorial clause in the EU-Israel Association Agreement are enforced correctly .
I am raising this point as I believe that it is fundamental .
We have been debating this issue for years and there is no doubt that progress has been made , yet we are , once again , facing a blatant violation of this agreement .
There are enormous obstacles to the peace process which , in my opinion , are due , firstly , to the policy of the Israeli Government , which is continuing with its settlements , following a policy of annexation and erecting walls .
These obstacles are also , however , the result of the increasing violations of fundamental principles and the rules of international humanitarian law in Israel and Palestine .
I believe that we should not give aid that allows agreements concluded not to be enforced .
I would also like to consider the reasons why Israel is violating the agreement , Article 2 of which calls upon Israel , and us , to respect it .
We are responsible for ensuring that , on the basis of the agreement , our relations are founded on the respect for human rights and not on the violation of international humanitarian law .
I believe that a politically appropriate , measured response from the Union to Israel 's persistence in issuing certificates of origin for products from the settlements should ensure that no product can continue to be given preferential treatment as an import into the European Union .
If we give due weight to the statements of the Commission regarding preferential treatment of products imported from the settlements , then we see that Israel 's practice of issuing certificates of origin for these products is considered by the Commission to be a violation of the agreement .
Nevertheless , this practice still continues .
The agreement - the Commission has said so too - is not being enforced resolutely .
I would like this issue of relations and legality to be addressed , because we need to end the situation of ' anything goes ' that exists in Palestine and Israel .
Israel needs to learn to enforce the agreements that it signs .
Mr President , as deputy chairman of the delegation to Israel , I set great store by the European Union 's desire to remain on good terms with that country , but if the friendship is put at risk by non-compliance with important international rules , I wonder what will become of the trust between us .
In the past , the Commission has communicated on a number of occasions that the European Union does not accept Israel 's illegal occupation policy .
The Commission has also taken every opportunity to denounce the illegal application of the Association Agreement .
A number of weeks ago , we received a response from Commissioner Patten to the effect that ' the Member States have informed the Commission that in a number of cases , import duties have been levied on goods that originated from the settlements and were imported with Israeli proofs of origin . '
This illegal and incorrect practice nevertheless remains in place .
This is unacceptable .
The Association Agreement with Israel has been drafted and must be observed with due regard to international law and to fundamental values .
If you make sound agreements , you make your friends , provided these agreements are observed correctly .
Mr President , at the beginning of this week , Monday in fact , the Dutch Foreign Minister gave his response to nine parliamentary questions about the possible irregular application of the trade agreements between the EC and Israel .
In his balanced and lucid reaction , I read that for most of the products that carry Israeli proof of origin , the Netherlands can assume that the conclusions by Israeli customs regarding their origin have been reached in a lawful manner .
This means that they meet all the conditions of the origin rules protocol .
Commissioner , do you subscribe to this conclusion for the other EU Member States too ?
Also , Mr President , Article 79 of the Association Agreement between the EC and Israel stipulates that in the event of possible non-compliance with this Agreement by one of the parties involved , both are required , via the Association Council , to reach a mutually acceptable solution .
I trust that the Commission will make every effort to reach a compromise with regard to the interpretation of the origin rules protocol .
Thank you , Mr President . Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must firstly explain that I am one of the signatories of this question ; I did so as a democratic service for Mrs Sandbaek who asked me to do so .
I do not agree with the opinion of the majority of the speakers but this question has been around for a long time in this House and it was important to clear the air and see clearly in this history of enforcement .
Indeed , it is the question of the application of the Agreement and not of challenging it that is in the question from Mrs Morgantini and others .
The response from the Commissioner was very precise , completed further by the important clarifications given by Mr Belder .
The Commissioner indicated that the application came from the customs authorities of the Member States .
Mr Belder gave a very precise example of a Member State , which considers that this Agreement is being applied .
Furthermore , there are appeal proceedings , which is the association council .
If you have accurate details , Mrs Morgantini , you can communicate them to the Commission , who will not fail , I am sure , to mention them for the next Association Agreement .
The rest are words and threats , which are founded on nothing .
I am slightly worried , Mr de Rossa , that you are using this occasion to challenge the Association Agreement with Israel , because that is not the aim of this debate at all .
I am also astonished that you want the US to put pressure on Israel to respect human rights more , whilst you do not mention the pressure that the European Union could and should exert on the Palestinian Authority to stop the terrorist attacks .
We all heard Mr Arafat lamenting the current situation and transferring all the blame onto Israel , forgetting once again the fatal attacks of recent weeks .
Now we all know the role that Hamas plays .
The European Union , just like the European Parliament , could give its support to Mr Mazen through budgetary aids or parliamentary incentives .
Mr Mazen seems to show a genuine desire to reach a peace agreement .
We can back him instead of continuing to back those who , like Mr Arafat , think that the terrorist attacks are part of normal policy in Palestine on its romantic road to freedom .
What freedom ?
That , I will leave you to imagine .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will quite openly admit that this issue rather tends to pull me in two directions at once .
From the legal point of view , on the one hand , it is quite clear that pacta sunt servanda - treaties under international law are to be adhered to .
We know which territory is internationally recognised as being Israel 's , we know which areas are occupied ; we also know that products from Israel can be imported and that produce from the areas occupied by it cannot be .
In practice , gathering evidence is very difficult ; so , in practice , is knowing where to draw the line .
The Commission 's answer has this to say on the subject : ' These principles do not apply to products which have been sufficiently processed within Israel 's internationally recognized borders . '
Does that , then , mean in practice that oranges harvested on the West Bank are processed in Israel , the juice bottled and exported to the EU ?
Is that what is meant by ' sufficiently processed ' ?
Or is it ' sufficiently processed ' only if the juice is blended with that of apples and bananas in a mixed fruit cordial with the orange juice making up less than 50 % ?
I think this shows us how difficult it is in practice to draw a distinction , even where the proportions are concerned .
That is why , in this context , we should ask ourselves the important question as to whom this is meant to benefit .
Does it do the Palestinians any good when an Israeli orchard , or a factory on the West Bank , is closed down ?
The workers there are laid off , and then the same production operation restarts in the Israeli heartland with immigrants from Russia .
This , of course , does the Palestinians no good at all , but at least the position is clear-cut in legal terms .
We have then maintained the legal position , but we have not necessarily helped the Palestinians .
We should ensure that the actions of the Commission or of the European Union do not make overall relations between Israel and the Palestinians worse than they already are .
I am therefore in favour of the Commission continuing to act in these matters with the same caution and conscientiousness that it has demonstrated so far , never losing sight of the overall framework within which relations between Israel and the Palestinians are developing .
Mr President , last July I tabled an oral question to the Commission on renewing the scientific and technical cooperation agreement with Israel .
In substance the reply said that the Commission believed that the development of relations with Israel would make a significant contribution to the Middle East peace process .
You have said more or less the same thing to us today , Mr Nielson .
Although I share the idea that knowledge and an exchange of knowledge help build a better world , in the same ways as economic cooperation , I am particularly stupefied by this answer .
Indeed , this position completely disregards the Parliament 's Resolution of April 2002 , of which it is obviously right to remind you here given the general title of the debate .
We all know that in paragraph 8 of the Resolution , Parliament asked the Council and the Commission to urgently convene the association council to give its position to the Israeli Government , by asking the latter to respect the UN resolutions , and , in this context , called for the suspension of the Association Agreement .
Where are we , a year and a half after this demand was worded ?
When the Agreement began in 1995 , just after the process in Oslo , some regarded it as helping to build peace .
The situation now , however , is radically different .
What type of cooperation is the Commission talking about ?
Partnerships can only be devised on the basis of mutual trust , and of shared rights and obligations .
Now , the criminal attitude of the Israeli Government shows every day that it not only flouts the concerns of the Union , but also that it outbids the other in this fatal situation .
More than a year ago now , Israel erected a wall in the West Bank allegedly for reasons of safety .
In actual fact , it is an iron curtain that massacres the Palestinian territories and drives tens of thousands of inhabitants in their homes .
In this way , new territories are being annexed .
It is time to give Parliaments ' Resolution tangible form .
There are precedents .
In 1990 the Commission enforced Parliament 's recommendation that scientific cooperation be partially frozen until the Palestinian schools and universities that had been closed unilaterally by the Israeli authorities were completely reopened and remained so .
It was at least a few months before it was possible for them to reopen .
Today , given that the clause on the respect of fundamental rights has been brutally violated , and in the sight of the whole world , in what way is this demand for suspension excessive ?
In what way is it excessive to ask that this law is applied and respected ?
Finally , and I conclude Mr President , I am aware that the responsibility of the Council , shamefully absent today , is enormous .
As , in theory , a member of the quartet , the Union has the means to carry weight . What it lacks is the political will to do so .
Mr President , the Commissioner is right ; it is up to the customs offices of Member States to check whether products come from Israel or from Israeli settlements in the occupied territories .
However , the Commissioner also knows that once Israel has said that a product hails from Israel , there is very little customs offices can do about this , even when we know that we are being led up the garden path .
Member States are not individually capable of enforcing what , in my view , is to be done , namely for Israel to stop labelling products which we know originate from settlements , but which are still given the label ' from Israel ' .
How difficult this is was once again demonstrated in this very Parliament when the Israeli Ambassador stated quite clearly that he challenges the EU 's right to draw a distinction between products from Israel and those from the settlements .
As long as this situation persists , I do not think it is up to the Member States , but up to the Commission , to do battle with the Israeli Government in order to force the latter into action , which Member States are not capable of doing .
It is also up to the Commission to draw the necessary conclusions if Israel does not appear prepared to do what it is required according to EU legislation .
Mr President , it is a fact that the definition of territoriality applied by Israel to determine the origin of its exports to the European Union is not legal .
The Commission has publicly announced that Israel improperly issues proofs of origin to settlement products , but why has the Commission done nothing effective about it ?
The legal settlements are the main obstacle to peace .
At present , Member States which do not want to violate the trade agreement in giving preferential treatment to exports from such illegal settlements have only been able to recover some limited duties , mainly relying on Israel to refrain from answering verification questions .
Why has the Commission not explicitly notified the Member States that Israel 's definition of territoriality is illegal ?
Only when that has happened can the Member States draw the logical conclusion that they have to ask for verification for all Israeli products exported to the European Union .
Mr President , the first EC-Israel Free Trade Agreement was signed in 1975 and for 20 years the location of exported products was never questioned .
However , now it is being used as a political instrument to bash Israel and the settlements .
The author of the oral question has gone as far as calling for the suspension of the more recent 1995 agreement , even though the Commission has controversially agreed with her and imposed tariffs on goods allegedly exported by the settlements in the Occupied Territories .
This is a technical dispute on trade and , although I am a friend of Israel , I support an eventual two-state solution and a dismantling of most of the settlements .
Palestine is not yet a state competent to have its own trade agreements , which , controversially , the EU ratified in 1994 .
The Commission did this in spite of the fact that Israel had the signed agreement of the Palestinian Authority that Israel was responsible for customs matters for goods exported from the settlements .
Nevertheless , there is also an EU-Palestine Free Trade Agreement .
Therefore , whichever way you look at it , these goods should have EU tariff-free access as they come from territories covered by one or other free trade agreement .
All trade agreements refer to the territory where the goods are produced , not the nationality or the religion of the producers .
This whole dispute is now subject to a technical resolution under Article 79 of the Association Agreement , which is where it rightfully belongs .
It should not be the subject of political manipulation within this House .
The debate is engendering further hostility to trade with Israel and undermines Israel 's faith in the impartiality of the EU as a vital component of the quartet in the quest for the Roadmap for Peace and the end of terrorism .
I am sure that all sides of the House desire that outcome strongly .
Mr Nielson , let me take this opportunity to remind you that on 10 April our Parliament voted on a Resolution to freeze the Association Agreement .
Now , eighteen months later , this Resolution is still being ignored .
Could we see this as unwavering support for the Israeli state 's policy despite its violations of human rights and international law ?
We could , for we are talking about economic , commercial agreements , about financial interests , but we also about the right to life .
This colonial war claims more and more victims .
Even though the roadmap made provision to colonisation to be put on ice , the Jewish colonies continue to grow and roads around them are still being built .
In Israel the situation is tragic .
The discrimination against some Israeli citizens is increasing ; they are persecuted , denied certain rights because they are Arab Israelis .
The Knesset enacted a law to prevent Palestinians from obtaining Israeli citizenship by marriage .
This is a discriminatory and racist law .
A recent report by FIDH , the International Federation for Human Rights , has revealed to us a modern form of slavery of migrant workers .
Even Mr Abraham Burg , a former President of the Knesset , raised the alarm .
He said that Israel is a framework of corruption , based on foundations of oppression and injustice , which reduces itself to a colonist state , headed by a clique of individuals who are without morals , are above the law and corrupt .
In the occupied territories the situation is tragic .
A wall of shame embodies the apartheid and injustice , and the Palestinian society is living a tragedy .
We are not , of course , going to count the deaths .
Who are the victims of terrorism though , of this State terrorism that assassinates refugees on a daily basis ?
To conclude , Mr President , I will say that we cannot remain silent .
Is it not our duty to put pressure on the Israeli Government , with all the means that we have at our disposal including economic and commercial ones ?
Why not paralyse the Association Agreement as we courageously did before in South Africa against the apartheid ?
Mr President , my position is rather different from some of those expressed here .
In my opinion , this Parliamentary question is inappropriate and imprudent .
We are in the midst of a peace process , the European Union is a member of the Quartet , and I believe that if we in the European Parliament and in the other institutions really feel solidarity with the Executive and with the figure of Mr Solana in his capacity as ' Mr Common Foreign and Security Policy ' , our representative , then we should support a rapprochement between the countries and not seek conflict between the parties .

Let us not forget , furthermore , that this question implies a direct condemnation of the occupied territories .
All of us in Parliament have done this before now : it is a commonly-accepted practice , and we also know that , in accordance with the Taba agreements on the devolution of the territories , many of those territories , which were once desert and will now be habitable , will pass into Palestinian hands .
What worries me most is that this speech goes against the Palestinian Authority .
Since Arafat and Abu Mazen are making constant demands for Europe to take a firmer stance in the peace process , and for that process not to remain in the hands of the United States , and if , as Mr Solana says , Europe really is one of the biggest contributors to Abu Mazen 's profile , why do we not , instead of creating divisions between the parties , devote ourselves to upholding Abu Mazen and his policies , to upholding the prestige of the European Union against the other side ?
In my opinion , it does the peace process no favours for one of the parties involved to pick a fight with one of the other negotiators .
Why are we not asking Mr Solana and the Palestinian Authority to strengthen the administration of the latter , and helping them both to achieve that aim ?
Why are we not demanding , and why is Europe not showing greater support for , public health and education services ? That would prevent education from remaining to a large extent in the hands of a group like Hamas , which has been condemned for acts of terrorism .
Why are we not making a real contribution to strengthening the Palestinian Authority ?
That would be the answer .
I would like to know what impact this question will have , since it will probably go against many Palestinian workers in the occupied territories .
Mr President , the Commission 's declaration is a confirmation of the European Union 's aim to maintain peaceful and stable relations with the countries in the Middle East region .
This is the only possible approach and does not prevent the EU from presenting its own opinions and objectives within the framework of global partnership .
In practice these are complex situations .
What is more important is to understand the ordinary basic mechanisms which either hamper or encourage stability , just as Mr Schuman did when he put forward his brilliant genesis of an idea for the Communities that served as a basis for the EU .
I would in this connection like to highlight one basic mechanism that has an effect on stability and peace : a clean environment .
Clean water , as was shown in Jordan recently , is a vital necessity , and to attain it all the countries in the West Bank region must find a solution both separately and together .
Unfortunately , the international community is still not even aware of the environmental destruction which is a reality in the West Bank .
Excessive water extraction , conducting untreated waste water to Jordan , and the uncontrolled dumping of community waste have led to unthinkable health risks and a shortage of water .
The West Bank environment project is a multicultural and multilateral project which aims to solve major problems threatening the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the region .
The project is not , however , making adequate progress .
The reason is not low levels of finance or a lack of know-how and technology .
The reason is chiefly that , for a project which is under way in a region occupied by three countries , there exists no political forum to agree on practical matters that are essential for its implementation , even though all the parties involved are agreed in principle on the needs and the measures to be taken .
One may without exaggeration say that the EU is at present the only player in the world that could offer a political forum for attempts like the West Bank environment project to build stability and peace through action on the part of the inhabitants of the region .
A neutral mediator is needed to initiate decision-making that overrides political controversies .
If it were not for examples of voluntary action like the West Bank environment project , all the other work the EU does to implement the Middle East peace plans would be in vain .
Mr President , I was interested to hear Mr Tannock remind us that these agreements between the European Community and Israel have been in operation since 1975 .
I have been in Parliament for 19 years and this issue has regularly come up as a political flashpoint .
In fact it was one of the first major flashpoints when I joined Parliament in 1984 , yet we still have not reached a satisfactory conclusion .
But , as several speakers have already said , we are not really here today to start arguing about the whole question of who is most at fault in this sad and extremely tragic country .
I have visited Gaza , because my daughter worked there for several years with the UN , and I know that when the kind of trouble that everyone in Israel is suffering from occurs now , when the borders are closed , Palestinian produce cannot move out of the Gaza Strip .
I have spoken before in this House about the dramatic sights I have seen on the streets of Gaza city , where animals were eating the flowers and strawberries that were part of the Palestinian exports from Gaza to Europe .
There is a wonderful climate .
It is potentially a great source of economic value to the Palestinian people , but every time there was trouble the borders were shut down and the produce was simply left to rot on the streets of Gaza .
That makes it different from produce coming out of Israeli settlements - and that is a very real difference .
Only the Israeli authorities have the means to eliminate the substantial distortions of the origin rules involving settlement products without causing further inconvenience to the EU , the Member States , Community operators and Israeli exporters .
Perhaps without Israel 's cooperation the only lawful and effective solution for the EU , short of suspending the agreement , is for the Member States to hold in doubt the origin of virtually all Israeli exports .
.
Mr President , firstly , a general remark : as I see it , in the way we are conducting this debate we are behaving like generals fighting a war that has already been fought .
Personally , I share the view that it was quite some time before the EU got to the point where these rules were being clearly applied .
But we have been doing this for some time now and this fact needs to be clarified .
I would also add that the political need for discussion and energy to be injected into the subject has more to do with what to do now than with the starting-point of the discussion which related to the actual administration of the customs regime .
As a member of the Commission I do not recognise anything in our discussions or handling of this in the Commission that resembles what some have said here about questioning the unity of the Commission in relation to this issue .
This has never been a divisive issue inside the Commission .
Others have mentioned that Member States have to agree .
That is absolutely correct .
Mrs Sandbæk asked why the Commission has not officially informed Member States about this and what it is going to do .
I will repeat what I said in my first contribution to this debate , namely that following the confirmation received from Israel that its customs authorities certified goods coming from the settlements as being of Israeli origin , the Commission published a notice to the importers in the Official Journal in November 2001 in order to inform them of the situation .
So almost two years ago the Commission did what Mrs Sandbæk asked .
This is one element on which I based my first remarks .
It sounds as if this debate is about a war that was waged some time ago .
In February this year - which was the time that the last internal Member States customs authorities met on this issue - about EUR 100 000 had been collected as permanent duties on these product categories from the beginning of 2003 .
We expect new figures to be available at the end of this month when the next meeting takes place .
The amount of guarantees taken on these products by EU customs authorities at that time was as much as EUR 1.7 million .
When we are certain that the goods are coming from settlements , duties are applied immediately by Member States .
Where there is any doubt , or where there is unclear or insufficient information about this from the Israeli authorities , we also apply duties after having checked as far as we can .
This is being regularly reviewed within our Member States through the Customs Committee , which will meet again at the end of this month .
This is something which is not just handled by putting a notice in the Official Journal ; it is an active , ongoing process .
Finally , Mr Gahler asked about the modalities and principles of assessing the accumulation , and how much processing is necessary before it becomes an Israeli product .
This is not the only place in the world where we have to decide on these matters .
We follow general principles and criteria as regards how much processing is necessary before the origin of a product is decided .
There is no special rule for Israel on this point .
The continuing occupation of territories by Israel , the repeated murderous operations by the Israeli army , its terrorist presence in Palestine and the arbitrary arrests , in conjunction with rough conditions of detention , the denial of the existence of a Palestinian state and the constant violation of the right of self-determination of a nation have created an explosive situation in the Middle East and a generalised climate of instability and insecurity , which is being maintained and incited by US and EU imperialism , causing the justified reaction of the Palestinians and intensifying the suicide attacks .
The proclamation of an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital is the sine qua non to any real effort to bring about peace and restore a climate of security for Palestinians and Israelis .
The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece take side unreservedly with the fighting Palestinian people and condemn efforts to maintain the current situation and perpetuate the problem , as contained in the Quartet 's road map , which has obviously collapsed .
The peoples of Europe are fighting for peace against imperialist military intervention , as in Yugoslavia , Afghanistan and Iraq , and against cooperation with and support for Israel in its bellicose strategy of violation of the rights of the Palestinians , and they will overturn with their fight the militarisation of Europe which will strengthen imperialism against the peoples even more .
The next item is the report ( A5-0164 / 2003 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the Commission communication to the Council and the European Parliament on the Special Framework of Assistance for Traditional ACP Suppliers of Bananas ( Council Regulation No 856 / 1999 ) - Biennial Report from the Commission 2002 ( COM ( 2002 ) 763 - 2003 / 2091 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , this Commission communication comes in response to the provisions of the Council Regulation on the Special Framework of Assistance for traditional ACP banana producers , whose objectives are to improve the competitiveness and support the diversification of agricultural production in those countries .
I would like to emphasise that significant sums , about EUR 44 million , were allocated to this aid project in both 2001 and 2002 , and that the Commission has told us the results of the programme for those two years .
It gives me particular pleasure to say , firstly , that efforts to diversify production increased during that period , and , secondly , that those efforts were based on incentives for agricultural and rural development projects .
Both of these achievements fulfil or express desires noted as objectives by both the Commission and Parliament when this programme was approved .
I ought to mention , however , that some problems have been encountered . The Commission is undoubtedly aware of them , but they should be solved through the prompt adoption of certain corrective measures .
Firstly , there have in some cases been significant and repeated delays , not attributable to any individual 's deliberate wishes , in mobilising and implementing appropriations over the last few years .
These delays , however , have as a rule created significant difficulties for farmers in the producing countries , some of which are among the 40 poorest countries on the planet .
Some of these farmers have told us of their doubts and , particularly in the case of West African farmers , of their disagreement with the methods used by the Commission to assess farmers ' competitiveness , on which the Commission 's criteria for allocating appropriations are based .
This assessment method takes into account average production costs , insurance and transport fleets as detailed by Eurostat .
These figures , though , do not constitute a single definition . That causes mistakes of more than minimal significance in some cases .
They are sometimes very significant mistakes , to the detriment of some of these countries .
Commissioner , I am concerned at the decline in the amount of assistance allocated in the 2003 budget , especially as we approach the changeover from the current system to a tariff only system . That changeover may have very negative effects , not only on production in traditional ACP countries , but also on European banana-producing regions , if , when the moment comes for us to move from the current system to the tariff only system , we are unable to adopt the right measures .
I will conclude by appealing for two concrete changes which are very important to Parliament and also , I hope , to the Commission : greater efforts to avoid any delays in payment from now on ; and assessments of growing and production methods , with the aim of withholding funding from those projects having a negative effect not only on the environment but also on the health of banana workers in producing countries .
The use of biodegradable substances in the banana-growing process should become a priority here .
. Let me start by say something about the evolution of payments .
I agree that this has been quite a problem in the start-up phase , but I can also inform you that the amount invoiced in 2002 was nearly EUR 41.5 million .
This represents nearly seven times more than the amounts invoice in 1999 and more than three times the amount invoiced in 2001 .
Although we cannot draw clear conclusions yet for the current year , the overall trend is quite positive and a similar disbursements of some EUR 40 million is expected for this year , taken as a whole .
We are now at a level of activity that corresponds reasonably well to expectations .
All this is quite complex , there are so many different interests deserving protection , many historical , social and political factors in everything that relates to bananas .
The Commission is well aware of the difficulties in combining the principle of equitable market access with consideration for the structural problems faced by small vulnerable economies .
The Special Framework of Assistance stems from those concerns and addresses them in a tangible manner .
Also it should be noted that this was not something imposed on our partners in this area but reflects thorough negotiations .
After the undeniable difficulties of the start-up phase , substantial progress can now be observed in the implementation of the scheme : I have just given these figures .
Now we have reached a satisfactory rate in terms of payment .
In response to the repeated suggestions by the Commission , several ACP banana suppliers are changing their strategies and seeking more financial support to fund diversification where the banana industry is no longer sustainable .
It is expected that this process will continue , with the least competitive banana suppliers using the available funds exclusively for diversification and social compensation .
As far as the possible increase in imports following enlargement , which is an important discussion , is concerned , it was agreed at the Copenhagen summit that appropriate arrangements would be made in order to ensure a sufficient supply of bananas to EU consumers in conformity with WTO rules .
Any increase in the banana quotas , which would be subject to negotiations in the WTO framework , would take account of the interests of these producers .
The Commission is well aware of its obligations resulting from the Cotonou Agreement including those relating to ensuring the continuing outlet for ACP bananas on the European market and we are of course committed to do anything we can to respect this .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to thank Mr Fernández for producing this report , which is an assessment rather than a legislative report .
I also thank Commissioner Nielson for his statement .
As the rapporteur says , we have reached the final stages of a regime for protecting banana imports , which will come to an end on 31 December 2005 .
The European Union has managed to maintain special privileges for 12 small countries , as Mr Fernández has told us .
Some of those countries , such as Somalia , Jamaica and Dominica , are among the world 's poorest , which is why they need our help .
That date , 31 December 2005 , is very close .
A guarantee and a tariff preference are laid down in the Cotonou Agreement ; they will have to be honoured .
Clearly , though , these banana producers will find themselves in trouble as the date approaches .
What I mean to say is that there is every chance of the Community market becoming flooded with bananas marketed by multinational companies .
Most importantly , the rapporteur has pointed out another danger , namely that enlargement will be used to justify granting even more preferential treatment to those multinational companies , opening up our markets to the detriment of both Community and traditional ACP producers .
I believe that Commissioner Nielson is at present aware of those problems .
He mentioned that the amount of aid has remained at approximately the same level , about EUR 40 million , in recent years , and I do not know to what extent that amount could be altered to accommodate the needs arising as an inevitable consequence of the transition from a protective banana regime to an open regime subject only to the tariff restriction .
I therefore reiterate my group 's support for Mr Fernández 's report , and hope that the Commission will continue to protect this small group of impoverished countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , bananas are extremely important products for the economy and for the land use of several European regions , particularly in the Atlantic archipelagos of Macronesia , but are also crucial to some less developed countries towards which we have binding legal and political obligations .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Fernández Martín , and offer my support for his conclusions and ideas on the matter now under our consideration . I also offer my support to my friend and colleague , Mr Medina Ortega , who is also a fellow countryman of the rapporteur .
In particular , I share his concern at the scantiness of the financial means available under this regulation .
I wish , however , to take this opportunity to raise a few basic points about the transparency and clarity of procedures in the way current legislation is implemented .
It is unacceptable that the funds we are looking at should be allocated by Commission decisions that are not made public and which are based on an unnecessarily complex system of calculation , on the basis of somewhat erroneously defined concepts , using data of dubious rigour and comparability that are spread across two regulations and several articles and annexes .
The aims of Community legislation must be clear , as simple as possible to enact and transparently implemented .
As the Ivory Coast Banana and Pineapple Producers ' Association has rightly stated , however , this regulation does not fulfil these criteria .
I therefore hope that the Commission will inform Parliament of the decisions it has taken on funding organisations in the beneficiary countries , as well as the calculations informing these and the data it has used and even the legal basis and what it has done with the unused appropriations from budget line B7-8710 .
A simple and transparent legal framework is a crucial instrument , in this and in other fields , for developing a positive and lasting relationship between the European institutions and their partners .
.
Mr President , in reply to the last remarks by Mr Casaca , this does not correspond to the way in which we are doing these things .
None of the beneficiaries has ever disputed the correctness of the calculations of the individual yearly amounts .
This is also being discussed at meetings with representatives of these countries .
I would add that the representatives of the producers from the Côte d 'Ivoire stated at one of these meetings that in their view the Commission has always applied the method prescribed by the Commission regulation in a correct and fair manner .
If these criteria are complex it only reflects the fact that we are where we are as a result of negotiations where contradictory and many different special interests had to be reconciled .
That is the source of the complication .
For once it is something we in the Commission are not guilty of .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be at the end of the debates today .
Mr President , the world today is more interdependent than ever before .
Problems are shared problems : poverty , hunger , military conflict , immigration , transmissible diseases , ecological disasters and the like .
Efforts to solve them must be coordinated and shared by all .
Here the question of development aid has become more important than ever .
Now is exactly the right moment , to my mind , for the Commission to have produced its communication to the Council and to Parliament , which we are debating today .
The report I am presenting today , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , is the fruit of work and contributions from political groups and from my fellow Members , for which I am particularly grateful and appreciative .
As we know , the European Union and its Member States constitute the world 's leading donors of government development aid .
The traditional mechanisms of the European model have not , however , allowed the desired aims of cooperation to be achieved with complete success .
It is difficult for us to ensure that the results are monitored or to assess them accurately , because the implementation of the programmes and projects is dispersed among both national cooperation agencies and fixed procedures which tie the receipt of aid in different ways to the acquisition of goods and services obtained by means of that aid in the donor countries .
According the World Bank 's figures , released here in this Chamber during a speech by the bank 's President , Mr Wolfensohn , the untying of aid would result in a reduction of transaction costs by up to 25 % .
We therefore welcome the Commission 's initiative , which may help to enliven the debate on this issue .
That debate is currently being conducted among Member States and multilateral organisations . They are far from reaching an agreement which would be binding on all parties , and on the main donors in particular .
I am convinced of the need , in this debate , to uphold the idea that aid priorities should suit the interests of recipient countries .
That idea would seem almost too obvious to any observer , but it is not currently being put into practice .
As a result , some European countries play a significant part in cooperation as official aid donors , but the money they make in return for delivering that aid exceeds their own contributions to the aid programmes , sometimes by a long way .
This practice is known to all of us , I believe , and it is clear proof of a degree of cynicism among the donor countries - in other words , our own countries .
We must make an effort , therefore , to try and remedy this state of affairs .
Of course , events do not take this kind of turn through a deliberate and evil desire for them to turn out badly , but for a whole range of reasons which cannot be gone into here .
The main thing is that we use the experience we have acquired to push for these ideas to be implemented , bearing in mind certain considerations , such as those mentioned in paragraph 4 of our report , in order to ensure that our objectives are achieved and certain undesirable effects avoided .
In other words , for example , it would be helpful if the Commission were to bear in mind the need for horizontal and geographical or regional budget lines to be treated equally , so as to introduce and guarantee open , transparent calls for tender , which do not always come about .
These calls for tender will apply to all Member States and candidate countries , all developing countries and all developed countries , on condition that they are reciprocated by third countries and approved by the recipient countries .
I will conclude by making express mention of a request made by many developing countries and NGOs .
That request is that priority be given to the award of contracts to local suppliers or service providers in both the recipient country and neighbouring countries in the same region , on condition that provision is made for sufficient training to ensure that the projects are brought to a satisfactory conclusion rather than left frustratingly unfinished .
The reasons for this are many and plain to see ; it would be almost too obvious to list them , but they can be summed up by evoking the desirability of contributing to the development of local markets in those countries .
. The communication about the untying of aid dates back to 18 November 2002 and we still have quite some work to do , even though we have made good political progress on the issue since last year .
This issue may appear to be very technical and difficult to address , but it can have quite an impact in the field concerning the effectiveness , the value for money of our aid and also the dynamics of the cooperation with our partner countries - exactly in the way Mr Fernández Martin has made clear .
I am grateful for the work he has done on this subject .
His report reflects broad agreement between us .
We have achieved consensus in Council on the untying of Community aid , and with the resolution on the table now in Parliament we can start working on implementation .
We will focus on concrete proposals to change the different relevant legal instruments .
The proposal to implement changes in the existing regulations will fall under the co-decision procedure and therefore Parliament 's role in moving this forward will be fundamental .
I look forward to discussing it with Parliament during the course of this coming year .
We will continue our work on establishing the facts relating to untying .
One of the problems is that it is very difficult to find concrete , reliable data on the impact of untying .
We will begin a study on this before the end of the year .
We will try to convince other donors who are still reluctant to join us , particularly through the work of the OECD ' s Development Assistance Committee and its new Working Group on Aid Effectiveness .
While welcoming the Council 's agreement on the untying of Community aid , I would like to express disappointment at the reluctance of some Member States - and especially that of one Member State - to commit themselves to untying bilateral aid .
This has two dimensions ; one is the well-established discussion as to whether or not official development assistance and the procurement there is part of the Single Market .
This is an internal EU discussion .
In the Commission 's view the answer is clearly ' yes ' , the public procurement directive does indeed cover development aid .
Some countries that have been doubting this over the years , including my own , clearly no longer doubt this .
However , one Member State still maintains a different view .
My reply would be ' okay , we will meet in Court ' .
The other element where a discussion is more open and more legitimate is what Member States do in the broader global discussion in the framework of OECD about the untying of aid .
There we have an agreement to untie aid to the group of least developed countries .
The volume of what has been agreed on corresponds to about 2 % of global ODA - not a big deal .
The Commission is complying , and in fact over-achieving , in relation to what it has to do in order to carry out this agreement .
But we take a different view : one reason being that we do not want to discriminate between least developed countries and the rest .
We are ready to untie all aid and we have legal obligations vis-à-vis the ACP countries , for instance , which means that as a group , they have access to bid on everything relating to all seventy-eight countries .
In preparation for the Monterrey Conference on Financing for Development , the Member States committed themselves to continue discussions on the further untying of bilateral aid .
The Commission recognises that we need both to increase the volume of aid and its effectiveness through measures like those we are discussing today .
I am really pleased to have the signal from Parliament and I look forward to moving this forward .
It is true that we have to insist on some reciprocity , because this issue is also about taking care of trade interests opening up on our part , if , for instance , the United States is not doing the same thing .
It is clearly not something we have a mandate to do .
Our policy is now clear we want to go for the big solution on this issue .
. Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent and timely report .
As he said , we now live in a world that is totally interdependent , and the problems of one country are problems for all of us , problems such as poverty , hunger , disease , ecological disasters and crime .
It is our joint responsibility to resolve these problems and to work towards a consistent and coherent strategy .
Development aid can play a pivotal role in working towards solutions , but only if it is free of trade commitments .
The proposals we have in front of us are a positive step towards achieving greater effectiveness of development aid .
Untying aid is a direct way of increasing that effectiveness , but we need to acknowledge and recognise , as the Commissioner has made clear , that among certain Member States tying aid is still common practice .
We must therefore take immediate action to address the inadequacy of our current practices .
Commissioner , may I say ' more power to your elbow ! ' when you see the recalcitrant Member State in court , because we cannot have one Member State playing a different game from the others .
We have , as you say , a single market .
I support the need for reform .
It will lead to increasing transparency and accountability .
It is a complex process , and we welcome the intention of the Commission to bring forward the legislative proposals and the changes to existing legislation , hoping that this will not result in more bureaucracy .
I should like to stress that this untying of aid from trade is not a final step , but it is one means of increasing the effectiveness of granting aid .
The main purpose of granting aid is poverty reduction .
So it is not an isolated concept , but part of an ongoing debate which will be pursued to some extent in Cancun next week .
Mr President , I wish to express my sincere thanks to my colleague , Fernando Fernández Martín , for the pithy though balanced report he has drafted .
I would also ask Commissioner Nielson to convey my thanks to those involved in drafting the Commission communication .
The text is clearly written and big-hearted in its tone .
The practice of tying aid may in theory even turn development aid completely on its head , with the donor benefiting and the country intended as the recipient becoming poorer than ever .
Although this extreme paradox , which is well-known in economic theories , is not necessarily very easily possible in reality , it is nevertheless a reminder of the sort of reduced effectiveness and perversions of aid which still occur and are furthermore permitted in real life .
Estimates by the World Bank and the OECD of savings made through increased effectiveness are of the order of 25 % .
Our rapporteur estimates that the net benefit of untying could be the equivalent of as much as USD 5 billion in terms of cash .
As we know how even small sums of money can work wonders in development cooperation , an increase of several billion euros of that sort is staggering .
The European Union 's willingness to take the initiative in this matter is significant as the EU and the Member States are responsible together for half the world 's development aid .
Reduced effectiveness in development cooperation is therefore by no means a trivial matter when measured in real terms .
It is important to implement the conclusions arrived at in Barcelona swiftly .
It should be self-evident that simple market economy principles dictate that the EU Member States should untie donor aid .
The key competition principles agreed in the EU will work to the advantage of the developing countries in this .
Then local sourcing and sourcing from other developing countries will also be possible , as we have already seen , resulting in a multiplier effect on the effectiveness of aid .
In addition to the benefit in terms of welfare achieved in the developing countries , the liberalisation of procurement will also be important within the EU , because the practice of tying aid which still goes on in many Member States also distorts competition among the Member States themselves and is against the rules on competition in the EC Treaty .
Mr President , aid which is conditional on the acquisition of goods or services originating in the donor country has repeatedly been condemned as an immoral and inefficient practice by recipient countries and the worst-affected NGOs on the one hand , and on the other by the majority of agencies involved in development issues . Among the latter are many intergovernmental organisations .
In 1996 , the Development Assistance Committee ( DAC ) of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) published a strategy document entitled ' Shaping the 21st Century : The Contribution of Development Cooperation ' . This publication discredited the practice of imposing conditions on development assistance , showing it to be incompatible with the new guiding philosophy for initiatives in this field .
Since then , that philosophy has gradually taken on a definite , solid form through a series of important declarations and resolutions , such as the DAC 's recommendation , approved in May 2001 , demanding that aid to the least-developed countries should be untied .
More importantly , the international community adopted the Monterrey Consensus at the International Conference on Financing for Development in March 2002 , committing itself to supporting initiatives designed to phase out conditional aid .
In its communication of November 2002 , entitled ' Untying : Enhancing the Effectiveness of Aid ' , the Commission responds to just those promises made at Monterrey . It goes even further than the DAC 's resolution , since it extends the need to untie aid to all developing countries , not just to least-developed countries .
It also extends the untying of aid to all aid sectors , including food aid .
All these recommendations are still gaining ground , under pressure from lobbying by the general public and by NGOs .
They have not , however , made a great impression on a large number of countries , which are continuing to grant tied aid , either openly or covertly . This is unfortunately also true of various EU Member States .
The result is a significant discrepancy between the policy advocated by Parliament and implemented by the Commission on the one hand , and the policy put into practice by some Member States , such as Spain under José María Aznar , on the other .
It comes as no surprise that the report presented by Mr Fernández Martín , a Partido Popular deputy in my country , should list a series of initial misgivings about the progressive approach urged by the Commission , an approach favourable to the untying of development cooperation policy .
In the rapporteur 's favour , however , it should be said that he showed understanding and flexibility by accepting the amendments tabled to his first proposal , which have yielded substantial improvements in his final text .
That text includes a motion for a resolution approved by the Parliamentary Committee on Development and Cooperation . We will be reasonably happy to vote for it , since it favours the complete untying of development aid , both European Union aid and aid granted by each and every one of the Member States .
. Mr President , I should like to make just a few points .
With regard to Mrs Korhola 's comments , it is true that many years ago the World Bank and UN stated that up to 25 % of development assistance was wasted from the point of view of the recipient countries because of tying to the donor countries .
This figure is not acceptable to the Commission because we have open competition between the 15 Member States , and adding a sixteenth does not really change the name of the game in terms of ensuring competitiveness when we are tendering .
Therefore , the dynamics of this mainly revolves around a classical case of a single bilateral donor country tying or not tying .
For the Commission , the dynamics of this , economically speaking , are not fantastic .
I would add that as a result of access to ACP countries , these countries have the right to bid on anything we tender relating to them .
About 25 % of all tenders are now being won by ACP bidders .
This is good and is part of what Mr Fernández Martín talked about as being important to attain .
Finally , it is true that food aid and the transport of food aid has - at the insistence of the US and via the decision in the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD - been excluded from what should be covered by untying of aid .
This is very sad and this is why we specifically refer to that problem as one of the elements in the broader topic of the untying of aid .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be at the end of the debates today .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions on the bomb attacks in Mumbai :
B5-0371 / 2003 tabled by Gerard Collins , on behalf of the UEN Group ;
B5-0376 / 2003 tabled by Bob van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0379 / 2003 tabled by Jean Lambert and Reinhold Messner , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0381 / 2003 tabled by Margrietus J. van den Berg and Maria Carrilho , on behalf of the PSE Group ;
B5-0386 / 2003 tabled by Giuseppe Di Lello Finuoli and Esko Olavi Seppänen , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group and
B5-0387 / 2003 tabled by Charles Tannock and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group .
Mr President , I am surprised that for once my political group is the first to be called in the debate .
I recently had a long and interesting conversation in Scotland with the Consul General for India and we were reflecting upon the problems in trying to constitute a polity which is continental in scale and multilingual in character , with citizens of many faiths and of none , with memories of historical antagonism between religious communities and which tries to sustain a working democratic constitution and to live at peace with its neighbours .
We were thinking both of Europe and of India and it is humbling to us in the European Union , as we work towards improving our constitution , to think that India has achieved this continent-wide polyglot democracy in a secular polity for more than 50 years now .
We have a lot to learn from India and we should approach today 's debate with a certain sense of humility in that regard .
However , evidently , as the horrifying events in Mumbai show us , all is not well in India .
The issue of the capability to sustain a secular state with religious tolerance is now before us , as is the question of whether the tension with Pakistan will be cooled and whether intercommunal relations in India will become peaceful .
That sets the background to this admirable resolution which is before us today .
Some of it in a sense merely states the obvious : of course we condemn the bomb attacks in Mumbai ; of course we deplore the targeting of civilians ; of course we feel great sympathy with the victims .
We support the Indian Government in its fight against terrorism , but there is more to be said than that and some of it is said in my group 's amendment to the resolution where we call for further steps to be taken to enforce Indian constitutional law properly and to prevent communal violence inside India .
We are particularly aware , for example , of recent Amnesty International reports on problems in Gujarat and the responses to the 2002 massacre there .
The Indian National Human Rights Commission has itself called for improved vigilance by the Indian authorities and for effective protection of constitutional rights .
At the same time we welcome the Pakistani Government 's assurance that it also deplores and has no time for the terrorist act in Mumbai .
Times are critical , but we must also be critically sympathetic to the Indian state .
Things are going wrong which will call for resolve in India to make them better .
We should carry this resolution and the amendments to it tabled in the name of my group and of the ELDR Group .
For a long time , India was a stable country with Hindus and Muslims coexisting peacefully alongside one another .
Last week 's terrorist attacks in Mumbai might well spell the beginning of increasing violence between representatives of the religious communities . I certainly hope it will not .
One of the suspects has already indicated that with this act , he wanted to take revenge for last year 's anti-Muslim riots in Gujarat , which claimed the lives of 2 000 Muslims .
Developments in India over the past fifty years had been typified by cultural diversity and a heterogeneous society .
Over the past ten years , however , we have witnessed increasing alienation between Muslims and Hindus .
The immediate cause is the issue involving the temple of the god Ram .
The root cause , however , is to be sought more in the area of looming Hindu nationalism , where faith and national identity coincide .
Hindus fear Muslims and Christians , particularly demographically speaking .
Finally , needless to say , friction with Pakistan is continually placing a heavy strain on relations between them , including in India .
The Indian Government should take the problems seriously , and it appears now to be doing so .
An escalation must be avoided at all costs .
I have tabled an amendment in which the Indian Government is urged to draw up a plan of action in this respect .
India is not the only country that is facing tension between religions .
Almost half of the recent violent conflicts in the world have a religious dimension .
Consequently , I have expressly asked for this issue to be highlighted in my human rights report .
An institutionalised dialogue should be set up between the most important world religions .
The European Union should also look into this issue .
For a long time , India was a good example of the peaceful co-existence of religions .
It should pull out all the stops in order to again become the peaceful , stable country which it had been for such a long time .
Mr President , I wish to start , as other speakers have done , by conveying my condolences and those of the Group of the Party of European Socialists to the Indian authorities and to all the relatives of the victims , for the appalling attack perpetrated in Bombay .
I should also like to take this opportunity to say - as Mr MacCormick said - that there is indeed more to be said on the matter , although it is crucial to start saying exactly what he said , but not , I believe , if this means raising further problems , albeit very real ones , concerning human rights in India .
I do not believe that this is the appropriate time , place , or way to raise such issues , because what we do not need is an attempt to justify any form of terrorism against civilians , which is what has occurred in this case : we must condemn all such terrorist activities , whether the attack in Bombay or those that have placed Israel in a continual state of mourning , or , for example , the attack that took place in Buenos Aires , which the British judicial authorities are only now beginning to deal with , and are doing so extremely well , in a way that should be noted by all and which should , in fact , be the standard for all European political authorities .
This is not , unfortunately , always the case .
We must not hesitate to condemn terrorist attacks of this type and not attempt to justify them .
Our condemnation of fanaticism must be clear , unequivocal and resolute .
This is the message that I would like to make extremely clear , and this is why I do not believe that the amendments tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party are appropriate .
Mr President , as the founder of the European Parliament Friends of India group , this resolution is intended as a gesture of solidarity with the people and government of India against the mindless violence perpetrated by a small number of fanatics drawn from Islamic extremists .
They believe the killing in Bombay with the bombing of innocents , including children and members of their own Muslim faith , to be justified and a way of destabilising the largest multicultural , democratic success story in the world .
I also salute the professionalism of the authorities , not only in their early success in apprehending the suspects and hopefully eventually securing convictions , but , most of all , preventing an escalation of further inter-communal violence .
I also welcome the response of the government of Pakistan , but it must crack down seriously if any evidence emerges of connections to Lashkar-e-Toiba and if any of its operations are shown to have been launched from Pakistani territory .
However , I particularly welcome their condemnation of the bomb attack .
It is essential that the political stability of India as a nuclear , regional superpower is upheld by all EU Member States and all other democratic nations of the world .
India is a country in which all groups have reached the highest offices , as illustrated by its current President and Head of State , who is a Muslim .
Within 20 years it will in terms of population be the largest country in the world , overtaking China .
Terrorism is a negation of all the values of those who seek to build rather than destroy .
This House condemns it everywhere , all over the world .
Mr President , the bombings at the Gateway of India and the Zaveri Bazaar in Mumbai on 25 August 2003 killed and injured scores of innocent civilians .
These devastating and cowardly terrorist attacks remind us all that the scourge of terrorism is a threat faced by all democracies .
It is a challenge that we must face together by intensifying security cooperation on a bilateral and multilateral basis .
The United Kingdom in particular has strong historical ties with India .
I trust that the British Government will offer India all the support that it can in combating terrorism .
The Indian authorities and people have shown commendable restraint in the face of these latest outrages .
That , of course , is the right response .
The terrorists seek to stir wider hatred and animosity and undermine not only the secular democracy , which has been part of our legacy to India and India 's great strength and example , but also the hopeful signs of rapprochement , which have been seen recently between India and Pakistan .
Pakistan should now clearly demonstrate its willingness to take effective action against terrorists on its borders with Afghanistan and now , even more urgently , on its borders with India - in cooperation with the Indian security authorities - before there is another conflagration .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group .
We support the joint resolution , but , at the same time , I would endorse Mr Casaca 's comments that we should not be widening this resolution outside of its original terms .
Therefore , we will not support the two amendments by the Liberals and the Greens .
Of course the PSE Group condemns the cowardly ' twin towers ' bombings of the Gateway of India and of the Zaveri Bazaar in Mumbai on 25 August 2003 that killed and injured so many people .
Under no circumstances can any terrorist attack that targets civilians , resulting in the loss of innocent lives , be accepted by the international community .
These terrorist bombs were clearly designed to cause maximum civilian causalities , to destabilise Indian society and weaken the Indian economy .
Yet members of both the Hindu and Muslim communities in India died in the attack and worked together in the rescue efforts .
We have seen a degree of restraint that we have to welcome .
At the same time , we welcome the statement by the Pakistani Foreign Minister expressing sympathy with the victims and their families .
We urge the Commission , the Council and this Parliament to do all they can to ensure that the current rapprochement between India and Pakistan is not damaged by these incidents .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it goes without saying that the European Union must not pass over in silence the terrorist attacks in Mumbai .
Not only did these bombings , which hit India 's financial centre , claim the lives of 52 people , they also threatened to jeopardise the peace process in the region .
It is regrettable that this should happen precisely at this moment in time , jeopardising the peace negotiations between India and Pakistan over Kashmir , a much-wanted region by both countries .
India has been making major efforts for some time to bring this conflict to an end .
After all , the Indian Government 's policies are geared to the peaceful co-existence of the different nations , as illustrated by the number of Muslims occupying high government positions .
India is , moreover , the only country in southern Asia that has opted in favour of a secular and pluralist state model .
A choice of this kind is a clear expression of tolerance with regard to the various population groups .
It goes without saying that this raises very important issues , which must be viewed in terms of India 's importance , not only in Asia but also in the world .
After all , we should not overlook the fact that India is a superpower boasting great economic potential and is also one of the European Union 's important trading partners .
The objective of the violence was to destabilise society and deliver a blow to the Indian economy .
The international community should concern itself more with increasing Muslim fundamentalism in the world .
The recent attack against the UN headquarters in Iraq is a dramatic example of this .
This incident underlines once more the enormous threat that is emanating from ever increasing fundamentalism .
I take the view that the European Union and its Parliament have every reason to continue to support India as a constitutional state , where Hindus and Muslims are treated equally , in a bid to ensure respect for the principles of democracy .
. The Commission agrees with Parliament 's concerns and shares its view on the gravity of the recent bomb attacks in Mumbai .
These attacks are proof that terrorism can strike in any part of the world and have disastrous consequences .
The Commission condemned in the strongest possible terms the bomb attacks that caused much loss of life and many causalities in Mumbai on 25 August 2003 .
President Prodi reacted immediately by sending a message to the Indian Prime Minister , Mr Vajpayee .
He condemned the attack , offered his condolences and assured India of EU support in the fight against terrorism .
The EU and India have stood and stand side by side in their fight against terrorism , as spelled out in a Joint Declaration issued at the 2001 Summit in Delhi .
Cooperation in this matter is part of our regular political dialogue at all levels , and we have set up a working group that has already met four times since May 2001 .
A strong signal from the European Parliament is thus a very welcome contribution to the EU 's expression of solidarity with India .
It will emphasise our common resolve to fight terrorism , wherever it occurs and whatever its motives .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be at the end of the debates today .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists welcomes the peace agreement signed a Accra on 18 August 2003 under the authority of ECOWAS , the Economic Community of West African States .
We are concerned that while this is holding in the capital , there are still problems in the rural areas , with reports even today of tens of thousands of people fleeing into Monrovia from Totota in Central Liberia .
That is hardly surprising , with the alleged massacres of hundreds , and possibly thousands , of civilians perpetuated in Nimba County since the signing of the agreement .
Fourteen years of violence and misrule in Liberia resulted in immense human suffering amongst civilians , as well as gross human rights violations , a breakdown in social and economic structures , and now 85 % of the population is living below the poverty line .
The arrival of the peacekeeping force has enabled the peacekeeping process to start , but there is still a long way to go .
We look forward and call upon all the parties to the agreement to implement it in good faith and to establish a transitional government as promised on 14 October 2003 , that will hopefully lead to free and fair elections .
We welcome the fact that the European Union has provided aid to that process , amounting to EUR 15 million to date .
We recognise that more may be necessary .
The problem is that at the moment the peace agreement is holding in Monrovia , but less well outside .
Part of that problem is that there is still a shortage of troops on the ground .
There are only 1 500 out of a promised 3 500 .
Those troops are required as soon as possible .
We equally ask that all the states in the region refrain from any actions that might contribute to instability in Liberia and on the borders between Guinea , Sierra Leone and the Côte d 'Ivoire .
We ask that these neighbouring states act with discretion .
Mr President , corrupt and ruthless dictators continue to exploit and impoverish many countries in Africa .
Decades of international aid , especially EU aid , have been undone and destroyed .
Consequently millions suffer from avoidable diseases or are maimed and shot .
The EU must condemn these dictators and it must be ready to act promptly .
In cases like Liberia , where ECOWAS and Nigeria have taken the initiative .
I hope the EU will do more than just provide the EUR 15 million that it is has pledged .
I am pleased , of course , that the EU is involved and I want to ensure that this Parliament is aware of the continuing problems in Africa , because it is European taxpayers who in the end become impatient if we are seen not to take appropriate action .
I hope Commissioner Nielson will do his best and keep Parliament informed , because we need to show that Liberia can recover and can perhaps be a model for other African countries .
We need to build it anew and ensure there is prosperity and peace .
Mr President , West Africa provides examples of the extent to which this region is rent asunder .
On the one hand , it is where there are the best opportunities for a regional market to grow and develop , and some states have done well by African standards in making progress in recent years .
On the other hand , there are states - of which Sierra Leone is one example , and Liberia is another - where not only is the state in crisis , but where every vestige of the rule of law threatens to disappear .
We have to consider how we are going to respond in the face of this situation .
We have to be clear in our own minds that Liberia started out with a congenital defect , as the descendants of black African returnees from America were in violent conflict with the indigenous inhabitants from the word go and the state has never been internally united .
Today there are also violent conflicts , organised criminality , powerful raw materials interests , and the danger , despite all current efforts and even though some period of time without war can be achieved , that the real problem , the establishment of a constitutional state that functions to some degree , will not actually be tackled .
Important though troops are , they cannot do it on their own .
What the country needs is the establishment of a state , the building of institutions , and the truth that a state does not come into being automatically is demonstrated in Somalia , where there has been no rule of law whatever for the past ten years .
It is a characteristically European conception that well-ordered states must always and everywhere be in place , even though , in the aftermath of the Thirty Years ' War , it took us decades to re-establish a functioning state order .
For a start , then , we should not take an arrogant approach to these matters ; secondly , we need to apply a certain healthy realism .
We must first put a stop to the violence and must alleviate the direst need ; then , though , will begin a process , which will last decades , of re-establishing political institutions that work to at least some degree .
That will not happen without massive help from us , but nor can it be successful unless the people want to help themselves .
It cannot happen without support from the country 's neighbours , without regional cooperation , without the establishment of a regional community in West Africa .
There are however two sides to this , as the state borders and ethnic boundaries do not coincide , resulting in the danger of aid to neighbourhoods being misused - as it was in the Congo - in order to strengthen the hand of related peoples in internal politics on the other side of the border and to upset the balance of nationalities .
A healthy combination of external help , help aimed at enabling people to help themselves , and regional cooperation offers the only chance for this region , racked by crises , to get back on its feet , at least in the medium term .
. Mr President , the Commission welcomes the peace agreement signed by the belligerent parties , civil society and political parties of the country on 18 August 2003 .
We are still concerned about the ongoing fighting .
It is very important that ECOWAS fully deploys its peacekeeping troops to ensure that the peace agreement is respected on the ground .
The figure available to me as to how many troops have actually been deployed is 2127 .
ECOWAS is doing what it is expected to do .
We hope that the presence of this force will permit a rapid resumption of humanitarian assistance and an end to the atrocities that , especially for women and children , have been terrible in Liberia .
We have been informed by ECOWAS that deployment should be completed by 9 September 2003 .
It has appointed a special representative for Liberia to oversee the conduct of the peacekeeping force and monitor the implementation of the peace agreement .
ECOWAS is not in a position to carry the financial burden of these operations alone , and following the proposal from the Commission the Council decided to make EUR 50 million available to support the peace process broadly defined in Liberia .
This money comes from allocated funds for Liberia that were never used : because of the situation we could not work there normally .
For both the 7th and the 8th EDF , Liberia was more or less out of the circuit .
Some things were possible , but only very little .
About EUR 8 million of the EUR 50 million are earmarked to support the ECOWAS peace-keeping operation and for the creation of the office of the special representative .
The remaining funds should be used for a demobilisation and reintegration programme as well as for institution-building and the restoration of democratic structures .
In this regard , I was pleased to listen to Mr Posselt 's contribution .
These were wise words warning against the arrogant approach of taking it for granted that a rapid process of elections does it .
This , unfortunately , is not the case .
We need to be pragmatic and rediscover the practical value of the notion of governance .
First stability or peace , then governance , then democratisation and then democracy itself .
We have to be pragmatic and not allow ourselves to surrender to the temptation of prescribing those nice things that we take for granted here in our environment .
We have to show confidence and be a more realistic partner .
Liberia has been going through the most terrible , traumatic times .
We also welcome the UN Security Council decision to establish a stabilisation force for Liberia to take over responsibility from ECOWAS as from 1 October 2003 .
Also , the contributions from Sweden , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom for the peacekeeping force in Liberia are very welcome and we see a strong case for mobilising what I would now call ' partnership stamina ' .
We tried , over the years , to do something meaningful in Liberia , but with Mr Taylor around this was almost impossible .
Regionally , it is extremely important that the opportunity now at hand is not missed .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions on Burma :
B5-0374 / 2003 tabled by Bob van den Bos and Anne André-Léonard , on behalf of the ELDR Group ;
B5-0378 / 2003 tabled by Patricia McKenna and Marie Anne Isler Béguin , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group ;
B5-0383 / 2003 tabled by Enrique Barón Crespo and others , on behalf of the PSE Group
B5-0384 / 2003 tabled by Marianne Eriksson and Fausto Bertinotti on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group and
B5-0389 / 2003 tabled by Geoffrey Van Orden and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group .
In Burma , generals have for years been keeping their own people in their gunsights , and the opposition in captivity .
If the new Prime Minister , General Khin Nyunt , is really serious about his roadmap to democracy , he will immediately release Aung San Suu Kyi and her colleagues and give them an important role in this process .
He presented this roadmap a few days ago behind closed doors , without the presence of the media or foreign diplomats .
The plan is supposedly to set up a convention for a new constitution , which should lead to fair and free elections .
As no information was given as to the how and when of this plan , the only conclusion I can draw is that the military regime is trying to sidetrack the West and is hoping to break out of its isolation .
As it must not , of course , be allowed to succeed in this , I support the Council 's decision to tighten the sanctions .
Any remaining business contacts should be completely severed .
The Commission and the Council , in cooperation with the United Nations , should continue to appeal for the immediate release of Aung San Suu Kyi and her colleagues .
She has been held illegally for more than three months , during which time she has gone on hunger strike .
The international community must make the Burmese authorities responsible for her well-being and the Red Cross must gain access to her .
Pressure from the neighbouring countries in the ASEAN - China , India and Japan - must be stepped up .
Fortunately , the United States has also been very forthright in its opinion about the current situation and has expressly pledged its support to Aung San Suu Kyi .
Burma is still the pariah of the international community .
The military junta sees the enforcement of its own power as more important than the suffering of the Burmese people .
The generals ' roadmap to democracy has so far only led to prison .
This is not only about the liberation of Aung San Suu Kyi , but also about the liberation of the Burmese people as a whole .
Mr President , I have had two opportunities to visit Burma since I became a Member of this House .
On the first occasion I carried a letter from President Klaus Hänsch informing Aung San Suu Kyi of the award of the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to her .
Khin Nyunt , the current Prime Minister , played a central role in ensuring I did not have the opportunity to deliver that letter in person .
On the second occasion I was able to meet with Aung San Suu Kyi clandestinely .
On that occasion my colleagues and I were able to obtain her clear support for sanctions against the military regime in Burma .
I hope the Council and the Commission recognise that is the view of the National League for Democracy .
30 August marked three months of detention at the end of 13 years of open prison for Aung San Suu Kyi and other members of the National League for Democracy .
The State Peace and Development Council - the former SLORC - has harassed the people of Burma , the National League for Democracy and Aung San Suu Kyi .
The last time she was visited was in July .
On 31 August the United States reported she was on hunger strike .
The regime denies that .
If that is the case , the absolute minimum the authorities can do is to enable the international community to reassure itself of her wellbeing .
As for free and fair elections , the problem in Burma is not free and fair elections - those took place 13 years ago - but that the military regime is not prepared to accept the will of the Burmese people .
We welcome the fact that ASEAN started to get involved in this process at its ministerial meeting in June .
We welcome the pressure they put on Burma and note that the current military regime has refused to allow them to meet with Aung San Suu Kyi .
We demand her immediate release and that of all political prisoners , which would be a major step towards the restoration of democracy .
We call on the Council and the Commission to show their readiness , in collaboration with the United States , to help facilitate the national reconciliation process in Burma .
In the meantime , we ask the Council to introduce tough further measures targeted against the regime , its members and their interests .
They should be imposing smart sanctions that hurt those people in power .
We call on the Council and Member States to ask the United Nations Security Council to urgently address the situation in Burma .
It is now more than three months since Aung San Suu Kyi , Nobel Peace Prize winner and Sakharov Prize winner , was - to put it purely and simply - kidnapped by the Burmese junta , who have been holding her in detention ever since .
The UN emissaries and the representatives of the Red Cross have not been able to visit her regularly .
Last July a delegation from the International Committee of the Red Cross was probably the last contact that Aung San Suu Kyi had with the outside world .
No one has seen her since .
Today , in the same way that the dictator denied secretly holding the young woman , the Burmese authorities are denying her hunger strike , made public on 31 August by the US State Department .
The imprisonment and arrest of militants of the National League for Democracy in May quite rightly gave rise to much feeling in the world .
The US took the opportunity to reinforce their economic sanctions on the Rangoon regime .
Today , the - no doubt demagogic - use of this announcement by the US cannot , however , hide the severity of the regime nor its hypocrisy in promising an official roadmap destined to restore democracy .
This programme , which includes , and I quote , ' free and fair elections and a new Constitution ' , still does not fix a timetable and remains silent on the release of the leader of the opposition .
It happened after the junta showed its desire to not respect any of the democratic demands of its people , and this is a bad omen .
The results of the 1990 elections which , let us remember , were a landslide victory for Aung San Suu Kyi 's party , were not recognised by the armed forces .
The Association of South-East Asian Nations now threatens to exclude Burma from its members .
It had hoped for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi before its next summit in Bali in October .
As for the European Union , it should do everything possible to compel the military junta to free the Nobel Prize winner .
In collaboration with the United Nations , the Council and the Commission should now show their determination , through strict sanctions , to do something practical in the process of democratisation in Burma .
Political pressure should increase .
Under the rule of one of the fiercest dictators , in the hands of a head of government who has held the duties of head of services of the military information for forty years , the Burmese people need all our solidarity .
The worry such as that for the lady of Rangoon is a genuine one .
Let us listen to the opposition , which has just declared that this hunger strike is a declaration that the Burmese generals are slowly but surely poisoning her .
Mr President , before the House today is a resolution on Burma , drafted with the support of all major political groups in this Parliament and therefore backed by representatives of all fifteen countries within the European Union .
It is absolutely unequivocal in its demand : the immediate release of Aung San Suu Kyi .
I hope this message is now being heard by the Burmese regime .
Aung San Suu Kyi is a symbol of resistance to tyranny and personifies the hopes of the people of Burma for freedom .
She has spent eight of the last thirteen years under some form of detention or restriction and on 30 May 2003 she was seized again and has been held virtually incommunicado , to all intents kidnapped by the regime in a military barracks in the Ye Mon district of Rangoon .
Four days ago it was reported that she was on hunger strike and that she was in a serious condition .
The International Committee of the Red Cross must be given immediate access to her in order to assist in the provision of emergency assistance .
Given the policy of the ICRC not to reveal the detention conditions of those that it visits , Aung San Suu Kyi should also be seen by Italian Ambassador Miniero , on behalf of the European Union , or by Her Majesty 's Ambassador to Burma , Vicky Bowman .
These should be just the preliminaries to her release and to the release of scores of other National League for Democracy members and organisers , elected Members of Parliament , senior Party officials and students detained following the violent attack on opposition elements on 30 May 2003 .
Each member of the State Peace and Development Council that runs Burma must be held personally responsible for the health , safety and wellbeing of Aung San Suu Kyi .
They must be put on notice that action will be taken against them .
General Khin Nyunt , the newly-appointed Prime Minister , has talked about a roadmap to democracy .
Let him show that he is serious , lift the barrier on that road , respond to our calls for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi and other political prisoners and recognise the results of the 1990 elections which gave a landslide victory to the National League for Democracy .
To encourage him , much more needs to be done to increase the pressure on his military dictatorship in Burma .
Action should now be taken to strengthen the EU sanctions with moves to deny Burmese dictatorship the hard currency it uses to fund its repression .
As we have seen in other countries such as Zimbabwe , quiet diplomacy does not work .
Neighbouring ASEAN countries need to do more to bring about change in Burma .
I call on the Council presidency and the Commission to take urgent action , to visit Aung San Suu Kyi , to bring about her immediate release and , in case the SPDC does not respond in a positive way , to draw up new measures that can quickly be taken against the Burmese regime .
Mr President , what is achieved by this House 's resolutions on human rights and debates on matters of urgent and topical importance ?
In the case of Burma , not very much .
In June , we called for the speedy introduction of democracy and for the immediate release of Aung San Suu Kyi , who was detained in what was at the time a secret location .
She has , since 1988 , been campaigning for more democracy , and was awarded our Sakharov Prize in 1990 and the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991 .
It was partly through our pressure that representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross were able to visit her .
There is , however , no prospect of democracy being introduced with any sort of urgency .
Although the new Burmese Prime Minister , General Khin Nyunt , published , on 30 August , a roadmap for free elections by secret ballot , no firm date has been set for them .
My fellow Members are right not to set too much store by promises of democracy and such things as the summoning of a constitutional convention , for it is the armed forces who take decisions on all important matters , and the convention will have no influence on them whatever .
Aung San Suu Kyi has been on hunger strike since 31 August in order to make a forceful protest against her detention .
Let us , too , have done with half measures !
The EU 's imposition of a visa ban and its freezing of the overseas assets of Burmese associates of the regime are nothing like enough .
As a community of values , one that exalts the maintenance of democracy and human rights as its supreme principle , the EU must take a hard line with the junta in Rangoon .
Aung San Suu Kyi and her supporters must be released from detention at last .
The results of the free elections in 1990 must be accepted , power must be handed over to the forces of democracy , and the roadmap must be implemented , but under international supervision .
Commissioner Nielson , I urge you to press for tougher action to be taken and for further sanctions to be imposed .
These should , I believe , include an embargo on goods imported from Burma and a boycott of tourism in that country .
That , perhaps , will be the sort of language they will understand .
Mr President , as we are all deeply concerned for the personal safety of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi we have to remember her own words : ' investment that only goes to enrich an already wealthy elite bent on monopolising both economic and political power cannot contribute towards egality and justice , the foundation stones for a sound democracy ' .
The SPCD 's announcement to restart the National Convention that would lead to free and fair elections has to be taken with caution .
In the 15 years the regime has ruled Burma there has not been a single democratic reform .
In fact the human rights situation in Burma has become worse .
There has to be a very clear message from the European Union that relentless pressure will be applied to the Burmese regime .
Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi and the other political prisoners must be released immediately .
We should be prepared to strengthen our sanctions to encourage the SPDC to relinquish its grip on power and fully respect the results of the last elections .
Exports of oil , gas , gems , minerals and timber which provide the majority of the regime 's income , could be targeted. as could the refusal of visas and freezing of assets .
Dictators and their regimes and families should not be allowed to leave their country or to acquire any assets abroad .
As well as increasing the sanctions against the regime , it is vital the EU should try to secure the cooperation and support of Asian countries , in particular Burma 's neighbouring countries .
International pressure is necessary to force the regime to respond positively .
With Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi reported to be on hunger strike , the EU should intensify its actions to secure her release and the release of other detained NLD members and to support democratic change in Burma .
We should use our liberty to promote theirs .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I support what Mr Van Orden said .
He has set the problem out very well .
There is clearly a very serious problem , and Aung San Suu Kyi should be released immediately .
It is unacceptable that a delegation from this Parliament is not allowed , and has been refused , permission to visit her .
There is a real need for the other states in the region to maximise the pressure for her immediate release and to ensure that free elections concur with that .
I have to ask how long will the European Union and the United Nations drag their feet and stand back before they increase the pressure for the early release of those held in prison ?
There is an urgent need for immediate action .
Words are easy , what we need now is for the roadmap to be implemented .
. Mr President , the Commission is deeply concerned by reports that Aung San Suu Kyi , the leader of the National League for Democracy , may be on hunger strike .
A statement of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Rangoon dismisses this information as ' groundless ' .
Other sources indicate , however , that the pro-Democracy leader is indeed on hunger strike .
Therefore it is of the utmost importance that an independent body be given the opportunity to immediately visit Aung San Suu Kyi .
The detention of Aung San Suu Kyi is completely unacceptable .
The regime 's argument that her detention was ' temporary ' and ' protective ' lacks all credibility .
The EU has repeatedly demanded immediate and unconditional release of Aung San Suu Kyi and other leading representatives of the Burmese National League for Democracy and will continue to do so .
The junta has to understand that her release will serve the interests of the regime , as it has declared its desire to move on in the process of national reconciliation .
The EU has declared itself rea